                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 7, 2000     Decided March 7, 2000 

                           No. 99-1199

                         Eliezer Gurfel, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Securities and Exchange Commission, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Securities and Exchange Commission

     David W. O'Brien argued the cause and filed the brief for 
petitioner.

     Mark Pennington, Assistant General Counsel, Securities 
and Exchange Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  
With him on the brief were David M. Becker, Deputy General 
Counsel, Jacob H. Stillman, Solicitor, and Susan K. Straus, 
Attorney.

     Before:  Silberman, Henderson, and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Silberman, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner challenges an NASD 
order, affirmed by the SEC, barring him from the securities 
business.  He asserts that under its bylaws the NASD had 
lost authority to adjudicate his conduct.  We deny the peti-
tion.

                                I.

     The National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) is 
an association of broker-dealers authorized under the Securi-
ties Exchange Act to develop and enforce rules of profession-
al conduct for its member firms, subject to oversight by the 
SEC.  See 15 U.S.C. s 78o-3.  At the time of the misconduct 
that gave rise to this case, Eliezer Gurfel was employed by 
NASD member firm International Money Management 
Group, Inc. (the firm).  Under the terms of his employment 
with the firm, Gurfel sold securities products to investors and 
split the commissions--Gurfel receiving 85% of the commis-
sions and the firm 15%.  On four occasions between January 
and March of 1993, Gurfel received commission checks from 
ITT Hartford for his sale of the insurance company's variable 
annuities.  Although the checks were made out to the firm, 
Gurfel deposited them in his personal bank account, evidently 
by forging the endorsement of the firm's president, Chip 
Brittingham, on the back of the checks.1  Gurfel did not send 
the firm its 15% share of the commissions.

     The firm discovered that the Hartford checks were missing.  
According to unchallenged testimony during NASD enforce-

__________
     1 Gurfel protested before the NASD and SEC that he did not 
forge Brittingham's name on the checks;  while he acknowledged 
that he "mistakenly" deposited the checks in his personal account, 
he professed ignorance as to how Brittingham's name came to be on 
the back of them.  Since Gurfel does not contest the SEC's factual 
findings, we accept the agency's determination that Gurfel "forged 
or caused to be forged" Brittingham's name on the checks.

ment proceedings, Brittingham confronted Gurfel about the 
missing commissions, and Gurfel then admitted that he had 
forged Brittingham's name on the checks.  Gurfel reimbursed 
the firm for the funds he had converted, and "resigned" from 
the firm.  As is required by NASD Bylaws, Art. IV, s 3(a) 
(1996),2 the firm notified the NASD that Gurfel's association 
with the firm had been terminated.  The notice of termination 
was sent on November 15, 1993.  The notice indicated that 
Gurfel had violated his agreement with the firm by depositing 
the checks into his personal account, but made no reference 
to the forgeries.  One week after his termination, Gurfel 
began work at another NASD member firm, Van Sant and 
Mewshaw Securities, Inc. (Van Sant).  His employment there 
ended about a year later, on October 31, 1994.

     On November 30, 1995, the NASD's Business Conduct 
Committee filed a complaint against Gurfel alleging that he 
forged or caused to be forged the Hartford checks and 
converted the proceeds for his personal use.  While Gurfel 
did claim innocence of the forgery charge, his more vigorous 
defense was procedural.  Article IV, Section 4 of the NASD 
Bylaws, entitled "Retention of Jurisdiction," states that:

     A person whose association with a member has been 
     terminated and is no longer associated with any member 
     of the [NASD] ... shall continue to be subject to the 
     filing of a complaint ... based upon conduct which 
     commenced prior to the termination ... but any such 
     complaint shall be filed within:
     
     (a) two (2) years after the effective date of termination of 
     registration.... (emphasis added).
     
Gurfel argued that since no complaint was filed within two 
years of the date of his termination with the firm--where he 
committed the misconduct--this provision deprived the 
NASD of authority to file its complaint.  The NASD respond-
ed that the two-year period set forth in section 4 began 

__________
     2Article IV has since been redesignated as Article V without 
substantive change.  In this opinion we refer to the bylaws in effect 
at the time the NASD's complaint against Gurfel was filed.

running not when Gurfel left the firm, but when he was 
terminated from Van Sant, at which point he left the industry.  
Since the NASD filed its action less than two years after that 
later date, the complaint was timely.  The NASD's National 
Adjudicatory Council rejected Gurfel's argument and barred 
Gurfel from future association with any NASD member firm.  
The SEC sustained both the NASD's interpretation of section 
4 and the sanction.  In re Gurfel, Exchange Act Release No. 
41,229 (SEC Decision March 30, 1999).  In his petition Gurfel 
contests only the NASD's authority to bring the enforcement 
action against him.

                               II.

     His argument essentially is that section 4 must be read as 
if it were analogous to a statute of limitations.  The phrase 
"effective date of termination of registration"--which starts 
the running of the two-year period--therefore refers to his 
initial termination from the firm rather than his subsequent 
termination from Van Sant.  That is so, it is claimed, because 
the misconduct with which he is charged took place at the 
firm from which he was initially terminated.

     The obvious difficulty with petitioner's argument is that 
section 4 does not start the running of the two-year period of 
extended NASD authority from the date of any misconduct, 
but rather from the date of termination.  And termination 
could occur for a host of reasons, including voluntary resigna-
tion having nothing to do with the person's conduct.  There-
fore in determining which termination begins the two-year 
period--the first or second--the place at which the miscon-
duct occurred appears irrelevant.

     Petitioner attempts to tie the jurisdictional period to the 
termination from the broker-dealer at which the misconduct 
took place by referring to language later in section 4.  A 
member firm is required to amend its notice of termination in 
the event that "the member learns of facts or circumstances 
causing any information set forth in said notice to become 
inaccurate or incomplete."  See NASD By-Laws, Art. IV, 
s 3(b).  Section 4(a) addresses the effect of the filing of such 

a post-termination amendment on the NASD's jurisdiction, 
stating that an NASD complaint must be filed within

     two (2) years after the effective date of termination of 
     registration pursuant to Section 3 above, provided, how-
     ever, that any amendment to a notice of termination filed 
     pursuant to Section 3(b) that is filed within two years of 
     the original notice which discloses that such person may 
     have engaged in conduct actionable under any applicable 
     statute, rule, or regulation shall operate to recommence 
     the running of the two-year period under this paragraph.
     
NASD Bylaws, Art. IV, s 4(a) (emphasis added).  Gurfel 
reads the "which" clause as referring to the original notice, 
not the amendment, and that is supposed to suggest that it is 
necessarily a person's misconduct-related termination that 
triggers the jurisdictional period.  We think that reading is 
plainly wrong because as petitioner concedes there is no 
necessary connection between a termination and misconduct 
that took place prior to the termination.  It is obvious then 
that it is the amendment that is modified by the "which" 
clause.

     Although the language of section 4 might not pass SEC 
scrutiny as an offering circular, we think the agency's reading 
is correct.  The "termination" which begins the running of 
the two-year period, after which the NASD loses jurisdiction, 
is the termination from a person's last job in the industry.  
After all the section is entitled in jurisdictional terms.  Its 
apparent purpose is to extend coverage to any registered 
representative who worked in the industry for any member 
firm for two years after that person leaves the industry.  
That is why the section does not even apply to a person who 
is presently "associated with any member of the [NASD]."  
In other words, as petitioner concedes, a person who remains 
with one firm (never terminated) is subject to the NASD's 
jurisdiction indefinitely.  It is also clear that a person who 
leaves firm A to work for B and continues working at B for, 
let us say, 40 years remains subject to NASD jurisdiction for 
misconduct committed at firm A--as he is still "associated 
with" an NASD member.  These examples show that section 

4's limitation on the NASD's authority to impose discipline on 
a registered representative is not focused on--indeed, it is 
indifferent to--the period of time running from the represen-
tative's misconduct.  In sum, this provision merely restricts 
the NASD's authority to discipline registered representatives 
to a period necessary to protect the industry, not for the 
purpose of granting a possible wrongdoer repose.

     The SEC argues that it is entitled to deference as to the 
proper interpretation of the NASD rules3 because the Com-
mission must approve and may on its own initiative modify 
the NASD Bylaws, see 15 U.S.C. s 78s(b)-(c).  We think that 
deference would be appropriate if we were in doubt as to the 
proper interpretation of section 4, see Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 
503 U.S. 91, 110-11 (1992) (deferring to EPA's interpretation 
of state environmental regulatory standards the agency incor-
porated by reference), but we are not.

                            *  *  *  *

     For the reasons set forth above, we agree with the SEC's 
interpretation of section 4, and deny Gurfel's petition.

                                                      So ordered.

__________
     3 That would raise an interesting question if we were faced with 
divergent interpretations from the NASD and the SEC.

                                                                            