                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 25, 2002       Decided June 11, 2002 

                           No. 01-5184

                   Chem-Nuclear Systems, Inc., 
                            Plaintiff

                Chemical Waste Management, Inc., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

            George W. Bush, In his official capacity 
      as President of the United States of America, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96cv01233)

     James T. Banks argued the cause for the appellant.  Pat-
rick D. Traylor was on brief.

     John L. Smeltzer, Attorney, United States Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for the appellees.  Robert H. Oak-
ley, Attorney, United States Department of Justice, was on 
brief.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Chemical 
Waste Management, Inc. (CWM) appeals the district court's 
May 2, 2001 opinion and order (dated nunc pro tunc to March 
26, 2001) denying its request for reimbursement from the 
United States for costs incurred in cleaning up portions of a 
polluted ravine (Basket Creek Site or Site) in Douglasville, 
Georgia.  See Chem-Nuclear Sys., Inc. v. Bush, 139 F. Supp. 
2d 30 (D.D.C. 2001) (CNSI);  Joint Appendix (JA) 363-78.  
Pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. 
ss 9601 et seq., the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA 
or government) in 1991 had ordered CWM and others to 
clean up the Basket Creek Site, into which CWM (through 
other parties) had dumped at least 80 drums of hazardous 
chemical waste.  Having expended nearly $8 million in clean-
up costs, CWM sought reimbursement for removing a certain 
amount of waste for which, it alleges, it was not responsible.  
CWM argued in the district court that (1) it was not required 
to exhaust before the EPA--and therefore could present to 
the court--its claim that the waste from the 80 drums was 
"geographically divisible" from the rest of the waste such that 
it was entitled to a partial reimbursement for costs not 
associated with the 80 drums;  (2) it had proven its geographic 
divisibility theory by a preponderance of the evidence, as 
required by CERCLA and the Restatement (Second) of 
Torts;  and (3) the government had not carried its ensuing 
burden--placed upon it by the district court in a December 
23, 1999 ruling--of producing evidence linking to the Site any 
further waste from CWM beyond the 80 drums.  Declining to 
decide whether it (via a different district judge) had erred in 
placing that burden on the government, see CNSI, 139 F. 

Supp. 2d at 31, 39 n.17, the district court held that the 
government had "in fact sustained [the] burden" in any event, 
id. at 31, and entered judgment in its favor.  We affirm the 
court's decision but on a slightly different ground.  We hold 
that the burden of proving that only 80 CWM barrels were 
dumped at the Site was always CWM's to bear and that it 
has not proven, by a preponderance of the evidence on the 
record before us, that it is not liable for any additional waste 
at the Site.

                                I.

     During the 1970s CWM collected and stored liquid chemical 
waste materials in 55-gallon drums at its Barnwell, South 
Carolina facility.  In July 1973 CWM hired Continental Trad-
ing Company (Continental) to remove hundreds of the 55-
gallon drums from Barnwell.  Based on its knowledge of each 
of the chemicals to be removed, CWM recommended to 
Continental that it sell, reprocess for sale, incinerate or 
solidify and bury the drums to be removed.  See JA 33, 54-55 
(CWM inventory as of May 10, 1973, listing chemicals, num-
ber of drums containing each chemical and recommended 
methods of drums' disposal).1  Continental subsequently ar-
ranged with Young Refining Corporation (Young)--owned 
and operated by Dr. C.B.F. Young (Dr. Young)--to store 
CWM's drums at Young's Douglasville, Georgia facility until 
Continental could arrange for the waste to be sold, repro-
cessed for sale, incinerated or buried.  Between July 1973 

__________
     1 CWM may or may not have recommended to Continental that it 
solidify and bury only about 153 to 182 drums of the chemicals.  
CWM states in its brief that it "recommended that only about 
10,000 gallons of [chemicals] be solidified and disposed of in a 
landfill" and that "that amount would fill about 182 55-gallon 
drums."  Br. of Appellant at 7 (citing Trial Ex. 4).  Along the same 
line, CWM's inventory of May 10, 1973 indicates that Henry 
Schultz, an employee at the Barnwell facility, recommended to 
CWM that 153 drums of waste be solidified and buried.  See JA 33, 
54-55.  The record, however, is silent on whether Schultz's recom-
mendation was ever passed on to Continental.

and February 1974 Continental transported from Barnwell to 
Douglasville approximately 1,649 drums of chemical waste.

     Although Young incinerated some unknown portion of the 
waste in the 1,649 barrels at the Douglasville facility, much of 
it could not be burned because it lacked sufficient BTU value 
or contained water.  Moreover, the waste emitted a noxious 
odor when burned and, as a result, the Georgia Environmen-
tal Protection Division (EPD) objected to its incineration.  
Thereafter, Young halted incineration.  According to the 
parties' stipulations, "Continental's and Young's records indi-
cate that on or about September 26, 1974, Continental ad-
vanced Young $10,000 to move drums" containing waste that 
could not be incinerated or reprocessed "at a rate of $12 per 
drum to Young's Borden Springs, Alabama facility."  JA 35.  
Dr. Young's deposition testimony indicated, however, that few 
if any of the drums (833 or so, if the arithmetic holds) made it 
to Borden Springs.  In early March 1976 Dr. Young arranged 
with one Bartlett Hulsey to transfer chemical waste from the 
Douglasville facility to what Hulsey claimed was a "licensed" 
disposal site.  According to Dr. Young's testimony, Hulsey 
stated that he would be willing and able to dispose of CWM's 
drums, all or most of which apparently remained at Young's 
facility:

     Q: [Y]ou reached an agreement on a specific figure?
     
     A: Yes.
     
     Q: And how many drums was he going to dispose of for 
     you?
     
     A: I don't remember a specific number.  He said, "I 
     can dispose of those drums for you."  We had them off to 
     themselves sitting on the ground in the back of the 
     plant....
     
     Q: How many drums were there?
     
     A: Where?  At our plant?
     
     Q: Yes, there at the plant that you had gotten from 
     [CWM] and Continental that Mr. Hulsey was going to 
     move for you?
     
     A: I would say that I've accounted for as many as, oh, 
     1200, 1400 drums, and maybe as high as maybe 1800 
     drums.
     
     Q: And was it your understanding that Mr. Hulsey was 
     going to dispose of all of those drums?
     
     A: To the best of my knowledge, that was the agree-
     ment.  He said, I can take care of these drums for you.  
     And we made a deal.
     
JA 244 (quoted in CNSI, 139 F. Supp. 2d at 40).

     The Basket Creek Site--a ravine located along Basket 
Creek Road in Douglas County, Georgia--was owned in the 
1970s by Lee Wallace, who operated it as an unlicensed 
landfill, permitting various entities on numerous occasions to 
dump waste materials into the ravine.  The ravine itself is 
aligned in a north-south direction and slopes downward to-
ward the south.  As it deepens toward the south, the ravine 
widens;  in the 1970s the south end of the ravine terminated 
at a dam of tires and soil.

     On March 17, 1976 two tractor-trailer rigs owned by Hul-
sey transported approximately 160 drums (about 80 in each 
trailer) the twenty miles from Young's Douglasville facility to 
the Basket Creek Site.  At approximately 9:45 p.m. Douglas 
Daniell--the Douglas County Supervisor of Environmental 
Health--arrived at the Site in response to a nearby resident's 
complaint.  There Daniell saw Hulsey's two rigs--one of 
which was already empty--along with four men, including 
Hulsey.  In addition, Daniell observed approximately 80 
drums in the ravine, some of which had broken open and 
others of which were being crushed and covered by a bulldoz-
er.  Daniell told the men at the Site not to dump the 
remaining drums and to wait there until he returned with the 
sheriff.  When Daniell returned, the empty tractor-trailer and 
the second tractor were gone;  the second trailer, still contain-
ing approximately 80 drums, remained at the Site.  On March 
18 Georgia EPD officials inspected the Site and confirmed 
that approximately 80 partially covered drums were in the 
bottom of the ravine.  On March 21 Jack Hunnicutt of the 
Alabama Department of Health reported to the Georgia 

officials that Young's Borden Springs facility contained ap-
proximately 1,000 drums.  By October 1976 the Site was 
closed and all of the drums and tires at the Site had been 
covered with dirt to prevent future dumping.  For a number 
of years following the Site's closure, Daniell inspected the 
Site periodically and never detected any additional disposal of 
55-gallon drums.

     In 1990 the EPA began investigating the Basket Creek Site 
in order to determine whether an environmental response 
under CERCLA was necessary.  On April 11, 1991 it issued 
an administrative order pursuant to CERCLA section 106(a), 
42 U.S.C. s 9606(a), stating that it had determined "condi-
tions at the Site may present an imminent and substantial 
endangerment to the public health or welfare, or the environ-
ment due to the release or threat of release of hazardous 
substances."  JA 40.  The order named CWM, Continental, 
Young and Hulsey as respondents and directed them to, inter 
alia, "excavate overlying soils and remove buried drums, 
sample and analyze drum contents, arrange for the proper 
disposal of drum contents, sample soils in the drum burial 
area, properly treat and/or dispose of any contaminated soil, 
and restore the Site to its original condition."  Id.  Continen-
tal, Young and Hulsey all denied liability and failed or refused 
to assist in performing the cleanup the EPA had mandated.  
CWM denied liability as well but notified the EPA that it 
would cooperate by performing "reasonable removal actions 
at the Site."  JA 41.

     Ultimately, CWM remediated the entire Site, incurring 
expenses of $7,660,315.  Pursuant to CERCLA section 
106(b)(2)(A),2 CWM petitioned the EPA for reimbursement in 
the amount of $2,557,989--cleanup costs it asserted were not 
associated with the 80 drums.  See CNSI, 139 F. Supp. 2d at 

__________
     2 Section 106(b)(2)(A) provides that a party that has complied 
with an administrative order to clean up hazardous waste may 
"petition the President for reimbursement from the [Superfund] for 
the reasonable costs of such action, plus interest."  42 U.S.C. 
s 9606(b)(2)(A).  The EPA serves as the authorized delegate of the 
President in CERCLA matters.  See Exec. Order No. 12,580.

34.  On April 29, 1996 the EPA's Environmental Appeals 
Board (EAB) rejected CWM's petition for reimbursement, 
concluding that CWM was jointly and severally liable for the 
entire environmental harm to the Site and, consequently, for 
the entire cleanup cost.  Still seeking reimbursement, CWM 
timely filed an action in the district court pursuant to CERC-
LA section 106(b)(2)(B).3

     On January 9, 1998 the district judge to whom CWM's case 
was initially assigned4 appointed a special master pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. s 636(b)(2).  In his report of September 2, 1999 the 
special master concluded that CWM had failed to exhaust its 
administrative remedies by neglecting to advance its geo-
graphic divisibility argument before the EAB and that, ac-
cordingly, it was precluded from raising the argument in 
district court.  In an effort to assist the trial court further, 
however, the special master proceeded to address the merits 
of CWM's geographic divisibility claim, i.e., its theory that it 
could not be responsible for cleaning up areas north of where 
the 80 barrels came to rest because "the contents of the 
drums could not have migrated into [those] 'uphill' portion[s] 
of the ravine."  JA 279 (special master's first report).  While 
the special master found that CWM had established that the 
harm from the 80 drums was geographically divisible from 
the harm caused by other sources, he nonetheless recom-
mended entry of judgment in favor of the government.  "Cru-
cial to [CWM's] successfully proving that it is entitled to 
reimbursement," the special master pointed out, "is the pre-
cise location of all [CWM] waste at the Site."  JA 302 
(emphasis added).  CWM's geographic divisibility claim ulti-
mately failed, he held, because CWM was unable to "prove by 

__________
     3 Section 106(b)(2)(B) provides that "[i]f the President refuses to 
grant all or part of a petition made under this paragraph, the 
petitioner may within 30 days of receipt of such refusal file an 
action against the President in the appropriate United States 
district court seeking reimbursement from the [Superfund]."  42 
U.S.C. s 9606(b)(2)(B).

     4 The original judge retired in 2000 and the case was reassigned.  
See CNSI, 139 F. Supp. 2d at 34 n.9.

a preponderance of the evidence that other waste delivered by 
[CWM], through Continental, to Young, did not find its way 
into the Site."  Id. (emphasis added).

     On December 23, 1999 the district court issued a memoran-
dum opinion (1) rejecting the special master's recommenda-
tion that the case be dismissed for failure to exhaust adminis-
trative remedies;  (2) holding that "[t]o the extent [CWM has] 
proved the 'harm' it caused is geographically divisible from 
the remaining contamination of the Site, [the] EPA must 
submit proof that [CWM] contributed to other harm at the 
Site before the burden shifts to [CWM] to prove that it is not 
liable for those other harms," JA 340 (emphasis added);  and 
(3) remanding the case to the special master "for further 
findings on [CWM's] claim for reimbursement," JA 341.  On 
remand, the special master concluded in a September 18, 2000 
report that the government did not satisfy the specially 
imposed burden of linking CWM "to the harm beyond the 80 
drum area of the Site so as to shift the ... burden of proof 
back to [CWM]."  JA 343.

     And so the parties returned to the district court, this time 
before the judge to whom the case had been reassigned on 
February 28, 2000.  See JA 6;  supra note 4.  The district 
court rejected the special master's September 18, 2000 con-
clusion, see CNSI, 139 F. Supp. 2d at 39-40, finding that "the 
evidence raises a reasonable inference that [CWM] caused 
harm at the Site beyond the 80 drums, thereby shifting the 
burden back to [CWM] to disprove this inference," id. at 39 
(emphasis added).  Because CWM was unable to meet the 
burden, see id., the court held that the government was 
entitled to judgment.  In so holding, the district court noted 
that it did not need to address whether CWM was required to 
exhaust administrative remedies as to its geographic divisibil-
ity claim.  See id. at 39 n.17.  More importantly, as we have 
mentioned, the court declined to "revisit the correctness of 
[the original judge's] ruling[ ] that ... the government has 
the burden to produce evidence linking [CWM] to waste 
beyond the 80 drums at the Site," id., because it found that 
burden satisfied.

                               II.

     On appeal CWM makes the same three contentions it made 
in district court, namely (1) that it was not required to 
exhaust before the EPA--and therefore could present to the 
courts--its claim that the waste from the 80 drums was 
geographically divisible from the rest of the waste at the Site;  
(2) that it proved geographic divisibility by a preponderance 
of the evidence;  and (3) that the government did not carry its 
subsequent burden--placed upon it by the original district 
judge--of linking to CWM waste beyond the 80 drums.  
Assuming without deciding that CWM was not required to 
exhaust its geographic divisibility claim before the EPA, we 
find that CWM has not proven geographic divisibility in any 
event.

     CWM does not and cannot contend that it escapes liability 
altogether for any environmental harm to the Site;  CWM is 
plainly liable, under CERCLA section 107(a), in its capacity 
as a party "who by contract, agreement, or otherwise ar-
ranged for disposal or treatment, or arranged with a trans-
porter for transport for disposal or treatment, of hazardous 
substances owned or possessed by such [party]."  42 U.S.C. 
s 9607(a)(3).  And CWM is jointly and severally liable for the 
entire harm to the Site, irrespective of the fact that other 
parties may have contributed thereto, see O'Neil v. Picillo, 
883 F.2d 176, 179 (1st Cir. 1989) ("Congress intended for 
those proven at least partially culpable to bear the cost of the 
uncertainty"), unless it can affirmatively establish some basis 
for dividing the harm, see United States v. Alcan Aluminum 
Corp., 964 F.2d 252, 268 (3d Cir. 1992).  Under section 433A 
of the Restatement (Second) of Torts--"[t]he universal start-
ing point for divisiblity of harm analyses in CERCLA cases," 
United States v. Hercules, Inc., 247 F.3d 706, 717 (8th Cir. 
2001)--CWM can avoid joint-and-several liability for the full 
response cost of $7,660,315 if it demonstrates (a) that "there 
are distinct harms" to the Site, for some of which it is not 
liable;  or (b) that "there is a reasonable basis for determining 
[its] contribution ... to a single harm."  Restatement (Sec-
ond) of Torts s 433A(1) (1965);  see id. s 433A(2) ("Damages 
for any other harm cannot be apportioned among two or more 

causes.");  42 U.S.C. s 9606(b)(2)(C) ("[T]o obtain reimburse-
ment, the petitioner shall establish by a preponderance of the 
evidence that it is not liable for response costs....").

     CWM does not maintain that there were "distinct harms" 
to the Basket Creek Site.  As the government points out, the 
harm at issue was "the release or threatened release of 
hazardous substances into groundwater," Br. of Appellees at 
36 (citing JA 128-29);  that harm was indivisible because 
"there was no evidence that the [Site] contained distinct 
pockets of waste that caused or could cause separate and 
distinct plumes of groundwater contamination."  Id. at 37.  
CWM resorts instead to section 433A(1)'s second prong, 
arguing that there is a reasonable basis for determining its 
contribution to the undivided harm.  Specifically, CWM 
claims that those portions of the Site uphill of the drums 
"could not have been contaminated by Hulsey's dumping" for 
the simple reason that "liquid runs downhill."  Br. of Appel-
lant at 28.  CWM might well be correct that uphill portions of 
the Site were not contaminated by the 80 identified drums.  
It does not necessarily follow, however, that CWM has proven 
geographic divisibility.

     Part and parcel of CWM's burden of proving that "there is 
a reasonable basis for determining [its] contribution ... to 
[the] single harm," Restatement (Second) of Torts 
s 433A(1)(b), is a showing that only 80 drums were dumped 
at the Site.  As another circuit has held, the Restatement 
permits a polluter to escape joint-and-several liability for the 
entire harm only "if it can meet its burden of proving the 
amount of the harm that it caused.  If it is unable to do so, it 
is liable for the full amount of the harm."  Bell Petroleum 
Servs., Inc. v. Sequa Corp., 3 F.3d 889, 896 (5th Cir. 1993) 
(citing Restatement (Second) of Torts s 433B(2)) (emphasis 
added).  In other words, CWM can prove "the amount of the 
harm that it caused" was less than $7,660,315 worth of 
cleanup costs only by demonstrating that it dumped no more 
than 80 barrels.  Accordingly, although the district court 
declined to "revisit the ... ruling[ ] that ... the government 
has the burden to produce evidence linking [CWM] to waste 
beyond the 80 drums at the Site," CNSI, 139 F. Supp. 2d at 

39 n.17, we conclude that the ruling was in error.  The special 
master correctly held in his first report that the burden was 
CWM's to bear, see JA 302;  it should not have been shifted to 
the government thereafter.

     Whether CWM has carried its burden is a question of law 
that we review de novo.  See Bell, 3 F.3d at 896 ("The 
question whether the harm ... is capable of apportionment 
... is a question of law." (citing Restatement (Second) of 
Torts s 434(1)(b))).  On the record before us, see supra Part 
I, we agree with the district court's conclusion that CWM 
"cannot prove by a preponderance of the evidence that [it is] 
not liable for any additional waste" beyond the 80 drums.  
CNSI, 139 F. Supp. 2d at 39.

     True, in attempting to account for all of the 1,649 drums it 
arranged to have Continental ship, CWM cites several facts 
which together bolster, at least theoretically, a conclusion that 
it dumped no more than 80 drums:  Continental's and Young's 
records could support an inference that approximately 800 of 
the 1,649 drums were to be shipped to Young's Borden 
Springs, Alabama facility;  CWM's May 10, 1973 inventory 
could support an inference that CWM recommended only 153 
to 182 drums be solidified and buried in a landfill, see supra 
note 1 and accompanying text, and that the 153 to 182 drums 
were the same drums in Hulsey's two rigs on the night of 
March 17 and were the only drums to be dumped, see CNSI, 
139 F. Supp. 2d at 32 (Hulsey "transported approximately 
160 drums ... from Young Refining to the Basket Creek 
Site" (emphasis added));  and, finally, the parties' stipulation 
that Young incinerated at Douglasville some unknown portion 
of CWM's waste could support an inference that it in fact 
incinerated the approximately 700 drums of waste remaining.

     The foregoing chain of possible inferences, however, is 
insufficient to satisfy CWM's burden of proof under the 
Restatement and under CERCLA.  CWM's theory of the 
evidence turns on one crucial but unproven assumption--
namely, most or all of the drums Hunnicutt counted on March 
21, 1976 at the Borden Springs facility were CWM's.  With-
out establishing this assumption as a fact, CWM cannot show 

(and we cannot conclude) that its drums ever made it to 
Borden Springs, whatever Continental's or Young's records 
might indicate.  Moreover, CWM's theory crumbles under 
the weight of even a few countervailing facts:  Dr. Young's 
deposition testimony suggests that all of CWM's drums were 
to be dumped at the Basket Creek Site;  the fact that the 
same types of hazardous substances that came from CWM's 
drums were found all over the Site, not only in the southern 
(downhill) portion, suggests that CWM drums--beyond the 
acknowledged 80--were dumped into northern portions of the 
Site;  and the fact that Young halted incineration when the 
Georgia EPD objected to the noxious fumes from CWM's 
waste suggests that Young may not have incinerated all 700 
of the "unaccounted for" drums.

     In short, while CWM produces some circumstantial evi-
dence to support its theory of geographic divisibility, it has 
not managed the "very difficult proposition" of proving its 
theory by a preponderance of the evidence.5  Hercules, 247 
F.3d at 717;  see Restatement (Second) of Torts s 433A(2) 
cmt. i (noting difficulty of apportioning certain kinds of harm 
and cautioning against "arbitrary apportionment for its own 
sake").  Accordingly, the district court's denial of CWM's 
request for reimbursement is

                                                                 Affirmed.

__________
     5 Nor has CWM convinced us that relief is warranted based on 
the alternative ground that the government's "delay in responding 
to Hulsey's dumping denied CWM the ability to defend itself 
against [the] EPA's accusations" and thereby denied it due process 
of law in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution.  Br. of Appellant at 39 (capitalization altered).  As the 
government points out, CWM's due process claim "is premised on 
the patently erroneous suggestion" that the EPA could have noti-
fied CWM of its potential CERCLA liability in March 1976, i.e., 
before CERCLA was even enacted.  Br. of Appellees at 54.  Fur-
thermore, only about one year elapsed between the EPA's 1990 
investigation into Douglasville residents' complaints about drinking 
water and its issuance of a cleanup order in April 1991;  thus, CWM 
cannot even show governmental delay, much less delay so extended 
that it implicates due process.

           