                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 9, 2001   Decided April 13, 2001 

                           No. 00-1188

                      Alldata Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Robert L. Rediger argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Joan E. Hoyte-Hayes, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Frederick Havard, 

Supervisory Attorney.  Julie B. Broido, Senior Attorney, 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Henderson and Randolph, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  Alldata Corporation peti-
tions for review of the determination that it committed an 
unfair labor practice.  The NLRB cross-petitions for enforce-
ment.  We grant the petition for review and deny the petition 
for enforcement.

                                I.

     Petitioner sells an automobile repair database to service 
stations.  In May 1993, petitioner hired Karl Abbadessa to 
sell its products in Queens, New York, under the supervision 
of local field manager Arnold Pincus.  Petitioner's salesmen 
were paid largely on commission.  Company policy required 
that salesmen meet a quota of 7.5 sales per rolling quarter--
i.e., at the end of every month, each salesman must have met 
his quota for the previous three months.  At the time of 
Abbadessa's hiring, failure to meet the quota resulted in 
written warnings prior to discharge.

     Abbadessa's tenure in petitioner's employ was tumultuous.  
In August 1994, Pincus fired Abbadessa over financial impro-
prieties.  Petitioner then nullified the firing and instead 
issued a written warning, which stated that Abbadessa need-
ed to maintain his sales quota.  By the end of fiscal year 
1994, however, Abbadessa's sales placed him in the top 10% of 
petitioner's sales force.  On April 11, 1995, petitioner in-
formed Abbadessa that his fiscal year 1994 sales had earned 
him a trip to the "Winner's Circle," a company-funded trip to 
a California resort.  Because the trip would allow him to meet 
petitioner's executives, Abbadessa spoke to other Alldata 
salesmen about their working conditions so that he might 
convey their concerns to management.

     The primary concern among those in Abbadessa's region 
was their changing commission formula.  Beginning in early 
1994, petitioner adopted a second method for distributing its 
database:  a contract with Snap-On Tools, a seller of automo-
tive tools.  Snap-On's sales force marketed the database to 
service stations, in competition with Alldata's own commis-
sion-driven salesmen.  Among Abbadessa's fellow salesmen, 
this arrangement allegedly led to diminished earnings;  with-
out question, it led to resentment of Snap-On's role.  Sales-
men under Pincus' supervision, including Abbadessa, made 
their dissatisfaction known to Pincus at their monthly sales 
meetings.  Pincus was not unsympathetic.

     For Abbadessa, the Snap-On contract apparently led to 
both resentment and hostility toward Snap-On's employees.  
On May 10, 1995, Abbadessa was rejected for promotion 
because of his antagonistic relationship with Snap-On.  After 
Pincus recommended two other salesmen for promotions, 
petitioner's vice president of sales, Robert Weiffenbach, sug-
gested that he thought Abbadessa was "a better candidate."  
Pincus conceded that Abbadessa was a better candidate, but 
informed Weiffenbach that

     I did not choose him because he has a poor reputation 
     with [S]nap-[O]n. I feel this will negatively affect their 
     cooperation with us....  I have attempted and am con-
     tinuing efforts to bring upon an improvement in their 
     relationships.  Karl has been resisting making peace.
     
     During the Winner's Circle, having been encouraged by 
Pincus to act as an "ambassador[ ]" for his fellow salesmen, 
Abbadessa approached Weiffenbach regarding his concerns 
and requested a meeting with Rod Georgiu, petitioner's presi-
dent--which he got.  Abbadessa spoke to Georgiu about 
various issues relating to employee well-being, including bo-
nuses, expenses, reimbursement, and support.  Abbadessa 
testified that Georgiu appeared sympathetic to his concerns 
and suggested that Abbadessa put his complaints in writing.  
Weiffenbach also urged Abbadessa to memorialize his con-

cerns and to do so quickly.  Abbadessa drafted a letter to 
Georgiu, which he had Pincus review, and sent it on May 23.

     On June 5, petitioner decided to eliminate some salesmen 
who were well below quota.  Weiffenbach wrote Pincus and 
the other field service managers:

          In the next day or two I will be sending you a list of 
     reps that need to be terminated immediately.  Basically 
     the list will include established reps that are below 2 or 3 
     units YTD [i.e., since March 31].  Each of you has a rep 
     or two in this category and this performance can not be 
     allowed to continue this year.  There is absolutely no 
     excuse for an established rep not to be above quota.
     
This policy constituted a change from petitioner's previous 
one of issuing written warnings to those who were below 
quota.

     On June 12, Abbadessa e-mailed Weiffenbach to suggest 
that "we draw up an 'agreement' which clearly states what 
the [Snap-On] dealers['] obligations are, ... and have any 
dealer who is interested in participating sign."  Abbadessa 
apparently also submitted his own draft of such an agree-
ment.  The next day, Pincus offered two candidates who were 
under his supervision for termination.  He told Weiffenbach 
that neither Abbadessa nor Alan Tankoos, another salesman, 
qualified for retention, because they each had secured only 
two of the requisite 7.5 sales, despite the fact that the rolling 
quarter within which those sales had to be made was almost 
five-sixths over.  Pincus stated that "[i]f [Abbadessa's] busi-
ness doesn't improve he may be my first choice to go."

     The following day Weiffenbach angrily responded to Ab-
badessa's June 12 e-mail:

          I read the document you intended to try and get the 
     dealers to sign.  Frankly I went a little ballistic.  I have 
     one statement I want you to think about.  What makes 
     you think you have the authority and/or rapport with 
     Snap-on to ask or require them to sign this unauthorized 
     document? !  Karl, you need to put your adversarial 
     attitude about Snap-on in the closet and leave it there.  
     
     They do not work for you or [me] and your heavy handed 
     tactics will only serve to further damage the relation.  
     You can be certain I will not allow that to happen.  I am 
     working hard to get their entire organization behind us 
     ....
     
Abbadessa wrote back on June 20 assuring Weiffenbach that 
he had taken no direct action to get Snap-On dealers' signa-
tures.

     The same day, Weiffenbach e-mailed Abbadessa to notify 
him that his Winner's Circle status earned him 600 "stock 
option shares."  The message congratulated Abbadessa on his 
sales success during the preceding fiscal year.

     Three days later, Pincus terminated Abbadessa's employ-
ment for "failure to maintain sales volume."  Pincus wrote to 
Abbadessa stating that Abbadessa had net sales of only two 
units with a week left in the rolling quarter--well short of the 
required 7.5--and that another possible cancellation threat-
ened to reduce Abbadessa's total to a single sale.  Therefore, 
according to Pincus' letter, petitioner had "no alternative but 
to terminate [Abbadessa's] employment immediately, effective 
June 23, 1995."  However, field managers other than Pincus 
did not begin cutting personnel, pursuant to Weiffenbach's 
memorandum, until September of that year.  Only then was 
Tankoos released.

     With Abbadessa's June 23 firing, the clock began running 
on the six-month statute of limitations for filing an unfair 
labor practice charge under s 10(b) of the National Labor 
Relations Act.1  When Abbadessa finally attempted to file a 
charge on December 18--five days before the statute of 
limitations was up--he did so without attaching the jurat or 
declaration required by NLRB regulations.2  At the time 
much of the federal government, including the Regional Of-

__________
     1 29 U.S.C. s 160(b).

     2 See 29 C.F.R. s 102.11.  That is, Abbadessa failed to include 
either his signature as witnessed by a notary public or a declaration 
under penalty of perjury that the contents of the charge were true 
and correct.  See id.

fices of the National Labor Relations Board, was shut down 
due to a budget deadlock.  After the offices reopened, on 
January 8--after the statute of limitations had run--the 
Regional Office requested that Abbadessa refile his charge in 
the proper form and deferred for later consideration whether 
the refiled charge would be considered timely.  Abbadessa 
promptly refiled.

     An administrative law judge found that Abbadessa's meet-
ing with and letter to Georgiu constituted protected concerted 
activity under s 7 of the Act, and inferred that Abbadessa's 
termination was brought on by that concerted activity.  After 
making those findings, however, the ALJ dismissed the com-
plaint because he believed that the untimely filing of the 
sworn charge meant that no valid charge was filed.  The 
Board disagreed, holding that "the failure of a charging party 
to comply with the jurat or declaration requirement does not 
affect the timeliness of the filing of an unfair labor practice 
charge."  The Board determined, however, that the ALJ's 
decision was insufficiently specific to allow meaningful review, 
and so it remanded for specific findings regarding the ele-
ments of the unfair labor practice and witnesses' credibility.3

     On remand, the ALJ made a credibility finding as to only 
one topic but otherwise fleshed out his previous findings 
regarding the unfair labor practice.  Over a strong dissent, 
the Board adopted the ALJ's order and decision.4  Alldata 
petitioned for review and the Board cross-petitioned for en-
forcement.

                               II.

     Petitioner presents us with two arguments.  First, it is 
contended that an unsworn charge is no charge at all and that 
by the very terms of the Board's own regulations Abbadessa's 
charge was untimely.  Second, petitioner, echoing the dissent-
ing Board member, argues that substantial evidence is lack-
ing for the Board's finding that petitioner acted on the basis 

__________
     3 Alldata Corp., 324 N.L.R.B. 544, 545 (1997).

     4 Alldata Corp., 327 N.L.R.B. 127, 127 (1998).

of animus against concerted activity.  We take up those 
arguments in order.

                                A.

     The Board's regulations require that a charge contain 
either a jurat or a declaration.  Petitioner argues that non-
compliance with the jurat requirement invalidates a charge 
and that failure to file a valid charge within the six-month 
period renders a subsequent charge untimely.  The Board 
decided, however, that the defective charge's filing tolled the 
statute of limitations, and that "[a] charge timely filed within 
the 10(b) period remains timely pending its revision to comply 
with this provision of the Board's Rules."  324 N.L.R.B. at 
545.  We give controlling weight to the Board's interpretation 
of its own rule unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent 
with the regulation itself.  See Canadian Am. Oil Co. v. 
NLRB, 82 F.3d 469, 473 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Here, we see no 
reason not to defer to the Board's interpretation.  While 
s 102.11 requires that a charge "shall" contain a jurat or 
declaration, the consequence of a charge's noncompliance on 
its timeliness is not mentioned.  If the agency allows a 
statutorily valid charge filed within the statutory period to be 
subsequently brought into compliance with agency specifica-
tions, there is nothing "plainly erroneous or inconsistent" with 
the text of the regulation about doing so.

                                B.

     It is, of course, axiomatic that the Board's unfair labor 
practice determination must be premised on a finding that 
petitioner was motivated by animus against Abbadessa's con-
certed activity.  And Abbadessa's efforts to improve the pay 
and working conditions of his fellow salesmen were protected 
activity.  But petitioner claims that there is not a shred of 
evidence that the company resented Abbadessa's concerted 
activity--at least insofar as it remained within legitimate 
scope and bounds.  In fact, the company encouraged Ab-
badessa's role.

     The Board's finding, not atypically explained in a footnote 
to the Board's opinion, is based on inferences it draws from 
certain circumstances:

     the timing of the discharge in that it occurred shortly 
     after Abbadessa's voicing of employee complaints about 
     [petitioner's] bonus policy, expense reimbursement, sales 
     support and other issues;  the disparity in [petitioner's] 
     treatment of Abbadessa and other underperforming sales 
     people;  and the inconsistency between commending and 
     rewarding Abbadessa for his sales performance and then 
     shortly thereafter firing him for alleged poor perfor-
     mance.
     
327 N.L.R.B. at 127 n.2.

     That sort of circumstantial evidence, when combined with 
some evidence of employer animus directed at an employee's 
protected activity, would ordinarily suffice to support a Board 
finding of illegal discharge.  But it is doubtful that it would 
suffice without that crucial link.  Cf. MECO Corp. v. NLRB, 
986 F.2d 1434, 1437 (D.C. Cir. 1993).

     In any event, the Board's description of the circumstantial 
evidence in this case ignores other circumstances which whol-
ly undermine its finding of unlawful motivation.  Taking the 
last point first, there is no logical inconsistency in the compa-
ny's behavior in discharging Abbadessa for poor performance 
shortly after giving him a reward, because the reward was for 
his performance in the prior year, fiscal 1994, whereas his 
performance in early fiscal 1995 was below company stan-
dards.

     To be sure, turning to the timing, Abbadessa was dis-
charged before the group of firings Weiffenbach contemplat-
ed--which did not come until September.  The Board particu-
larly was struck by the fact that Tankoos, who like Abbadessa 
had only two net sales for the rolling quarter, was not 
discharged until September.  At the time Abbadessa was let 
go, however, Tankoos, unlike Abbadessa, had four potential 

sales in the pipeline, whereas Abbadessa was not making a 
comparable effort.5

     Still it is a fair observation that the timing of Abbadessa's 
discharge was suspiciously abrupt coming even before the end 
of the quarter.  But the Board (and the ALJ) ignored Ab-
badessa's extraordinary drafting and sending to Weiffenbach 
of the proposed new agreement with Snap-On.  In the con-
text of Abbadessa's troubled relations with Snap-On employ-
ees it is quite apparent that Abbadessa's initiative did engen-
der animus, even fury.  Weiffenbach wrote Abbadessa that 
he, Weiffenbach, "went ballistic" when he received that com-
munication only days before Abbadessa was discharged.  The 
Board's counsel conceded Abbadessa's efforts to directly in-
fluence Alldata's contractual relations with Snap-On went 
beyond any reasonable definition of protected concerted activ-
ity yet neither the ALJ nor the Board even discussed its 
relevance.6  Abbadessa's ploy, coming in the wake of his 
troubled relations with Snap-On employees, may well have 
pushed him to the front of the queue of marginal employees, 
but it constitutes a non-protected ground for discharge.

     We agree with the dissenting Board member that there is 
simply no evidence that petitioner ever manifested any hostil-
ity to Abbadessa's protected concerted activity.  Abbadessa 
was encouraged by his supervisors, Pincus and Weiffenbach, 
to present his and his fellow salesmen's compensation con-
cerns to Georgiu both orally and in writing (Pincus even 
helped Abbadessa to draft a letter to Georgiu).  Abbadessa 
went too far, however;  he took his advocacy role beyond 
protected bounds and, assuming that initiative in part contrib-
uted to the timing of his discharge--which is a fair infer-

__________
     5 The ALJ refused to credit Pincus' testimony that he had pled 
with Abbadessa to increase his sales efforts because there was no 
written record of those pleas.  The Board implies that Abbadessa's 
unwarned firing, coupled with petitioner's prior policy of issuing 
written warnings, suggests improper motivation.  But Weiffen-
bach's June 5 memo plainly changed that policy for the whole 
company.

     6 To be sure, petitioner did not make this point very effectively.

ence--it nevertheless does not support the Board's finding of 
unlawful motive.  The Board just flatly ignored the obvious 
superseding (and benign) explanation for the abruptness of 
Abbadessa's discharge and instead fixed on an unsupported 
cause.  As such, its inference drawn from the circumstances 
is unreasonable.  See Allentown Mack Sales & Serv., Inc. v. 
NLRB, 522 U.S. 359, 366-67 (1998);  see also Southwest 
Merch. Corp. v. NLRB, 943 F.2d 1354, 1360 (D.C. Cir. 1991).

                             * * * *

     Accordingly, the petition for review is granted.

                                                                 So ordered
.

                                      