                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 3, 2001   Decided January 29, 2002 

                           No. 00-5282

                     Abdus-Shahid M.S. Ali, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                  District of Columbia, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv01348)

     Robert N. Weiner, appointed by the court, argued the cause 
and filed the briefs as amicus curiae for appellant.

     Abdus-Shahid M.S. Ali, appearing pro se, was on the briefs 
for appellant.

     Mark R. Davis, Senior Assistant Attorney General, State 
of Virginia, argued the cause and filed the brief for appellees 
Commonwealth of Virginia, et al.

     Robert R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, Charles L. Reis-
chel, Deputy Corporation Counsel, and Carl J. Schifferle, 
Assistant Corporation Counsel, filed the brief for appellees 
District of Columbia, et al.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  A District of Columbia inmate claims 
that following his transfer from the District's Lorton Correc-
tional Facility to a Virginia prison pursuant to an interstate 
compact, Virginia officials used excessive force in restraining 
him, required him to register under his birth name rather 
than his religiously inspired legal name, and neglected to give 
him the insulin he required, resulting in his leg becoming 
dangerously infected.  The inmate also claims that the Dis-
trict denied him access to the courts by failing to transport 
certain legal documents with him to the Virginia prison, 
sending them instead to his home.  The inmate filed suit in 
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, 
naming as defendants the Commonwealth of Virginia, various 
Virginia officials, the District of Columbia, various District 
officials, and the Attorney General of the United States.  
Affirming the district court's dismissal of the complaint, we 
find that (1) all claims against Virginia, its agencies and its 
officers in their official capacities are either barred by sover-
eign immunity or mooted by the inmate's transfer back to a 
District prison, (2) the district court lacked personal jurisdic-
tion over Virginia officials in their personal capacities, (3) the 
inmate lacks standing to bring a denial of court access claim, 
and (4) neither the District nor its officials can be held liable 
for torts committed by Virginia officials.

                                I.

     Appellant Abdus-Shahid M.S. Ali is a District of Columbia 
inmate serving concurrent sentences for first-degree murder 
convictions in 1964 and again in 1986.  Ali's claims arise from 
his April 1999 transfer from the District's Lorton Central 

Facility, located in Lorton, Virginia, to Virginia's Sussex II 
prison in Waverly, Virginia.  The transfer took place pursu-
ant to a contract, authorized by the Interstate Corrections 
Compact, Va. Code Ann. s 53.1-216;  D.C. Code Ann. 
s 24-1001, between the District of Columbia Department of 
Corrections and the Virginia Department of Corrections.

     According to Ali, during a strip-search undertaken in prep-
aration for his transfer, Virginia prison official D. Davis "hit 
[him] in the stomach," prompting Ali to punch Davis, at which 
point several other officers leapt on Ali and wrestled him to 
the ground.  Compl. p p 10-11.  Ali claims that his "face was 
swollen up and at least four teeth were loosened of which one 
had to be pulled...."  Pl.'s Opp'n. to Va. Defs.' Mot. to 
Dismiss p 30.

     Ali also contends that Virginia prison officials humiliated 
him when, after he arrived at Sussex II, they held a stun gun 
to his head and forced him to register under his birth name, 
James C. Long, rather than his legal name, Abdus-Shahid 
M.S. Ali.  Although originally convicted under his birth name, 
Ali changed his name in 1979 for religious reasons.  Accord-
ing to Ali, not only did he find the registration under his birth 
name religiously offensive, but as a result of his incarceration 
under the name James Long, Sussex II officials neglected for 
fifteen days to give him the insulin shots required to treat his 
diabetes.  Sussex II medical staff apparently confused anoth-
er inmate's file, labeled "James Long #268-200" and contain-
ing no diabetes diagnosis, with Ali's file, labeled "Ali #136-
476."  Compl.p 16.  As a result of this "medical malpractice," 
Ali alleges, his fingers became "numb," Compl. p p 16,17, and 
his right leg, which became infected, "burst open" and "may 
(in time) ... require amputation," Pl's Opp'n. to Va. Defs.' 
Mot. to Dismiss p 11.

     Finally, Ali contends that District prison officials "forced 
him" to send certain legal documents home rather than 
transporting them along with his other belongings to the 
Sussex II prison.  Compl. p 22.  As a result, he experienced a 
"set-back" in litigation pending in the District of Columbia 
Superior Court.  Compl. p 23.

     Based on these allegations, Ali filed suit in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia against 
three categories of defendants:  (1) the Commonwealth of 
Virginia and the Virginia Department of Corrections, as well 
as the Attorney General, the Governor, the Chief Warden of 
the Sussex II State Prison, and Corrections Officer D. Davis 
in their personal and official capacities;  (2) the Mayor of 
Washington, D.C., the Warden of the Lorton Central Facility, 
and the District of Columbia Department of Corrections;  and 
(3) the Attorney General of the United States.  While Ali's 
handwritten complaint contains many claims, he alleges es-
sentially four causes of action:  (1) that corrections officers 
used excessive force in violation of his Eighth Amendment 
right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment;  (2) that 
the denial of insulin also violated his Eighth Amendment 
rights;  (3) that forcing him to sign his birth name violated the 
First Amendment and the Religious Freedom Restoration 
Act (RFRA), 42 U.S.C. ss 2000bb to 2000bb-4;  and (4) that 
the failure to transfer all his legal papers to the Virginia 
prison violated his First Amendment right to court access.

     The district court dismissed Ali's complaint with prejudice.  
With respect to his claims against the Virginia defendants 
(except for the claim relating to the use of his birth name), 
the court concluded that Ali failed to exhaust his administra-
tive remedies as required by the Prison Litigation Reform 
Act (PLRA).  As to the birth name issue, the district court 
held that "the mere fact that correctional authorities maintain 
an inmate's records in the name he used when convicted 
implicates no constitutional right."  Ali v. District of Colum-
bia, No. 99-1348, slip op. at 5 (D.D.C. July 11, 2000).  Finding 
the claims against the District defendants and the Attorney 
General of the United States based on the actions of Virginia 
prison officials, the district court dismissed these claims as 
well.  The district court also noted that "to the extent" Ali 
sought "injunctive and declaratory relief," such claims were 
"moot" in light of Ali's "transfer[ ] back to Lorton."  Id. at 4.

     Ali, supported by the amicus we appointed, now appeals the 
dismissal of his two Eighth Amendment claims (excessive 
force and denial of insulin), his First Amendment and RFRA 

claims (use of his birth name) and his access to court claim.  
Our review is de novo.  See Moore v. Valder, 65 F.3d 189, 192 
(D.C. Cir.1995) (reviewing "de novo a dismissal for failure to 
state a claim upon which relief can be granted").

                               II.

     We begin with Ali's claims against the Virginia defendants.  
According to Virginia, the district court lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction because Ali failed to exhaust his administrative 
remedies as required by the PLRA.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 1997e(a) ("No action shall be brought ... until such admin-
istrative remedies as are available are exhausted.").  Virginia 
argues that although Ali filed a complaint pursuant to the 
prison's grievance procedures, because he filed suit before 
those procedures were completed, he failed to exhaust his 
administrative remedies.  See Jackson v. District of Colum-
bia, 254 F.3d 262, 269 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (holding that remedies 
must be exhausted at the time the complaint is filed).  Alter-
natively, Virginia argues that the doctrine of sovereign immu-
nity bars Ali's claims against the Commonwealth and its 
officials in their official capacities and that the district court 
lacked personal jurisdiction over the individual defendants in 
their personal capacities.

     We start, as we generally do, by making sure we possess 
subject matter jurisdiction.  See Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon 
Oil Co., 526 U.S. 574, 587-88 (1999) (explaining that courts 
generally address subject matter jurisdiction even before 
personal jurisdiction unless the subject matter question raises 
a "difficult and novel" question of law).  Virginia's subject 
matter jurisdiction argument depends on reading the PLRA's 
exhaustion requirement as a jurisdictional bar.  Although we 
have never directly ruled that the requirement is not jurisdic-
tional, in Jackson we rejected inmates' argument that the 
defendants had waived their exhaustion defenses, 254 F.3d at 
267 (D.C. Cir. 2001), an issue we never would have considered 
if exhaustion were jurisdictional.  Removing any doubt, we 
now hold, as has every circuit to have considered the matter, 
that the PLRA's exhaustion requirement simply "governs the 

timing of the action" and does not contain the type of 
" 'sweeping and direct' " language that would indicate a juris-
dictional bar rather than a "mere codification[ ] of administra-
tive exhaustion requirements."  Chelette v. Harris, 229 F.3d 
684, 688 (8th Cir. 2000) (quoting Weinberger v. Salfi, 422 U.S. 
749, 757 (1975)).  See also Wright v. Hollingsworth, 260 F.3d 
357, 358 n.2 (5th Cir. 2001) ("The 42 U.S.C. s 1997e exhaus-
tion requirement is not jurisdictional.");  accord Basham v. 
Uphoff, No. 98-8013, 1998 WL 847689, at *3 (10th Cir. Dec. 8, 
1998);  Massey v. Helman, 196 F.3d 727, 732 (7th Cir. 1999);  
Rumbles v. Hill, 182 F.3d 1064, 1067 (9th Cir. 1999);  Nyhuis 
v. Reno 204 F.3d 65, 69 n. 4 (3d Cir. 2000);  Curry v. Scott, 
249 F.3d 493, 501 n. 2 (6th Cir. 2001).

     Having found the PLRA's exhaustion requirement not jur-
isdictional, we have no reason to consider the merits of the 
Virginia defendants' exhaustion defense because Ali's claims 
against them are barred on other grounds:  sovereign immu-
nity and lack of personal jurisdiction.  As to the first, the 
Eleventh Amendment bars all suits in federal court against a 
state by citizens of another state.  See U.S. Const. Amend. XI.  
When plaintiffs sue state officials in their official capacities 
for monetary damages, the suits are, in substance, suits 
against the state and also barred by sovereign immunity.  
Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651, 663 (1974).  Congress may 
abrogate state sovereign immunity through a legitimate exer-
cise of its Fourteenth Amendment, section five, enforcement 
powers.  Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 756 (1999).  States 
can also waive their sovereign immunity, but "we will find 
waiver only where stated by the most express language or by 
such overwhelming implications from the text as [will] leave 
no room for any other reasonable construction."  Edelman, 
415 U.S. at 673 (citation and internal quotations omitted).

     Applying these principles to this case, we note first that it 
makes no difference that Ali may be a District of Columbia 
resident rather than a citizen of "another state," as the 
Eleventh Amendment provides.  See 13B Charles Wright & 
Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure s 3618, 
at 568-570 (2d ed. 1984) (General rule is that prisoner retains 
residency had at time of incarceration).  In Alden v. Maine, 

the Supreme Court held that "the sovereign immunity of the 
States neither derives from, nor is limited by the terms of the 
Eleventh Amendment.  Rather, [it] is a fundamental aspect 
of sovereignty which the States enjoyed before the ratifica-
tion of the Constitution, and which they retain today ... 
except as altered by the plan of the Convention or certain 
constitutional Amendments."  527 U.S. at 713.  Cf. also Hans 
v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1, 5 (1890) (holding despite the literal 
language of Eleventh Amendment that the doctrine of sover-
eign immunity bars suit in Federal Court against a state by a 
citizen of that same state.)

     The question, then, is whether Ali has pled a cause of 
action arising under a federal statute that abrogates Virgi-
nia's sovereign immunity.  He has not.  RFRA does not 
apply to the states, City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507, 536 
(1997), and the Supreme Court has held that section 1983 
does not abrogate state sovereign immunity, Will v. Michigan 
Dep't of State Police, 491 U.S. 58, 71 (1989).  Nor has 
Virginia waived its sovereign immunity simply because the 
Interstate Corrections Compact, adopted by the Common-
wealth, provides that "[t]he fact of confinement in a receiving 
state shall not deprive any inmate so confined of any legal 
rights which said inmate would have had if confined in an 
appropriate institution of the sending state."  Va. Code Ann. 
s 53.1-216, Article IV(e);  see also id. at Article I (defining 
"state" as including the District of Columbia).  Not only does 
this language fall far short of the required "most express 
waiver," Edelman, 415 U.S. at 673, but we see no basis for 
finding that the "overwhelming implication," id., of the Com-
pact's text is that Virginia intended to waive sovereign immu-
nity.  Even assuming the Compact creates rights enforceable 
by individual inmates, the Compact says nothing about how 
inmates may enforce these rights.  A "reasonable construc-
tion," id., of the Compact would suggest that Virginia intend-
ed inmates to vindicate any rights through the traditional 
methods of either prospective injunctive relief against Com-
monwealth officials, see id. at 664, 668 (holding Eleventh 
Amendment bars "equitable restitution" but not prospective 
injunctive relief having only an "ancillary effect on the state 

treasury"), or damage suits against Commonwealth officials in 
their personal capacities, see Hafer v. Melo, 502 U.S. 21, 30-
31 (1991) ("Eleventh Amendment does not erect a barrier 
against suits to impose 'individual and personal liability' on 
state officials under s 1983" (quoting Scheuer v. Rhodes, 416 
U.S. 232, 238 (1974))), neither of which requires waiver of 
sovereign immunity.  See Alden, 527 U.S. at 732 (noting the 
difference between the existence of a legal right under Feder-
al law and the "implementation of the law in a manner 
consistent with the constitutional sovereignty of the States" 
(emphasis added)).  We thus conclude that the doctrine of 
sovereign immunity bars Ali's claims against the Common-
wealth of Virginia and the Virginia Department of Correc-
tions, as well as his claims against the Attorney General, the 
Governor, the Chief Warden of the Sussex II State Prison 
and Officer Davis to the extent that Ali seeks damages from 
these individuals in their official capacities.

     Because the district court found all claims for injunctive 
relief moot in light of Ali's return to the Lorton facility and 
because Ali does not appeal this determination, the next 
question with respect to the Virginia defendants is whether 
the district court had personal jurisdiction over the individual 
officials in their personal capacities.  Amicus argues that 
jurisdiction is proper under the District of Columbia long-arm 
statute either because the defendants "transact[ed]" business 
in the District, "contract[ed]" to do so, or "caus[ed] tortious 
injury in the District ... by an act or omission outside the 
District...."  D.C. Code Ann. s 13-423(a)(1), -(2), -(3).  We 
disagree.  Nowhere in his complaint does Ali allege that any 
defendants acting in their individual capacities either trans-
acted business in the District or contracted to do so.  It is 
true, as amicus points out, that Virginia has contracts with 
the District, makes reports to the District concerning District 
inmates it houses, and receives money from the District.  
Virginia officials, however, undertake all such actions in their 
official capacities.  In addition, because the District's Lorton 
facility, the site of the alleged assault, is located in Virginia, 
no tortious acts took place in the District.

                               III.

     Turning to the remaining defendants, we begin with Ali's 
court access claim against the District of Columbia defen-
dants, the only claim not based on the actions of Virginia 
officials.  To maintain a court access claim, an inmate must 
demonstrate "actual injury," that is the inmate must show 
"that an actionable claim ... which he desired to bring has 
been lost or rejected, or that the presentation of such a claim 
is currently being prevented...."  Lewis v. Casey, 518 U.S. 
343, 356 (1996).  This Ali has failed to do.  He alleges neither 
that he actually lost any otherwise valid legal claim nor that 
he is unable to raise such a claim in any other proceeding.  
He alleges only that he has an "open case" in the District of 
Columbia Superior Court that has been "set back."  Compl. 
p 23.  Without more, this claim is insufficient to give rise to 
Article III standing.  See, e.g., Hudson v. Robinson, 678 F.2d 
462, 466 (3d Cir. 1982) (mere delay in filing papers in court 
not enough to establish actual injury to court access if papers 
ultimately filed or accepted and considered by court).

     Ali's remaining claims against District officials--his Eighth 
Amendment and religious freedom claims--all rest on the 
actions of Virginia officials.  In Monell v. New York City 
Dep't of Social Servs., the Supreme Court, interpreting sec-
tion 1983, held that while the word "person" includes a 
municipality, the phrase "any person who ... subjects ... 
any citizen" implies a strict causal relationship.  Accordingly, 
the Court held that plaintiffs suing municipalities under sec-
tion 1983 may not rely on a respondeat superior theory;  
rather, they must show that municipality agents or employees 
acted "pursuant to official municipal policy of some nature."  
Monell, 436 U.S. 658, 691 (1978).  Ali makes no allegation 
that could give rise to liability under Monell.  For example, 
although he claims mistreatment by Virginia officials, Ali 
never alleges that the District had a policy of sending inmates 
to Virginia prisons that routinely mistreat inmates.  See, e.g., 
Jackson v. District of Columbia, 254 F.3d 262, 265 (D.C. Cir. 
2001) (inmates alleged that the District had a practice of 
sending them to prisons with grooming policies that violated 
their religious beliefs).  Amicus argues that Monell is inappli-

cable to this case because the Virginia officials acted as 
agents for the District.  Monell, however, expressly states 
that "a local government may not be sued under s 1983 for 
an injury inflicted solely by its employees or agents."  Mo-
nell, 436 U.S. at 694 (emphasis added).

     Ali's failure to state a section 1983 claim against the 
District defendants does not end our inquiry, for while Ali's 
complaint states no RFRA claim against the District, amicus 
argues that he constructively amended his complaint to in-
clude such a claim by citing the statute in his Opposition to 
the Virginia Defendants' Motion to Dismiss.  Even construing 
Ali's pleadings "liberally," Richardson v. United States, 193 
F.3d 545, 548 (D.C. Cir. 1999), and assuming that he "recog-
nized the need" to amend his complaint, id. at 549, we think a 
single citation to RFRA in a filing responding to Virginia's 
motion to dismiss insufficient to put the District on notice 
that it faced a RFRA claim.  See Sinclair v. Kleindienst, 711 
F.2d 291, 293 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (holding that complaint must 
give "defendant fair notice of the plaintiff's claim and the 
grounds upon which it rests").  Indeed, even the district 
court seems not to have realized that Ali intended to raise a 
RFRA claim against the District of Columbia.  See Ali, No. 
99-1348, slip op. at 2-4.  Under these circumstances, we 
decline to find that Ali constructively amended his complaint 
to state a RFRA claim against the District and its officials.

     Finally, we reject Ali's claims against the Attorney General 
of the United States.  The district court's reasons for dismiss-
ing these claims are entirely correct.

                               IV.

     Amicus argues that if Ali can sue neither District nor 
Virginia officials, the District, by "transferring prisoners to 
other states," can "deprive them of remedies for constitution-
al violations."  Amicus's Reply at 12.  Not so.  Although we 
affirm the district court's dismissal with prejudice of all 
claims against the Virginia officials in their individual capaci-
ties, we emphasize that this action merely "acts as res 
judicata for the jurisdictional issue."  Posner v. Essex Ins. 

Co., 178 F.3d 1209, 1221 (11th Cir. 1999).  Thus, nothing in 
either this opinion or the actions of the district court prevents 
Ali from filing suit against Virginia officials in their personal 
capacities in the appropriate federal district court in Virginia.  
This is precisely the remedy that section 1983 gives every 
Virginia inmate, whether transferred from the District or not.

     The decision of the district court is affirmed.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                             