                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 14, 2002       Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 01-1270

            32 County Sovereignty Committee, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                     Department of State and 
              Colin L. Powell, Secretary of State, 
                           Respondents

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                       Department of State

     Lynne Bernabei argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
her on the briefs were Alan R. Kabat and Debra S. Katz.

     Douglas N. Letter, Litigation Counsel, U.S. Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and Linda 
Jacobson, Assistant Legal Adviser, U. S. Department of 
State.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners are three Irish politi-
cal organizations:  the 32 County Sovereignty Committee and 
its successor entity, the 32 County Sovereignty Movement 
(collectively, "32 County") and the Irish Republican Prisoners 
Welfare Association.  They seek review of their designation 
as "foreign terrorist organizations."  8 U.S.C. s 1189.

     We have decided two cases arising under the portion of the 
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 con-
ferring upon the Secretary of State the power to designate 
foreign terrorist organizations.  See Nat'l Council of Resis-
tance of Iran v. Dep't of State, 251 F.3d 192 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  
People's Mojahedin Org. of Iran v. Dep't of State, 182 F.3d 17 
(D.C. Cir. 1999).  We assume familiarity with those opinions, 
and with the unique operation of 8 U.S.C. s 1189, and its 
procedure for designation and for judicial review.  See Peo-
ple's Mojahedin, 182 F.3d at 21-22.

     On May 16, 2002, the Secretary designated the "Real IRA," 
a militant group that seeks to end British rule in Northern 
Ireland, as a foreign terrorist organization;  the Secretary's 
publication of the designation in the Federal Register also 
listed petitioners as aliases of the Real IRA.  See 66 Fed. 
Reg. 27,442.  On June 8, 2001, we issued our decision in 
National Council, holding that two Iranian organizations the 
Secretary had listed as foreign terrorist organizations were 
entitled to the protection of the Due Process Clause of the 
Fifth Amendment because they had "developed substantial 
connections with this country," 251 F.3d at 202, and remand-
ing to the Secretary, see id. at 209.  Five days later, 32 
County and the Association jointly sent a letter to the Secre-
tary of State requesting that he "reopen the administrative 
record" pertaining to their designations so that they could 
receive the process ordered in National Council.  The orga-
nizations filed a petition for review with this court the next 
day.  After an exchange of letters between counsel for peti-
tioners and the Department of Justice attorney representing 

the State Department concerning the presence of 32 County 
and the Association within the United States, the govern-
ment's attorney notified petitioners by mail dated August 20, 
2001, that the State Department "hereby denies [their] re-
quest for the procedures described by the D.C. Circuit in 
National Council of Resistance."

     When a party seeks agency reconsideration and then files a 
petition for judicial review, we dismiss the petition as "incur-
ably premature."  Tenn. Gas Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 9 F.3d 
980, 980-81 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  The matter is one of jurisdic-
tion.  Because petitioners requested the Secretary of State to 
reopen the record and, while the request was pending, sought 
judicial review of the Secretary's designation, we sua sponte 
raised the question of our jurisdiction, see Steel Co. v. Citi-
zens for a Better Env't, 523 U.S. 83, 101-02 (1998), and 
ordered the parties to limit their oral argument to this issue.

     A "party's pending request for agency reconsideration ren-
ders 'the underlying action nonfinal, regardless of the order 
of filing' with respect to that party," thereby preventing a 
court from exercising jurisdiction over the petition.  Colum-
bia Falls Aluminum Co. v. EPA, 139 F.3d 914, 919 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (quoting Wade v. FCC, 986 F.2d 1433, 1434 (D.C. Cir. 
1993)).  "A request for a new rulemaking, however, would not 
pose any problem for our subject matter jurisdiction.  See 
American Mining Congress v. EPA, 907 F.2d 1179, 1185 
(D.C. Cir. 1990).  Once a rule is final, an agency can amend it 
only through a new rulemaking."  Columbia Falls, 139 F.3d 
at 919.

     Section 1189, a statute that is "unique, procedurally and 
substantively," People's Mojahedin, 182 F.3d at 19, nowhere 
mentions requests for reconsideration.  But it does provide 
that the Secretary may revoke a designation on the basis of 
changed circumstances by publishing the revocation in the 
Federal Register.  See 8 U.S.C. s 1189(a)(6) & (a)(2)(A)(ii).  
Petitioners' ultimate claim in this case is that the Secretary of 
State unlawfully considered them alter egos of the Real IRA.  
When petitioners requested the Secretary to "reopen" the 
record, they were seeking to have their designation revoked.  

Although the analogy is not perfect, petitioners' request 
appears to us to be similar to a request for a new rulemaking.  
Their designation was itself forward-looking, as a rule would 
have been, and under s 1189, the Secretary could have 
revoked the designation only by again publishing a notice to 
that effect in the Federal Register.  See 8 U.S.C. 
s 1189(a)(6)(B);  id. s 1189(a)(2)(A)(2).  Viewed in this man-
ner, the letters petitioners sent to the State Department did 
not render the designation "nonfinal."  See Am. Mining 
Cong., 907 F.2d at 1185.

     This analysis is consistent with our decision in National 
Council, which petitioners invoked when they sought to have 
the record reopened.  Although we said there that the desig-
nation without a hearing violated the due process rights of 
the Iranian organizations, we did not vacate the designation, 
but instead remanded for further proceedings, presumably on 
the issue whether the Secretary should revoke the designa-
tions after considering the evidence the designees offered.  
See 251 F.3d at 209.  In short, the final agency action--that 
is, the Secretary's publication in the Federal Register--
remained final despite petitioners' request to reopen the 
record.  Our jurisdiction is therefore not in doubt.

     Turning to the merits, we think it clear that People's 
Mojahedin, rather than National Council, governs this case.  
In People's Mojahedin we held that "[a] foreign entity with-
out property or presence in this country has no constitutional 
rights, under the due process clause or otherwise."  182 F.3d 
at 22.  32 County and the Association have demonstrated 
neither a property interest nor a presence in this country.  
They cannot "rightly lay claim to having come within the 
United States and developed substantial connections with this 
country."  National Council, 251 F.3d at 202.  Even the 
unclassified record in National Council revealed that the 
designated organizations had "an overt presence within the 
National Press Building ... and ... claim[ed] an interest in a 
small bank account."  Id. at 201.  In contrast, the affidavits 
petitioners submitted in this case demonstrate only that some 
of their American "members" personally rented post office 
boxes and utilized a bank account to transmit funds and 

information to 32 County and the Association in Ireland.  The 
affidavits do not aver that either organization possessed any 
controlling interest in property located within the United 
States, nor do they demonstrate any other form of presence 
here.  The Secretary therefore did not have to provide 32 
County or the Association with any particular process before 
designating them as foreign terrorist organizations.

     With respect to the substance of the Secretary's action 
against petitioners, the administrative record (including the 
classified information relied upon by the Secretary) furnishes 
substantial support for the Secretary's designation of 32 
County and the Association as foreign terrorist organizations.  
We are satisfied that "the Secretary, on the face of things, 
had enough information before [him] to come to the conclu-
sion that [32 County and the Association] were foreign and 
engaged in terrorism."  People's Mojahedin, 182 F.3d at 25;  
see National Council, 251 F.3d at 198-99.  The petition for 
judicial review is therefore denied.

                              `                                  So ordered.

                                                           