                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 12, 2002   Decided November 5, 2002 

                           No. 01-1357

                     Ezzell Trucking, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

          Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
           Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration

     Timothy W. Wiseman argued the cause for petitioner.  
With him on the briefs were Laurie T. Baulig and Daniel R. 
Barney.

     August E. Flentje, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief was 
John C. Hoyle, Special Counsel.  Mark S. Davies, Attorney, 
U.S. Department of Justice, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Henderson, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  A commercial motor carrier peti-
tions for review of a Federal Motor Carrier Safety Adminis-
tration order upgrading the company's safety rating to "satis-
factory"--the highest possible rating--but letting stand a 
finding that the company had violated regulations concerning 
pre-employment drug testing of drivers.  Because petitioner 
has failed to demonstrate that the drug testing finding injures 
it in any way, we dismiss the petition for lack of Article III 
standing.

                                I.

     Created in 1999 to take over certain duties from the 
Federal Highway Administration, see Motor Carrier Safety 
Improvement Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-159, s 101(a), 113 
Stat. 1748, 1750-51 (codified at 49 U.S.C. s 113), the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Administration assigns safety fitness 
ratings to owners and operators of commercial motor vehi-
cles.  49 U.S.C. s 31144(b);  49 C.F.R. s 1.73(h).  Adminis-
tration inspectors perform periodic on-site compliance re-
views, in which they assess points for regulatory violations 
and preventable accidents in six categories called "factors"--
general, driver, operational, vehicle, hazardous materials, and 
accidents--and then assign ratings of "satisfactory," "condi-
tional," or "unsatisfactory" for each factor.  49 C.F.R. 
ss 385.5, 385.7;  id. pt. 385, App. B, II.  From these factor 
ratings, the Administration calculates an overall rating of 
"satisfactory," "conditional," or "unsatisfactory."  Id. s 385.3;  
id. pt. 385, App. B, III.  Although a single unsatisfactory 
factor rating automatically reduces a carrier's overall rating 
to conditional, a single conditional factor rating does not 
change a satisfactory overall rating.  Id. pt. 385, App. B, 
III.A.

     In June 2000, the Administration conducted a compliance 
review of petitioner Ezzell Trucking, Inc., at its headquarters 
in Harrells, North Carolina.  The inspector assigned the 
company satisfactory ratings on four factors and an unsatis-
factory rating on the operational factor.  Concluding that the 

company had violated drug testing regulations by allowing 
five new hires to ride with current drivers before receiving 
their pre-employment drug test results, see id. s 382.301(a), 
the inspector also assigned a conditional rating on the driver 
factor.  The two negative factor ratings caused Ezzell's pro-
posed overall rating to drop from satisfactory to conditional.  
Ezzell appealed, and the Administration vacated the unsatis-
factory operational factor rating but let the drug testing 
violation stand.  Therefore, because Ezzell had five satisfacto-
ry factor ratings and one conditional factor rating, the Admin-
istration restored the company's overall rating to satisfactory.

     Ezzell nonetheless filed a petition for review.  Challenging 
the drug testing violation, the company argues both that the 
five new hires had not yet been authorized to act as drivers 
and that riding as a passenger in a commercial motor vehicle 
as part of an orientation program should not trigger drug-
testing requirements.  See id. ss 382.107, 382.301(a).

                               II.

     Before considering the merits of Ezzell's challenge, we 
must address the Administration's argument that the compa-
ny lacks Article III standing.  Steel Co. v. Citizens for a 
Better Env't, 523 U.S. 83, 94-95 (1998).  Under the "irreduci-
ble constitutional minimum" required for standing, Ezzell 
must demonstrate an "injury in fact" that is both concrete 
and particularized and actual or imminent, a causal connec-
tion between the injury and the Administration's action, and a 
likelihood that the injury will be redressed by a favorable 
decision.  Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-
61 (1992).  According to the Administration, Ezzell has suf-
fered no injury in fact because the company prevailed in its 
administrative appeal of its overall safety rating.  See, e.g., 
Mathias v. WorldCom Techs., Inc., 122 S. Ct. 1780, 1780 
(2002) (per curiam) (a successful party generally may not 
appeal a favorable judgment from an agency or lower court 
simply because it dislikes the decision's language or reason-
ing).

     Acknowledging that it succeeded in having its overall rating 
restored to satisfactory, Ezzell argues that the conditional 
factor rating injures it in several ways.  First, the company 
asserts in its brief that principles of collateral estoppel will 
bar it from challenging the drug testing violation finding in a 
pending civil enforcement proceeding.  We rejected a similar 
argument in Sea-Land Service, Inc. v. Department of Trans-
portation, 137 F.3d 640 (D.C. Cir. 1998), holding that an 
administrative ruling unnecessary to the judgment raises "no 
reasonable concern about preclusive effect" and thus does not 
support Article III standing.  Id. at 648-49.  In any event, 
the Administration informed us at oral argument that the 
finding will have no preclusive effect in the related proceed-
ing.  In view of this assurance, Ezzell's counsel conceded that 
the possibility of collateral estoppel cannot provide a basis for 
Article III standing.

     Second, pointing out that the drug testing violation is listed 
in the Administration's public database, called SafeStat, Ez-
zell claims injury to its reputation.  To establish such a claim 
for purposes of Article III standing, Ezzell must produce 
evidence that such injury is concrete, not speculative.  Lujan, 
504 U.S. at 560;  Sierra Club v. EPA, 292 F.3d 895, 899 (D.C. 
Cir. 2002).  Ezzell fails to meet this burden.  The company 
cites only a treatise saying that some insurance companies 
and trucking customers consider safety ratings in setting 
rates and in choosing carriers.  1 William E. Kenworthy, 
Transportation Safety and Insurance Law s 7-1, at 169 (2d 
ed. 1998).  The treatise, however, does not specify whether 
industry watchers focus on carriers' overall ratings or individ-
ual factor scores, nor whether Ezzell's insurance providers or 
customers have changed their business decisions based on the 
company's SafeStat listing.  Cf. Advanced Mgmt. Tech., Inc. 
v. Fed. Aviation Admin., 211 F.3d 633, 636-37 (D.C. Cir. 
2000) (rejecting reputational injury argument as "speculative" 
based on "sparse record" as to present and future conse-
quences for petitioner's business).

     Finally, Ezzell asserts that the presence of a violation in its 
record increases the probability that inspectors will select it 
for compliance reviews and roadside inspections.  But the 

company presented no evidence of how much more likely such 
reviews are to occur or of the burden they would impose.  
More important, in a letter to us following oral argument, the 
Administration advises that because the violation listing is 
more than eighteen months old, "the results of Ezzell Truck-
ing's June 2000 compliance review [are] no longer being used 
by the SafeStat system for any purpose."  Letter from 
August E. Flentje, Attorney, Department of Justice Appellate 
Staff Civil Division, to Mark J. Langer, Clerk, United States 
Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit 2 n.1 (Sept. 13, 2002).

     Because Ezzell lacks Article III standing, its petition is 
dismissed.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                                           