                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 10, 2002     Decided June 18, 2002 

                           No. 01-1371

              Verizon Telephone Companies, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                     WorldCom Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                             01-1379

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Mark L. Evans argued the cause for petitioners.  With him 
on the briefs were Michael K. Kellogg, Scott K. Attaway, 

David C. Frederick, Michael E. Glover, Edward Shakin, 
Joseph DiBella, Richard M. Sbaratta, James D. Ellis, Jeffrey 
B. Thomas and Gary L. Phillips.  Roger K. Toppins entered 
an appearance.

     John Rogovin, Deputy General Counsel, Federal Communi-
cations Commission, argued the cause for respondents.  With 
him on the brief were John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate 
General Counsel, Laurence N. Bourne and Rodger D. Citron, 
Counsel, Catherine G. O'Sullivan and Nancy C. Garrison, 
Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     David W. Carpenter argued the cause for intervenors 
American Telephone and Telegraph Company, et al.  With 
him on the brief were Peter D. Keisler, James P. Young, 
Mark C. Rosenblum, Mark D. Schneider, John E. Benedict, 
H. Richard Juhnke, Charles C. Hunter, Catherine M. Han-
nan, Jonathan Jacob Nadler, Jason Oxman, Thomas F. 
O'Neil III, William Single IV, Teresa K. Gaugler, Rodney L. 
Joyce, Mary C. Albert and Morton J. Posner.  David L. 
Lawson and Paul J. Zidlicky entered appearances.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Section 251(c)(6) of the Telecommu-
nications Act of 1996 requires incumbent local exchange 
carriers to provide competitive local exchange carriers with 
space for the "physical collocation of equipment necessary for 
interconnection or access to unbundled network elements at 
[their] premises."  Responding to our opinion in GTE Service 
Corporation v. FCC, which vacated the Federal Communica-
tion Commission's first order implementing section 251(c)(6) 
"insofar as it embrace[d] unduly broad definitions of 'neces-
sary' and 'physical collocation,' " the Commission issued a new 
order, which petitioners now challenge.  They argue that (1) 
the Commission's standard for collocatable equipment re-
mains overly broad because it permits collocation of any 

equipment "necessary for interconnection or access" whether 
or not it is "necessary" to place such equipment "at the 
premises";  (2) the Commission unlawfully allowed the place-
ment of switching and routing equipment, as well as equip-
ment containing multiple functions only some of which are 
"necessary" for interconnection or access to network ele-
ments;  (3) the Commission lacks authority to order incum-
bents to physically connect collocating competitive local ex-
change carriers to each other;  and (4) the Commission's 
space assignment rules are unlawful.  Finding petitioners' 
claims either meritless or waived, we deny the petitions.

                                I.

     In order to foster competition for local telephone services, 
Congress, in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, authorized 
competitive local exchange carriers (CLECs) to place certain 
equipment within the premises of incumbent local exchange 
carriers (ILECs) so that CLECs could gain access to ILECs' 
networks.  Specifically, section 251(c)(6) requires ILECs to 
"provide, on rates, terms, and conditions that are just, reason-
able, and nondiscriminatory, for physical collocation of equip-
ment necessary for interconnection or access to unbundled 
network elements at the premises of the local exchange 
carrier."  47 U.S.C. s 251(c)(6).  The statute provides certain 
exceptions (not here relevant) for instances where an ILEC 
can demonstrate to a state commission that "physical colloca-
tion is not practical for technical reasons or because of space 
limitations."  Id.

     Based on this statutory authorization, the Commission is-
sued an order entitled Deployment of Wireline Services Of-
fering Advanced Telecommunications Capability, 14 F.C.C. 
Rcd. 4761 (1999), ("Collocation Order"), in which it outlined 
the types of equipment that may be collocated, established 
standards for the assignment of space within the ILEC's 
facilities, and fashioned rules allocating the initial costs of 
preparing collocation space.  A detailed summary of this 
Collocation Order appears in our decision in GTE Service 
Corporation v. FCC, 205 F.3d 416, 420 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  In 
that case, although we affirmed the Commission's cost alloca-

tion rule, we found defective its standards for the types of 
equipment collocatable and its space assignment rules.  The 
flaws in the Commission's prior ruling fell into three catego-
ries, which we outline below together with the Commission's 
responses on remand.  See Deployment of Wireline Services 
Offering Advanced Telecommunications Capability, 16 F.C.C. 
Rcd. 15,435 (2001) ("Remand Order").

       Equipment "necessary" for interconnection or access

     In GTE, we found "impermissibly broad," 205 F.3d at 424, 
the Commission's interpretation of the phrase "necessary for 
interconnection or access," which allowed collocation of any 
equipment " 'used or useful' for either interconnection or 
access to unbundled network elements, regardless of other 
functionalities inherent in such equipment," Collocation Order 
p 28.  The Commission's interpretation, we observed, "ap-
pear[ed] to permit competitors to collocate equipment that 
may do more than what is required to achieve interconnection 
or access."  GTE, 205 F.3d at 423.

     Responding to this criticism, the Commission now deems 
equipment "necessary" for purposes of section 251(c)(6) only 
"if an inability to deploy that equipment would, as a practical, 
economic, or operational matter, preclude the requesting 
carrier from obtaining interconnection or access to unbundled 
network elements."  Remand Order p 21.  In crafting this 
new standard, the Commission rejected Verizon's argument 
that "necessary" modifies the phrase "physical collocation," 
reasoning that "such a reading would wrongly place [the] 
focus on whether 'collocation' of the equipment is necessary, 
... as opposed to whether the equipment itself, regardless of 
its location in the network, is necessary for interconnection 
[or] access to unbundled network elements."  Remand Order 
p 25 (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks omitted).

     In light of its new standard, the Commission also reexam-
ined its treatment of switching and routing equipment.  In 
the Collocation Order, the Commission expressly declined to 
require incumbents to collocate "equipment used exclusively 
for switching," finding insufficient support in the record for 

such a requirement.  Collocation Order p 30.  At the same 
time, however, the Commission warned that it might "explore 
requiring such collocation in the future," id.--precisely what 
it did on remand from GTE.  Benefitting from a "greatly 
expanded record ... reflect[ing] ... parties' several years of 
experience with the unbundled network access regime," the 
Commission reversed course, Remand Order p 51, concluding 
that smaller, more modern switching and routing equipment 
may be entitled to collocation because it was "necessary" to 
"access an unbundled local loop's theoretical capability of 
providing a telecommunications service," id. p 46.  The Com-
mission declined to allow collocation of older, traditional 
circuit switches, finding them unnecessary in light of the 
availability of smaller, more modern switches.

     With regard to multi-functional equipment--i.e., "equip-
ment that combines functions that meet [the] equipment 
standard with functions that would not meet that standard as 
stand-alone functions," Remand Order p 32--the Commission 
now allows collocation if (1) the "primary purpose and func-
tion ... as the ... carrier seeks to deploy" the equipment are 
to provide interconnection or access to unbundled network 
elements;  (2) any additional functions have a "logical nexus" 
to that purpose;  and (3) the additional functions do not 
"affect the demand on the incumbent's space and other 
resources so significantly as to increase the relative burden 
on the incumbent's property interests," id. pp 36-40.

                   "Cross-connect" requirement

     In GTE, we vacated the Commission's decision to allow 
CLECs to connect their equipment directly to that of other 
collocating carriers "subject only to the same reasonable 
safety requirements that the [ILEC] imposes on its own 
equipment."  Collocation Order p 33.  The "obvious problem" 
with this so-called cross-connect requirement, we thought, 
was that it "impose[d] an obligation on [I]LECs that ha[d] no 
apparent basis in [a] statute [that] focuse[s] solely on connect-
ing new competitors to [I]LECs' networks."  GTE, 205 F.3d 
at 423.  In its Remand Order, the Commission elected to 
maintain the cross-connect requirement, but in a modified 

form.  Instead of allowing CLECs to provision (i.e., install 
and maintain) their own cross-connects, the Commission now 
requires ILECs to provision cross-connects upon request.  
Remand Order p 62.  The Commission imposed that require-
ment because "[i]f an incumbent ... refuses to provision 
cross-connects between [CLECs] collocated at the incum-
bent's premises, the incumbent would be the only LEC that 
could interconnect with all or even any of the [CLECs] 
collocated at a common, centralized point--the central office."  
Id. p 63.  In contrast, for two CLECs to exchange traffic 
without a cross connect,

     each [CLEC] would have to carry its own telecommuni-
     cations traffic into its collocation space and then ... have 
     the incumbent LEC transport that traffic over incum-
     bent-owned facilities to an interconnection point outside 
     the incumbent's premises.  From [there], the other 
     [CLEC] would likely then carry the traffic back to its 
     own collocation space in the same central office to be 
     transported through the [CLEC's] network.
     
Id. p 64.  Such "back hauling," the Commission found, would 
impose "significant wasteful economic costs" on CLECs that 
"incumbent LECs themselves do not face" and that would 
"severely restrict the viability of competitive transport."  Id. 
pp 64 & n. 166, 63.

     According to the Commission, three separate provisions of 
the Communications Act support the new cross-connect re-
quirement.  First, the Commission found the cross-connect 
requirement authorized under section 201(a), which requires a 
common carrier:

     to furnish such communication service upon reasonable 
     request therefor;  and, in accordance with the orders of 
     the Commission, in cases where the Commission, after 
     opportunity for hearing, finds such action necessary or 
     desirable in the public interest, to establish physical 
     connections with other carriers....
     
47 U.S.C. s 201.  Second, an incumbent's "refusal to provi-
sion cross-connects," the Commission concluded, was an "un-

just and unreasonable practice in connection with existing 
services," Remand Order p 72, thus violating section 201(b)'s 
requirement that all "[c]harges, practices, classifications, and 
regulations for and in connection with such communication 
service ... be just and reasonable."  47 U.S.C. s 201(b).  
Finally, because it felt ILECs would be operating in an 
"unreasonable and discriminatory manner if [they] refused to 
provide cross-connects between collocators," Remand Order 
p 79, the Commission found the new cross-connect require-
ment authorized by section 251(c)(6)'s requirement of colloca-
tion on such "terms and conditions" as are "just, reasonable, 
and nondiscriminatory," 47 U.S.C. s 251(c)(6).  Arguing that 
GTE does not foreclose this result, the Commission pointed 
out that GTE merely rejects the notion that cross-connects 
were collocatable equipment and never addresses whether the 
Commission "could require incumbent ... provisioned cross-
connects pursuant to the 'rates, terms, and conditions' clause 
of section 251(c)(6)."  Remand Order p 81.

                      Space assignment rules

     Third and finally, in GTE, we vacated the Commission's 
space assignment rules.  By banning ILECs from requiring 
competitors to use separate entrances, or isolated rooms or 
floors, those rules left "competitors ... free to pick and 
choose preferred space on the LECs' premises, subject only 
to technical feasibility."  GTE, 205 F.3d at 426.  Modifying 
the space assignment rules in response to GTE, the Commis-
sion gave ILECs "ultimate responsibility" for placement of 
equipment.  Remand Order p 90.  An ILEC may also provide 
for the physical segregation of collocated equipment "if the 
proposed separated space is:  (a) available in the same or a 
shorter time frame as non-separated space;  (b) at a cost not 
materially higher than the cost of non-separated space;  and 
(c) is comparable, from a technical and engineering stand-
point, to non-separated space."  Remand Order p 102.  Under 
the Remand Order, moreover, incumbents may require segre-
gated spaces only where "legitimate security concerns, or 
operational constraints unrelated to the incumbent's ... com-
petitive concerns, warrant them."  Id. p 102.  The Commis-

sion adopted this final requirement after finding "based on 
the record ... that there [was] simply insufficient evidence to 
support a finding that incumbent['s] security concerns require 
physical separation of collocated equipment ... in every 
instance."  Id. p 101.  It also held that ILECs could require 
separate entrances "where construction of such ... en-
trance[s] is technically feasible, and will neither artificially 
delay collocation provisioning nor materially increase the 
requesting carrier's costs" and where an incumbent has "le-
gitimate security concerns."  Id. p 103.

                               II.

     Claiming the Commission "failed to heed this Court's man-
date" in GTE, Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 4, petitioner Verizon 
Communications, Inc., together with BellSouth Corporation 
and SBC Communications, Inc. (throughout this opinion we 
shall refer to petitioners as "Verizon") now petition for re-
view.  Verizon argues that (1) the Commission's new reading 
of section 251(c)(6) is overly broad because it allows for the 
collocation of equipment "at the premises" of ILECs even if 
"interconnection or access" could be obtained through the use 
of off-site equipment, id. at 15 (internal quotation marks 
omitted);  (2) the Commission acted unlawfully by allowing 
CLECs to collocate switching or routing equipment and by 
permitting CLECs to collocate multifunctional equipment 
without demonstrating that each function is "necessary for 
interconnection or access," id. at 16;  (3) the Commission has 
no authority to order carrier-to-carrier cross-connects;  and 
(4) the new space assignment rules "grant competitors un-
warranted rights to control the specific location of their 
equipment within the incumbent's premises," id. at 17.  In-
tervening in support of the Commission are fourteen other 
telecommunications companies, led by AT&T Corporation.

     The familiar standard established by Chevron U.S.A., Inc. 
v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 837 (1984), 
governs our review of the Commission's interpretation of a 
statute it administers.  Under this standard, we first deter-
mine whether Congress has "spoken to the precise question 

at issue," and if not, we defer to any "permissible" agency 
interpretation.  Id. at 843.  We do not understand Verizon to 
be arguing that the Commission's interpretation fails Chev-
ron's first step, nor could such an argument succeed with 
respect to the agency's interpretation of section 251(c)(6) in 
light of our express holding that the relevant statutory terms 
are ambiguous.  See GTE, 205 F.3d at 421 (holding that the 
"disputed terms at issue--'necessary,' 'physical collocation,' 
and 'premises' ... are ambiguous in their meanings").  Con-
sequently, we "defer to the Commission's interpretations if 
they are reasonable and consistent with the statutory pur-
pose."  Id.  Our deference is particularly great where, as 
here, the issues involve "a high level of technical expertise in 
an area of rapidly changing technological and competitive 
circumstances."  Sprint Comms. Co. v. FCC, 274 F.3d 549, 
556 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  With this highly deferential standard in 
mind, we consider each of Verizon's arguments.

     We begin with Verizon's claim that the phrase "equipment 
necessary for interconnection or access to unbundled network 
elements at the premises of the local exchange carrier," 47 
U.S.C. s 251(c)(6), means that CLECs may not place equip-
ment on an ILEC's premises unless an off-site location is 
infeasible.  According to Verizon, the Commission's interpre-
tation, which focuses on whether the equipment is necessary 
for interconnection or access "regardless of its location in the 
network," Remand Order p 25, "ignore[s] the pivotal phrase 
at the end of the sentence, which makes clear that equipment 
must be necessary ... at the premises of the local exchange 
carrier," Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 20.  The only sensible inter-
pretation of this language, Verizon argues, is that "the adjec-
tive 'necessary' " "relates" to "both components of the com-
pound prepositional phrase 'for interconnection or access ... 
at the premises of the local exchange carrier.' "  Pet'rs' Reply 
Br. at 4.  Otherwise, "the 'premises' clause does no work at 
all;  it is simply a redundant appendage."  Pet'rs' Opening Br. 
at 20.

     As the Commission points out, on remand from GTE, 
Verizon made an entirely different textual argument, namely, 
that the word "necessary" modifies "physical collocation," not 

"equipment."  See Comments of the Verizon Telephone Com-
panies, Oct. 12, 2000 at 2 (requesting the Commission "find 
that the term 'necessary' modifies the phrase 'physical collo-
cation of equipment,' so that any physical collocation can be 
ordered only where that collocation is 'necessary for intercon-
nection or access to unbundled network elements' ").  The 
Commission rejected that argument, finding that the "most 
natural reading" of the statutory language, as dictated by 
"simple grammar," is that the term "necessary" modifies 
"equipment," not "physical collocation."  Remand Order p 25.  
Seizing upon this variation, the Commission insists that Veri-
zon has waived its "at the premises" argument.  See High 
Plains Wireless, LP v. FCC, 276 F.3d 599, 608 (D.C. Cir. 
2002) (citing 47 U.S.C. s 405(a)).  We agree.

     Conceding that it never presented to the Commission the 
precise textual argument it raises now, Verizon argues that 
"every facet of an argument" need not be presented to the 
Commission as long as the "basic challenge to a Commission 
policy was reasonably flagged."  Pet'rs' Reply Br. at 9 (cita-
tion and internal quotation marks omitted).  The case Verizon 
relies upon, Time Warner Entertainment Co. v. FCC, 144 
F.3d 75, 81 (D.C. Cir. 1998), however, establishes a slightly 
more demanding test.  There, we held that if "a petitioner 
makes a basic challenge to a Commission policy, but the 
formulation of the issue presented to us was not precisely as 
presented to the Commission, we ask whether a reasonable 
Commission necessarily would have seen the question raised 
before us as part of the case presented to it."  144 F.3d 75, 81 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  Here, Verizon made a quite specific textual 
argument before the Commission--that the word "necessary" 
modifies the phrase "physical collocation."  In responding to 
this argument, the Commission had no occasion to consider 
the different textual argument made here--that the word 
"necessary" relates to the phrase "at the premises" as well as 
to the phrase "physical collocation."  The textual argument 
Verizon made before the Commission does not logically impli-
cate the one it makes now, as would have been the case if, for 
example, the Commission, in order to arrive at its decision, 
would necessarily have had to determine the effect of the "at 

the premises" language.  In short, we do not believe that a 
"reasonable Commission necessarily would have seen" the 
argument Verizon now raises.

     We have expressed our concern about the effect on federal 
"agencies' rightful role in statutory construction under the 
Chevron framework" when petitioners fail "to present statuto-
ry challenges to ... agencies for initial resolution."  Line-
master Switch Corp. v. EPA, 938 F.2d 1299, 1309 (D.C. Cir. 
1991).  This case implicates that concern.  Chevron's second 
step requires that we defer to an agency's interpretation of 
ambiguous statutory provisions such as section 251(c)(6).  By 
failing to raise before the Commission the textual argument it 
makes now, Verizon has deprived us of the Commission's 
expert judgment, informed by the pertinent policy consider-
ations, as to the relationship between the word "necessary" 
and the phrase "at the premises."  Were we to reject the 
Commission's waiver argument, we would have to undertake 
the very sort of freewheeling policy inquiry that Chevron 
deference was crafted to avoid.  This we may not do.

     Our conclusion that Verizon has waived its primary statuto-
ry claim largely moots its challenge to the Commission's 
decision to allow collocation of switches and routers in certain 
instances, as Verizon's arguments depend heavily on its asser-
tion that CLECs could feasibly locate such equipment off-
premises.  Verizon, however, makes an additional argument 
that focuses more precisely on the Commission's reasoning 
with respect to switches and routers rather than the general 
standard for equipment entitled to collocation.  The Commis-
sion determined that without a

     switch[ ] or router, the local loop is merely a transmis-
     sion medium theoretically capable of carrying telecom-
     munications traffic.  To access an unbundled local loop's 
     theoretical capability of providing a telecommunications 
     service, i.e., of accommodating the transmission of infor-
     mation between or among points specified by the user, a 
     requesting carrier must, as a practical, economic and 
     operational matter, be able to switch or route traffic to 
     or from that loop.
     
Remand Order p 46 (internal quotation marks omitted).  Ac-
cording to Verizon, this reasoning "has no apparent stopping 
point:  Every piece of equipment in a competitor's network is 
arguably necessary to complete a call and thereby 'to access 
an unbundled local loop's theoretical capability of providing 
telecommunications service.' "  Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 24.  
Although acknowledging the Commission's ruling that equip-
ment used for "call-related databases, information services, or 
operations support" (i.e., back office equipment) "may not be 
collocated," Pet'rs' Br. at 24 (citing Remand Order p 24), 
Verizon insists that the Commission "failed to articulate any 
coherent limiting principle to justify those exclusions" since a 
"competitor could hardly complete a call without using the 
appropriate database to determine where a call must be 
switched--thereby making such a database 'necessary' on the 
same flawed reasoning that switching equipment is supposed-
ly necessary."  Pet'rs' Reply Br. at 12-13.  Again, we dis-
agree.

     To begin with, we think it inaccurate to say that the 
Commission's reasoning has no limiting principle.  Putting 
aside the question of whether a call-related database is "nec-
essary" to access the functions of a local loop, Verizon gives 
us no reason to believe that the Commission's standard fails 
coherently to exclude "operations support system equipment" 
and other "troubleshooting, billing or record-keeping" equip-
ment.  Pet'rs' Reply at 12.  Moreover, even with respect to 
call-related databases, given the heavy deference owed, the 
distinctions drawn by the Commission easily withstand scruti-
ny.  The Commission relied on the fact that switching and 
routing equipment activates those capabilities of a loop that 
allow the loop to carry calls.  That is not the case with call-
related databases, which merely allow the switch to identify 
which local loop to activate but do not actually activate the 
loop's capabilities themselves.

     Verizon next challenges the Commission's decision to allow 
collocation of multifunctional equipment in certain circum-
stances.  According to Verizon, "that view of the Commis-
sion's statutory authority is squarely foreclosed by this 
Court's holding in GTE that the statute does not permit 

competitors to smuggle unnecessary functions into otherwise 
necessary equipment."  Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 26.  GTE 
contains no such holding.  Rather, GTE simply expresses 
concern over the Collocation Order's standard, which seemed 
to allow competitors to add any function that "lower[ed] costs 
and increase[d] the services they [could] offer their custom-
ers."  GTE, 205 F.3d at 424.  By contrast, the Remand Order 
limits collocation of multifunctional equipment to devices 
whose "primary purpose" is interconnection or access to 
unbundled network elements and whose additional functions 
have a "logical nexus" to this primary purpose, Remand 
Order WW 36-40.  We find this statutory interpretation emi-
nently reasonable, particularly since the statute speaks of 
collocatable "equipment" not "functions."  47 U.S.C. 
s 251(c)(6).

     Next, Verizon claims that the cross-connect requirement 
can be justified under neither section 201 nor section 
251(c)(6).  Relying on the general rule that "a specific statute 
will not be controlled or nullified by a general one," Crawford 
Fitting Co. v. J.T. Gibbons, 482 U.S. 437, 445 (1987), Verizon 
first argues that the "general authority in section 201 simply 
does not empower the Commission to sidestep the specific 
limitation in section 251(c)(6) on the authorized use of collo-
cated equipment."  Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 38.  Under the 
Remand Order, however, cross-connects are no longer collo-
cated;  rather, they are owned and maintained by the incum-
bent.  Thus, section 251(c)(6)'s limitations on collocatable 
equipment are irrelevant.  Cf. Verizon Tel. Cos. v. FCC, 122 
S.Ct. 1646, 1684 (2002) (noting in the context of section 
251(c)(3) that "it takes a stretch to get from permissive 
statutory silence to a statutory right on the part of incum-
bents to refuse to combine [unbundled network elements] for 
a requesting carrier").

     The only issue, then, is whether the cross-connect require-
ment can be justified under either section 201(a) or (b).  
Although the Commission explicitly invoked both subsections, 
Verizon's opening brief never addresses section 201(b).  Not 
until its reply brief does Verizon argue that section 201(b) 
might not apply even in the absence of section 251(c)(6), 

Pet'rs' Reply Br. at 22, but this comes too late, see Power Co. 
of Am., L.P. v. FERC, 245 F.3d 839, 845 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
(finding arguments not in opening brief waived).  We will 
thus affirm the Commission on that ground without reaching 
the question of whether the Commission reasonably invoked 
either section 201(a) or section 251(c)(6)'s "terms[ ] and condi-
tions" clause.

     This brings us, finally, to Verizon's challenge to the space 
assignment rules.  According to Verizon, the "new rules, 
though superficially more limited" than the previous rules 
struck down in GTE, "nonetheless effectively allow competi-
tors to insist on their space preferences and apparently 
prevent incumbents from requiring that competitors install 
their equipment in segregated space."  Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 
40.  This argument lacks merit.  Attempting to make the 
current rule resemble the vacated portions of the previous 
rule, Verizon mischaracterizes both.  For example, Verizon 
states that "the default rule effectively remains what it was 
before:  Incumbents apparently may not, as a general matter, 
require segregated collocation space and separate entrances."  
Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 40 (emphasis added).  This inaccurate-
ly describes the Collocation Order;  instead of mandating as a 
"default" that incumbents could not require segregated space 
and separate entrances, that order prohibited their use com-
pletely.  See Collocation Order p 42.

     Turning to the current rule and mischaracterizing it as 
well, Verizon argues that ILECs' "security and efficiency 
concerns apparently count for nothing in the Commission's 
calculus."  Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 41.  The Commission, how-
ever, abandoned the requirement that CLECs be permitted 
to control the placement of equipment;  rather, the Remand 
Order acknowledges that because "[a]n incumbent is far more 
familiar with the design and layout of its premises," it should 
have "ultimate responsibility" for determining where to place 
equipment.  Remand Order p 90.  Moreover, rather than 
banning separate entrances and segregated facilities outright, 
the Commission established a presumption against their use, 
which ILECs can rebut by showing that legitimate security 
concerns require separate facilities or entrances, that the 

separate facilities are comparable from an engineering stand-
point, that they are available on a similar time frame, and 
that their use will not "materially" increase CLEC costs.  
Remand Order p 102.  Finally, the Commission did not ignore 
ILEC security concerns;  rather, it found "insufficient evi-
dence to support a finding that [those] concerns require 
physical separation of collocated equipment from the incum-
bent's own equipment in every instance."  Id. p 101.

     As Verizon's brief makes clear, it prefers a rule that "at a 
minimum, permit[s] an incumbent, as a default, ... to deter-
mine where in its central office ... competitors may install 
their equipment and the path they may take through those 
buildings."  Pet'rs' Opening Br. at 40.  But this is a policy 
judgment for the Commission;  nothing in the statute man-
dates such a result or disallows the path the Commission here 
has chosen.

                               III.

     The petitions for review are denied.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                               