                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 3, 2000       Decided June 27, 2000 

                           No. 99-5283

                        Hordon H. Evono, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                           Janet Reno, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv01893)

     Brian C. Kalt argued the cause for appellant.  With him on 
the briefs was Langley R. Shook.

     David T. Smorodin, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. 
Attorney.

     Before:  Silberman, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Hordon H. Evono, a former Depu-
ty United States Marshal, appeals the dismissal of his em-
ployment discrimination complaint against the United States 
Marshals Service for lack of jurisdiction.  In Butler v. West, 
164 F.3d 634 (D.C. Cir. 1999), the court held that Congress 
intended to permit a federal employee to proceed to district 
court where the Merit Systems Protection Board ("MSPB") 
fails to issue a final decision on the employee's "mixed case 
appeal"1 within 120 days.  Id. at 641.2  Under Butler, the 
district court had subject matter jurisdiction over the claims 
asserted in Mr. Evono's complaint.  To the extent that the 
district court ruled that Mr. Evono waived his right to sue in 
district court on the basis of his pro se statements to the 
MSPB suggesting that the relief he sought in court differed 
from the relief sought in administrative proceedings, the 
district court erred.  Accordingly, because the district court 
had original subject matter jurisdiction over Mr. Evono's 
"mixed case," it retained original jurisdiction over his retalia-
tion claims, and we reverse.

                                I.

     Hordon H. Evono was employed in 1970 as a Deputy 
United States Marshal.  The Marshals Service discharged 
him in 1972 for alleged misconduct, but that discharge was 
held to have been animated by racial discrimination against 
him.  Evono v. Civiletti, C.A. No. 74-19 (D.D.C. Feb. 1, 1980), 
aff'd sub nom. Evono v. Smith, No. 80-1366 (D.C. Cir. June 8, 
1981).  After having been reinstated in 1980, and after addi-

__________
     1  "A mixed case appeal is an appeal filed with the MSPB that 
alleges that an appealable agency action was effected, in whole or in 
part, because of discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, 
sex, national origin, handicap or age."  29 C.F.R. s 1614.302(a)(2).

     2  Butler was decided on January 8, 1999, approximately five 
months after the district court dismissed Mr. Evono's discrimina-
tion claims and approximately seven months before it dismissed his 
retaliation claims.

tional litigation to enforce the district court's 1980 judgment, 
Mr. Evono was diagnosed in 1983 with a hearing loss, subse-
quently determined to have been job-related, that rendered 
him unfit for his position. He was forced to retire in March 
1984.  In 1993, Mr. Evono formally requested reemployment 
in accordance with the Priority Placement Referral System of 
the Department of Justice.  The Marshals Service denied 
that request, and Mr. Evono filed an Equal Employment 
Opportunity ("EEO") complaint alleging violations of the Civil 
Service Reform Act and racial and disability discrimination 
and retaliation.  When the Department of Justice failed to act 
on his "mixed case" complaint within 120 days, he appealed to 
the MSPB on September 16, 1994.3

     When no final decision was forthcoming from the MSPB, 
Mr. Evono, acting pro se, filed suit on August 20, 1997, in the 
district court, alleging discriminatory and retaliatory actions 
by the Marshals Service.4  Thereafter, the district court 
granted the government's motion to dismiss Mr. Evono's 
discrimination claims.5  The district court, citing 5 U.S.C. 

__________
     3  A "mixed case" complaint is "a complaint of employment 
discrimination filed with a Federal agency based on race, color, 
religion, sex, national origin, age or handicap related to or stem-
ming from an action that can be appealed to the Merit Systems 
Protection Board (MSPB)."  29 C.F.R. s 1614.302(a)(1).  Where a 
federal agency fails to act on a mixed case complaint within 120 
days, the matter may be appealed to the MSPB.  29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.302(d)(1)(i).

     4  Mr. Evono filed an amended pro se complaint on December 8, 
1997, for equitable relief and damages for racially discriminatory 
and retaliatory actions in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights 
Acts of 1964 and 1991, 42 U.S.C. s 2000e et seq., and s 1981, the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. s 791 et seq., and the Consti-
tution.  His amended pro se complaint essentially restated the 
allegations in his original complaint.  After the MSPB issued a final 
decision on June 24, 1999, Mr. Evono appealed to the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
s 7702(b)(1), where the matter was pending at the time briefs were 
filed in this court.

     5  The district court's opinion, filed July 27, 1998, stated that the 
dismissal was without prejudice to the refiling of Mr. Evono's Title 

s 7702, acknowledged that Mr. Evono generally would have a 
statutory right to file a "mixed case" where the MSPB had 
not issued a final decision on the underlying administrative 
action within 120 days, but ruled that he had waived his right 
to pursue his discrimination claim in court before exhausting 
his administrative remedies.  The district court relied on the 
fact that Mr. Evono did not refute the government's asser-
tions that Mr. Evono had represented to the MSPB "that he 
ha[d] no intention of interfering with [the] administrative 
proceedings" and that he was not seeking judicial review of 
his full "mixed case," and on the fact that he sought summary 
judgment only on the retaliation claims.  The district court 
retained jurisdiction over Mr. Evono's retaliation claims and 
appointed counsel for him in light of "the complexity of 
litigating the remaining retaliation claim."  Counsel filed a 
second amended complaint alleging retaliatory acts only.6

     On the eve of trial, the government moved to dismiss the 
second amended complaint on the ground that the district 
court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the retaliation 
claims, reading the district court's dismissal of Mr. Evono's 
discrimination claims to have been based on the district 
court's conclusion that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction, 
and arguing that hence, the district court could not exercise 
"supplemental jurisdiction" over Mr. Evono's unexhausted 
retaliation claims.  Mr. Evono responded, by counsel, that 
under Butler, subject matter jurisdiction was proper and 
exhaustion established.  The government replied that Mr. 
Evono could not split his "mixed case" between the MSPB 

__________
VII and Rehabilitation Act claims after exhaustion of his MSPB 
remedy.  The district court dismissed with prejudice Mr. Evono's 
constitutional discrimination claims on the ground that Title VII 
and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 provide the exclusive remedies 
for his employment discrimination claims.  The court denied with-
out prejudice Mr. Evono's motion for summary judgment and 
declaratory relief.

     6  The second amended complaint, filed by counsel, alleges that 
Mr. Evono's forced retirement and the thwarting of his efforts to 
obtain reinstatement were in retaliation for his EEO activities, 
which began in the 1970s and continued in the early 1980s.

and the court.  After initially denying the government's mo-
tion to dismiss as moot, the district court, on August 2, 1999, 
granted the government's motion to reconsider and dismissed 
Mr. Evono's second amended complaint without prejudice on 
the ground that the court lacked supplemental jurisdiction 
over his retaliation claims.

                               II.

     In contending that the district court erred in dismissing his 
retaliation claims, Mr. Evono maintains that Butler controls, 
and that because he was entitled to file his "mixed case" in 
the district court when the MSPB failed to issue a final 
decision within 120 days of his appeal, the district court had 
original jurisdiction over his discrimination and retaliation 
claims and thus retained original jurisdiction over his retalia-
tion claims after dismissing his discrimination claims for 
failure to exhaust administrative remedies.  We agree.

     5 U.S.C. s 7702(e)(1) provides:
     
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if at any 
     time after--
     
     ....
     
          (B) the 120th day following the filing of an appeal with 
     the [MSPB] under subsection (a)(1) of this section, there 
     is no judicially reviewable action....
     
     ....
     
     an employee shall be entitled to file a civil action to the 
     same extent and in the same manner as provided in 
     section 717(c) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964....
     
5 U.S.C. s 7702(e)(1).  Mr. Evono's appeal to the MSPB was 
a "mixed case appeal", alleging "that an appealable agency 
action was effected, in whole or in part, because of discrimina-
tion," 29 C.F.R. s 1614.302 (a)(2), and thus began the process 
described in s 7702(e)(1)(B).  Consistent with Butler v. West, 
164 F.3d at 638, the government agrees that, ordinarily, the 
district court would have had original jurisdiction over Mr. 
Evono's entire "mixed case," because the MSPB had not 
issued a final decision within 120 days of Mr. Evono's appeal, 

notwithstanding the fact that this would result in simulta-
neous administrative and judicial proceedings.  See Butler, 
164 F.3d at 642-43.  What distinguishes Mr. Evono's case, in 
the government's view, is Mr. Evono's pro se statement in the 
MSPB proceeding that he was not pursuing in the district 
court the full "mixed case" that was pending before the 
MSPB.  In other words, the government contends, Mr. Evo-
no attempted to split his claims, keeping his discrimination 
claims in the MSPB and his retaliation claims in the district 
court.  Relying on Smith v. Chicago School Reform Board of 
Trustees, 165 F.3d 1142, 1150 (7th Cir. 1999), applying the law 
of claim preclusion in interpreting the compensation cap in 42 
U.S.C. s 1981a(b)(3), the government maintains that because 
there is "but one subject matter transaction, i.e., Mr. Evono's 
non-restoration", he "may not split [it] into multiple packages 
of different claims, i.e., retaliation, handicap discrimination, 
racial discrimination, Civil Service merits. etc.".  While ac-
knowledging that there can be no res judicata bar until a first 
judgment is rendered, the government urges that splitting of 
this nature should be discouraged as wasteful of judicial 
resources.

     Of course, the difficulty with the government's position is 
clear from Butler, where the court, in holding that the 
existence of simultaneous district court and administrative 
proceedings could not serve as the basis for dismissal of a 
complaint filed pursuant to s 7702(e)(1), noted that the pen-
dency of simultaneous proceedings was what Congress con-
templated.  164 F.3d at 640-41.  To that extent it is clear, as 
the government concedes, that the district court had original 
jurisdiction over both Mr. Evono's discrimination claims and 
his retaliation claims, his pro se complaint containing the 
same claims that had been pending before the MSPB for over 
120 days without a final decision.7  Although Butler did not 

__________
     7  In view of the unequivocal holding in Butler, that the exis-
tence of simultaneous district court and administrative proceedings 
could not serve as a basis for dismissal of a complaint filed pursuant 
to s 7702(e)(1), it is unclear why the government did not file a 
notice of error with the district court regarding dismissal of Mr. 
Evono's discrimination claims or confess error in this court.

address a situation in which the district court dismisses part 
of a "mixed case" and s 7702 jurisdiction is asserted with 
respect to the remaining claims, the government has cited no 
authority, and we see no basis as a matter of statutory 
interpretation, for treating a "mixed case" over which the 
district court properly had jurisdiction but which it dismissed 
in part, any differently from a "mixed case" that proceeds in 
full in the district court.  Section 7702(e)(1) provides an 
employee with a right to file a "mixed case" in the district 
court and does not suggest that the jurisdiction thereby 
conferred on the district court dissolves upon dismissal of one 
claim where original jurisdiction otherwise properly exists.  
Contrary to the government's position, Mr. Evono was not 
obligated to abandon his proceedings before the MSPB.  
There thus was exhaustion and subject matter jurisdiction 
over Mr. Evono's retaliation claims in the district court 
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. s 7702 and 28 U.S.C. s 1331.

     To the extent that the government and the district court 
relied on Mr. Evono's pro se statements to the MSPB to 
conclude that he waived his right to file his "mixed case" in 
the district court, or was attempting to split his claims, their 
reliance is misplaced.  First, there was no waiver of his right 
to bring his discrimination claims to the district court.  Cf. 
United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993).  The 
statement at issue arose when Mr. Evono responded to the 
government's letter of September 18, 1997, to the MSPB 
administrative law judge apparently suggesting that in view 
of the pending judicial complaint, Mr. Evono would have to 
withdraw his administrative appeal.  The government has not 
made its letter a part of the record, and for that reason alone 
we have no basis to view Mr. Evono's pro se remarks, 
attempting to distinguish his MSPB claims and district court 
claims in order to avoid dismissal of the MSPB claims, as a 
waiver of his right to pursue a "mixed case" under s 7702.8  

__________
     8  Indeed, Mr. Evono stated to the MSPB that "[i]f it felt that 
there is a conflict in some way, that would complicate matters being 
decided before the [MSPB], I wish to be informed as much," 
suggesting that in his mind there was no conflict.

Moreover, Mr. Evono's remarks advised the administrative 
law judge that he was seeking judicial review of the "continu-
ing violations of [his] rights," which hardly reflects the lan-
guage of waiver.  Nor do Mr. Evono's statements in the 
district court, responding to the government's erroneous ar-
guments about exhaustion and claim splitting, demonstrate 
waiver.  Cf. Olano, 507 U.S. at 733.  Furthermore, that Mr. 
Evono sought summary judgment only on his retaliation 
claims reflects at most that he thought there were material 
issues of disputed fact on his discrimination claims, not that 
he was waiving his right to pursue the latter, much less 
voluntarily dismissing them.  In any event, as the govern-
ment acknowledged in its memorandum in support of its 
motion to dismiss or for summary judgment, and again at oral 
argument in this court, the claims raised by Mr. Evono in the 
MSPB and the district court were indistinguishable.

     Second, Mr. Evono did not split his "mixed case."  His pro 
se complaint contained discrimination and retaliation claims.  
It was the district court that split his case in two, by 
dismissing Mr. Evono's discrimination claims for failure to 
exhaust and declining to dismiss his retaliation claims.  As 
Mr. Evono points out, that he proceeded in reliance on the 
district's court dismissal, preparing for trial only on the 
retaliation claims, has nothing to do with whether the district 
court had jurisdiction over his case.  Nor does the second 
amended complaint filed by counsel after the district court 
had dismissed Mr. Evono's discrimination claims, raise claims 
of a different nature than those before the MSPB.  The 
government's reliance on Chicago School Reform Board is 
simply misplaced.  In that case, the Seventh Circuit held that 
the applicable statutory compensation cap did not prevent 
multiple suits from being filed, but noted that the doctrine of 
claim preclusion would prevent litigants from "splitting into 
multiple packages different claims arising out of the same 
transaction".  165 F.3d at 1150.  Nothing of the sort is at 
issue here;  as Mr. Evono notes in his reply brief, the 
government can raise the defense that Mr. Evono is seeking 
to avoid the damages cap if he files a second lawsuit.

     Finally, the government's supplemental jurisdiction conten-
tion fares no better.  The government contends not only that 
the district court lacked original jurisdiction under s 7702(e) 
to hear only a part of Evono's "mixed case," but that the only 
basis for jurisdiction over his unexhausted retaliation claims 
was supplemental jurisdiction, and that the district court 
properly ruled it lacked such jurisdiction.  Supplemental jur-
isdiction was never necessary in Mr. Evono's case, nor did he 
ever rely upon such a theory, because the district court 
always had original jurisdiction over his retaliation claims 
under s 7702(e).9  Parallel proceedings in the district court 
and the MSPB are contemplated by s 7702.  Butler, 164 F.3d 
642-43.  Insofar as the government was concerned about 
wasting judicial resources, the district court could have 
stayed or held the judicial proceedings in abeyance pending a 
decision by the MSPB.10  Id. at 643.

     Accordingly, we hold that where a complaint is properly 
filed under 5 U.S.C. s 7702(e)(1), the district court's dismissal 
of some claims does not deprive it of original jurisdiction over 
the remaining claims, notwithstanding the pendency of the 
same claims before the MSPB, and we reverse the order 
dismissing Mr. Evono's complaint alleging retaliation.

__________
     9  The cases relied upon by the government stand only for the 
unremarkable proposition that a district court need not exercise 
supplemental jurisdiction over matters with respect to which it does 
not have original jurisdiction, where the matters over which original 
jurisdiction could have been exercised have been dismissed, and 
only supplemental matters remain.  See, e.g., Saksenasingh v. 
Secretary of Education, 126 F.3d 347, 351 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  Harris 
v. Secretary, U.S. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, 126 F.3d 339, 346 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997).

     10  The government misconstrues Mr. Evono's point that the 
district court could have stayed his case, characterizing it as an 
argument that Mr. Evono sought a stay, or that the district court 
erred in not granting one.  To the contrary, Mr. Evono simply 
reiterates what the court said in Butler, namely that the district 
court may stay its proceedings if it wishes to benefit from MSPB 
expertise or avoid simultaneous proceedings.  Id.

                                  