                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 3, 2000   Decided December 22, 2000 

                           No. 99-3120

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                      Terrell L. Thompson, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00139-01)

     Beverly G. Dyer, Assistant Federal Public Defender, ar-
gued the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. 
J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender. Tony W. Miles, Assis-
tant Federal Public Defender, entered an appearance.

     Marc E. Rindner, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 

Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher and Roy W. McLeese, 
III, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  The question before the court is 
whether the district court properly admitted evidence police 
obtained from a search of the appellant.  The district court 
held that the police had reasonable suspicion to search the 
appellant because they had received an anonymous tip that he 
was carrying a gun -- the possession of which is unlawful in 
the District of Columbia -- and because the tip was corrobo-
rated to the extent of certain details, which were in them-
selves innocent.  The Supreme Court subsequently held that 
a search based upon an anonymous tip, only innocent details 
of which have been corroborated, is not reasonable and the 
evidence it produces is not admissible.  Florida v. J.L., 529 
U.S. 266, 120 S. Ct. 1375, 1379-80 (2000).

     We nonetheless affirm the judgment in this case because 
uncontradicted evidence in the record shows that the tip at 
issue bore indicia of reliability not present in J.L. and because 
the defendant's conduct itself gave the police reasonable 
cause to suspect that he was engaged in unlawful activity.  
We remand the case to the district court for resentencing, 
however, at the request of both parties.

                          I. Background

     The facts surrounding the search of Terrell Thompson were 
established at an evidentiary hearing and are not in dispute.  
At around 3:20 a.m. Officers Holloway and Pope of the 
Metropolitan Police Department had just completed a traffic 
stop near the intersection of "I" and Half Streets, S.E.  
Officer Holloway was in uniform, standing near his marked 
cruiser with Officer Pope when a middle-aged, Black man 
traveling southbound on Half Street drove up to them.

     The motorist told the officers that he "just saw" a man 
carrying a gun get out of a sport-utility vehicle in the parking 
lot of a Wendy's restaurant some 100 yards from where the 
officers stood.  The informant, who was anxious and agitated, 
described the suspect as a young Black man wearing dark 
pants and a bright orange shirt.  The officers accepted what 
he said as likely true and neither requested nor acquired 
specific information identifying him.

     Officers Holloway and Pope then drove in their separate 
cars to the Wendy's, which was closed.  As the two officers 
entered the parking lot from "K" Street, they saw a dark-
colored sport-utility vehicle leaving the lot.  Because the 
officers had been told the suspect had exited the vehicle, 
however, they did not stop it.  Officer Holloway then saw a 
Black man, who turned out to be Thompson, wearing a bright 
orange shirt and standing by himself at the far end of the 
parking lot with his back against a fence.  There was no one 
else in the parking lot.  Thompson was looking around the 
edge of the fence toward a nightclub called the Mirage.  He 
was, the district court found, "sort of peeking around as if he 
was trying to keep his position concealed."

     Fearing, based upon the tip, that Thompson was armed, 
Officer Holloway exited his cruiser with his weapon drawn 
and approached Thompson.  Thompson spotted Officer Hollo-
way over his left shoulder when Holloway was within five to 
seven feet of him.  Thompson stepped away from the fence 
and, without trying to flee, took five steps toward "I" Street.  
Holloway instructed him to raise his hands in the air and to 
stop, and Thompson complied.  Thompson at that point said 
something to the effect of "you got me" and indicated that he 
would not put up a fight.  At Holloway's instruction he 
dropped to his knees.  As Holloway assisted him to the 
ground, the officer felt a weapon toward the front of Thomp-
son's person.  At that point Officer Pope arrived and helped 
to handcuff Thompson.  The two officers then rolled Thomp-
son over and retrieved a nine-millimeter semiautomatic pistol, 
loaded and cocked, that was sticking out of his waistband.

     A federal grand jury indicted Thompson for unlawful pos-
session of a firearm by a convicted felon.  The district court 
denied Thompson's motion to suppress the gun and certain 
statements he made to the police, ruling that the anonymous 
tip together with certain corroborating details, such as 
Thompson's attire, race, sex, and location, gave the police 
reasonable ground to suspect that Thompson had a gun.  
Thompson then entered a conditional plea of guilty, reserving 
his right to appeal the court's denial of his motion to sup-
press.  The court sentenced Thompson to 37 months in 
prison, reflecting a two-point enhancement under the United 
States Sentencing Guidelines for possession of a stolen weap-
on.

     Thompson initially filed a notice of appeal challenging only 
his sentence, but he has since filed an unopposed motion to 
add the suppression issue in light of the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Florida v. J.L., 120 S. Ct. 1375.

                           II. Analysis

     Under the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States, the police may not stop and search a person 
unless they have reason to suspect he is engaged in wrongdo-
ing.  See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 27-28 (1968) (police may 
stop and frisk persons walking up and down street and 
peering into window of store, apparently casing it for rob-
bery).  As applied to the facts of this case, the fourth 
amendment requires that Officer Holloway have had a "rea-
sonable fear for his own or others' safety" before frisking 
Thompson.  Id. at 30.

     Specifically, "[t]he officer ... must be able to articulate 
something more than an 'inchoate and unparticularized suspi-
cion or hunch.' "  United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7 
(1989) (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 27).  Whether that stan-
dard is met must be determined " 'from the standpoint of an 
objectively reasonable police officer,' " without reference to 
"the actual motivations of the individual officers involved."  
United States v. Hill, 131 F.3d 1056, 1059 (D.C. Cir. 1997) 
(quoting Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690, 696 (1996)).

     In this case the district court determined that Officer 
Holloway had reasonable suspicion to search Thompson based 
upon the tip he got from the motorist and the corroboration 
of certain of the details of that tip:

     [A]n anonymous tip from an anonymous citizen can be 
     the basis for a Terry stop provided that there is some 
     corroboration to provide the police officers with legiti-
     mate reasons to believe that the tip was reliable.  And 
     the cases have held that the corroboration can be that 
     when they go to the scene they're confronted with what 
     the tipster told them he saw.  And so the corroboration 
     in this case ... is exactly what the Government says it is.  
     The citizen tipster said black male, bright orange shirt, 
     blue jeans or dark pants.  And he's in a parking lot at 
     Wendy's ....  And he's got a gun ....  They [then] 
     found what they were told they were going to find.
     
The district court's reasoning was based solidly upon the 
holdings of this court in United States v. Clipper, 973 F.2d 
944, 947-51 (1992), and United States v. McClinnhan, 660 
F.2d 500, 502-03 (1981), in which we deemed the same type of 
combination sufficient to support a stop and frisk.

     The decision of the Supreme Court in Florida v. J.L. casts 
new light upon this recurring situation.  In that case an 
anonymous caller had told the Miami-Dade police that a 
young Black man, standing at a particular bus stop and 
wearing a plaid shirt, had a gun.  When the police went to 
investigate they saw three Black males there, one of whom, 
15 year-old J.L., was wearing a plaid shirt.  Upon frisking 
him, the police discovered a gun.  See 120 S. Ct. at 1377.

     The Supreme Court, upon those facts, held that the police 
did not have reason to believe that the suspect had an illegal 
firearm nor, hence, reason to stop and frisk him.  Id. at 1380.  
The police cannot rely upon "the bare report of an unknown, 
unaccountable informant who neither explained how he knew 
about the gun nor supplied any basis for believing he had 
inside information about [the suspect]."  Id. at 1379.  The 
Court dismissed the argument that "the tip was reliable 

because its description of the suspect's visual attributes 
proved accurate:  There really was a young black male wear-
ing a plaid shirt at the bus stop."  The Court explained that 
"[s]uch a tip ... does not show that the tipster has knowledge 
of concealed criminal activity.  The reasonable suspicion here 
at issue requires that a tip be reliable in its assertion of 
illegality, not just in its tendency to identify a determinate 
person."  Id.  Finally, the Court rejected any suggestion that 
the putative possession of a firearm, and the danger that 
poses, might alter the inquiry into reasonable suspicion.  Id. 
at 1379-80.

     Thus, the Supreme Court has now rejected the district 
court's reasoning in admitting the evidence against Thomp-
son.  Ordinarily we would remand for further proceedings a 
case in which the district court did not "ask[ ] the right legal 
questions in making its ruling," United States v. Williams, 
951 F.2d 1287, 1291 (D.C. Cir. 1991);  to do so here is 
unnecessary, however, because uncontested facts in the rec-
ord still warrant our affirming the ruling.  See United States 
v. Caballero, 936 F.2d 1292, 1297 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  The tip in 
this case bears indicia of reliability beyond those of the 
anonymous tip in J.L.;  and the police themselves observed 
Thompson engaging in suspicious conduct.

     First, the tipster here informed the police in person, mak-
ing his report inherently more trustworthy than that of the 
unidentified caller in J.L. The informant stated that he "just 
saw" Thompson, indicating that his knowledge was based 
upon firsthand observation, see Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 
234 (1983);  the recency and the proximity of his claimed 
observation further suggested that it would prove accurate, 
see Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 147 (1972).

     In addition, the informant in this case was more accounta-
ble, and therefore more reliable, than was the anonymous 
caller in J.L. The precise situation here was anticipated by 
Justice Kennedy, concurring in J.L.:

     If an informant places his anonymity at risk, a court can 
     consider this factor in weighing the reliability of the tip.  
     An instance where a tip might be considered anonymous 
     
     but nevertheless sufficiently reliable to justify a propor-
     tionate police response may be when an unnamed person 
     driving a car the police officer later describes stops for a 
     moment and, face to face, informs the police that criminal 
     activity is occurring.
     
120 S. Ct. at 1381.  The informant in this case subjected 
himself to ready identification by the police when he ap-
proached them in his car;  the police need only have asked for 
his identification or simply noted the license plate on his car.  
Cf. United States v. Valentine, ___ F.3d ___, 2000 WL 
1648972 *1, *3 (3d Cir. 2000) (face-to-face tip supports reason-
able suspicion, notwithstanding informant's refusal to identify 
himself, in light of informant's accountability and claimed 
immediate, firsthand basis for knowledge).  Had the informa-
tion he provided proved false, he would have been subject to 
potential criminal prosecution.  See D.C. Code Ann. s 4-151 
(misdemeanor to "make or cause to be made to the Metropoli-
tan Police ... a false or fictitious report of the commission of 
any criminal offense").

     Thompson argues that the ability of the police to identify 
an otherwise anonymous telephone caller and the prospect of 
a prompt police response make the anonymous caller in J.L. 
no less accountable than the face-to-face informant in this 
case.  For this he relies upon Justice Kennedy's observation 
in his separate opinion, that as their technology improves, 
"the ability of the police to trace the identity of anonymous 
telephone informants may be a factor which lends reliability 
to what, years earlier, might have been considered unreliable 
anonymous tips."  120 S. Ct. at 1381.  Justice Kennedy's 
point, however, is not that face-to-face tips lack the requisite 
reliability but that even anonymous calls might one day have 
it.

     Second, what the police themselves observed of Thompson's 
conduct was clearly suspicious.  Although the district court 
erroneously relied upon innocent corroborating details in 
upholding the search, it also found, based upon undisputed 
police testimony, that the officers observed Thompson con-
cealing himself behind the fence and peering out toward the 

street.  Moreover, he was doing so in the parking lot of a 
closed restaurant at three o'clock in the morning.*  Review-
ing these facts objectively, that is, from the perspective of a 
reasonable police officer, Thompson's apparent effort to con-
ceal himself behind the fence must be regarded as suspicious, 
much as was the defendants' apparent casing of the store in 
Terry.  See 392 U.S. at 28.  Thompson's furtive conduct was 
not merely consistent with the tip that he had a weapon;  it 
would have signaled a reasonable police officer that Thomp-
son was positioning himself to use it, perhaps against some-
one exiting the nightclub toward which he was looking.  To 
ask more of the police in these circumstances -- to require 
them to investigate still further or to watch from a dis-
tance -- might well preclude them from interceding before 
the suspect has accomplished his violent, perhaps lethal, 
purpose.  The requirement of reasonable suspicion does not 
necessitate such forbearance.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm Thompson's convic-
tion.  We also vacate his sentence, however, because as the 
Government concedes, the evidence does not support the 
conclusion that the gun he had was stolen.  This matter is 
therefore remanded to the district court for resentencing 
consistent with the opinion.

                                        So ordered.

      * We disregard Officer Holloway's observation that Thompson 
"looked like he was going to shoot someone" because Holloway also 
testified that his belief that Thompson had a gun was based solely 
upon the tip, as opposed to Thompson's own conduct.

                                                          