                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 18, 2002       Decided May 7, 2002 

                           No. 00-5454

                      Christopher S. Oguaju 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv02195)

     Kemba T. Eneas, Student Counsel, argued the cause as 
amicus curiae in support of appellant.  With her on the 
briefs were Steven H. Goldblatt, appointed by the court as 
amicus curiae, and Wendy M. Marantz, Supervisory Attor-
ney.

     W. Mark Nebeker, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. 

Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assis-
tant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  An inmate in a federal prison 
requested under the Freedom of Information Act all records 
on file with the United States Marshals Service concerning an 
escaped convict turned government informant, whose testimo-
ny had helped to convict him.  The Marshals Service refused 
to confirm or to deny the existence of such records and 
asserted that, if they do exist, they "would be exempt from 
disclosure pursuant to exemption 7(C) of the [FOIA]" -- the 
exemption for law enforcement records the release of which 
"could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy."  5 U.S.C. s 552(b)(7)(C).  After 
exhausting his administrative remedies, the inmate filed a 
complaint in the district court, which granted summary judg-
ment to the Marshals Service.  We affirm the decision of the 
district court on the ground that disclosure of the records 
would not serve a public interest that outweighs the infor-
mant's privacy interest.

                          I. Background

     In 1998 the United States prosecuted Christopher Oguaju 
in a federal district court in Michigan for conspiring to 
distribute and for possession with intent to distribute heroin.  
At Oguaju's request, the court ordered the Government to 
turn over to the defense any exculpatory information it had, 
as required by Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963).  
Among the records Oguaju received was the plea agreement 
of David Powell, an escaped convict who was to testify against 
Oguaju in return for a recommendation of leniency from the 
prosecutor in his trial for escape.

     After Oguaju was convicted he asked the Marshals Service 
to give him, pursuant to the FOIA, 5 U.S.C. s 552, "[a]ny and 
all information in [its] file that deals directly or indirectly 

with David Powell ... includ[ing] investigative reports of Mr. 
Powell's escape from prison."  Oguaju wrote:

     Disclosure of the requested information to me is in [the] 
     public interest, as it is likely to contribute significantly to 
     the clarification of Constitutional and/or legal issues.  
     The information requested is for personal use and will 
     aid me to disclose/corroborate fraud committed by [Pow-
     ell], the information will not be used for any commercial 
     purposes.
     
The Marshals Service first made a "Glomar response" -- 
refusing to confirm or to deny the existence of any records, 
see Phillippi v. CIA, 546 F.2d 1009 (D.C. Cir. 1976) -- and 
then went on to assert that the records, if they exist, "would 
be exempt from disclosure pursuant to exemption 7(C) of the 
Freedom of Information Act."  That exemption permits an 
agency to withhold "information compiled for law enforce-
ment purposes" when producing that information "could rea-
sonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of 
personal privacy."  5 U.S.C. s 552(b)(7)(C).

     Oguaju filed an administrative appeal in which he asserted 
that the "documents requested [are] material to the prepara-
tion of [his] defense brief on appeal" because the "[p]rosecu-
tor improperly withheld agency record[s]" that would reveal 
Powell had perjured himself when he testified against Oguaju.  
The Department of Justice denied the appeal on the ground 
that, absent "an overriding public interest, even to acknowl-
edge the existence of" the records would unjustifiably invade 
Powell's privacy.

     Oguaju then petitioned for review by the district court, 
which granted summary judgment to the Marshals Service.  
Oguaju filed a timely appeal and agreed to rely in this court 
upon the brief filed by an amicus curiae whom we asked to 
appear and to whom the court is grateful.

                           II. Analysis

     As stated above, the FOIA exempts from disclosure law 
enforcement records the release of which "could reasonably 

be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy."  5 U.S.C. s 552(b)(7)(C).  The court determines 
whether disclosure is warranted by "balanc[ing] the public 
interest in disclosure against the [privacy] interest Congress 
intended the Exemption to protect."  Dep't of Justice v. 
Reporters Comm. for Freedom of Press, 489 U.S. 749, 776 
(1989).  The public interest in disclosure lies in "open[ing] 
agency action to the light of public scrutiny," Reporters 
Comm., 489 U.S. at 772;  it does not include helping an 
individual obtain information for his personal use, see Mays v. 
DEA, 234 F.3d 1324, 1327 (D.C. Cir. 2001) ("[T]he interest of 
the party requesting the document [is] irrelevant to this 
balancing").

     In this case Oguaju can avoid Exemption 7(C) only by 
showing that the public interest in release of the information 
he requested outweighs Powell's privacy interest in its sup-
pression;  Oguaju's personal stake in using the requested 
records to attack his convictions does not count in the calcula-
tion of the public interest.  What public interest, then, could 
the information serve?  According to the amicus, the answer 
is the "public interest in understanding how effectively the 
DOJ responds to Brady requests and in assuring that the 
United States Attorney's office and the Marshals Service, 
both entities of the DOJ, are working in concert to exchange 
information."

     The facts of this case and the precedent of this Circuit 
conjoin to scuttle this argument.  Oguaju has never offered 
any reason to believe the Department of Justice mishandled 
his Brady request, and under circuit law a bald accusation to 
that effect does not persuade.  See SafeCard Services, Inc. v. 
SEC, 926 F.2d 1197, 1206 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (holding that FOIA 
requester can avoid Exemption 7(C) only by producing "com-
pelling evidence that the agency is engaged in illegal activi-
ty");  Davis v. Dep't of Justice, 968 F.2d 1276, 1282 (D.C. Cir. 
1992).*  More important, even if the records Oguaju seeks 

__________
     * Amicus at one point suggests that SafeCard and Davis do not 
apply because Oguaju alleges no agency misconduct.  To the con-
trary, amicus's argument that the requested records could reveal 

would reveal wrongdoing in his case, exposing a single, 
garden-variety act of misconduct would not serve the FOIA's 
purpose of showing "what the Government is up to."  Report-
ers Comm., 489 U.S. at 780;  see also Beck v. Dep't of Justice, 
997 F.2d 1489, 1493 (D.C. Cir. 1993) ("The identity of one or 
two individual relatively low-level government wrongdoers, 
released in isolation, does not provide information about the 
agency's own conduct," and therefore "there is no public 
interest in [the] release" of that information).  Although the 
Third Circuit once indulged the argument advanced by the 
amicus, see Ferri v. Bell, 645 F.2d 1213, 1217-18 (3d Cir. 
1981) (privacy exemption overcome because release of infor-
mation could serve "indirect public purpose" by proving a 
Brady violation), that was before the Supreme Court laid 
down the law in Reporters Committee.  Accordingly, we 
adhere to the standards we adopted in Beck, SafeCard, and 
Davis to implement the teachings of the High Court.

     In the absence of any public interest in disclosure, any 
countervailing interest in privacy defeats a FOIA request.  
Nat'l Ass'n of Retired Fed. Employees v. Horner, 879 F.2d 
873, 879 (D.C. Cir. 1989) ("[S]omething ... outweighs nothing 
every time").  And Powell clearly does have some privacy 
interest in the requested documents, which -- if they exist -- 
pertain to Powell and the Marshals Service's investigation of 
his escape from federal prison.  Our amicus downplays Pow-
ell's interest, suggesting that he himself revealed the relevant 
information when he testified at Oguaju's trial.  This argu-
ment would have traction if Oguaju were requesting a tran-
script of Powell's testimony, but he is requesting something 
entirely different:  "Any and all information in [the Marshals 
Service's] file that deals directly or indirectly with David 
Powell ... includ[ing] investigative reports of Mr. Powell's 
escape from prison."

     Because Powell's privacy interest, however slight, necessar-
ily outweighs the nil public interest in release of the Marshals 
Service's records, Oguaju's FOIA request is foreclosed by 

__________
government mishandling of Brady requests is the only public 
interest alleged.

Exemption 7(C).  Therefore, we need not consider whether 
the Marshals Service erred, as the amicus argues, by refusing 
to confirm or to deny the existence of the records.  Right or 
wrong, that refusal deprives Oguaju of nothing to which he is 
entitled.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court is

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                      