                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 17, 1999   Decided January 11, 2000 

                           No. 99-7097

              GTE New Media Services Incorporated, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                 BellSouth Corporation, et al., 
                            Appellants

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv02314)

     Charles Rothfeld argued the cause for appellants. With him 
on the briefs were Richard J. Favretto, Andrew J. Morris 
and Miriam R. Nemetz.

     Thomas A. Isaacson argued the cause for appellee. With 
him on the brief were Robert F. Ruyak and Alan M. Wise-
man.  Kenneth W. Brothers, Mark C. Hansen, Stephen A. 
Weisbrod and Glenn B. Manishin entered appearances.

     Before:   Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  The matter at hand involves an 
interlocutory appeal brought pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 1292(b).  
The issues presented are whether the District Court may 
assert personal jurisdiction over the defendants and whether 
venue is proper in the District of Columbia ("District") when 
the defendants' sole contact with this forum is the operation 
of Internet websites that are accessible to persons in the 
District.  The District Court tentatively concluded that the 
quality and nature of the websites militated in favor of 
personal jurisdiction.  The trial judge noted, however, that 
"[a]ll of the interactive website cases reviewed [by the Dis-
trict Court] involved defendants with at least some physical 
contact with the forum," whereas the defendants in this case 
have no physical contact with the forum.  GTE New Media 
Servs., Inc. v. Ameritech Corp., Order Certifying for Interloc-
utory Appeal the Court's Ruling That Personal Jurisdiction 
Exists and Staying Proceedings at 3, reprinted in J.A. 218.  
Given the unusual circumstances of this case, the District 
Court determined that the questions of personal jurisdiction 
and venue should be certified for immediate review by this 
court.

     The underlying action in this case rests on a complaint by 
GTE Media Services, Inc. ("GTE") against various defen-
dants, including BellSouth Corp., BellSouth Enterprises, Inc., 
BellSouth Advertising & Publishing Corp., Intelligent Media 
Ventures, Inc., SBC Communications Inc., Pacific Telesis 
Group, Pacific Bell Interactive Media, US West, Inc., and US 
West Media Group, for alleged violations of Sections 1 and 2 
of the Sherman Antitrust Act.  GTE contends that the defen-
dants engaged in a conspiracy with an illicit purpose to 
dominate the Internet business directories' market.  The 
defendants, in turn, moved to dismiss the complaint for want 
of personal jurisdiction.  The defendants argue that the mere 
ability of District residents to access the defendants' Internet 

Yellow Pages from locations within the city is insufficient to 
establish personal jurisdiction.

     GTE contends that the action, tortious injury, and "persis-
tent course of conduct" required under the District's long-arm 
statute are established, because the defendants have entered 
into an agreement outside of the District with a purpose of 
causing Internet users in the District to use the defendants' 
Internet links to pursue business leads in the District.  In 
other words, GTE asserts that the alleged conspiracy was 
designed to cause Internet users who otherwise would have 
had access to GTE's links to be diverted to the defendants' 
links, which in turn resulted in more advertising revenue for 
the defendants.  GTE argues, in the alternative, that Section 
12 of the Clayton Act provides an independent basis for 
personal jurisdiction.

     On the record at hand, we hold that the District Court 
erred in concluding that there is sufficient evidence here to 
support personal jurisdiction.  And GTE's tortured interpre-
tation of Section 12 of the Clayton Act cannot save the day.  
However, at this juncture of the case, GTE is still free to 
supplement the record through jurisdictional discovery.  The 
case is hereby remanded to the District Court for further 
proceedings, including additional discovery and possible 
amendments to the complaint, should that be deemed war-
ranted.  We decline to pass upon the District Court's theory 
of jurisdiction, which is premised on the supposed existence of 
certain facts to show substantial effects, when we have no 
way of knowing whether there are indeed facts to support the 
asserted theory.  And we reject GTE's theory of jurisdiction, 
which appears to rest on a view that mere accessibility to an 
Internet site in the District is enough of a foundation upon 
which to base personal jurisdiction.

                          I. Background

     The relevant facts are relatively simple.  GTE alleges that 
in July 1997, five regional Bell operating companies (Ameri-
tech Corp., Bell Atlantic, BellSouth, SBC Corp., US West) 
and their relevant subsidiaries conspired to capture, control, 

and dominate the Internet business directories' market.  See 
GTE New Media Servs. Inc. v. Ameritech Corp., 97-CV-2314, 
Mem. Op. at 5-6, reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 185-86.  
After the alleged conspirators held meetings in California, 
Colorado, Georgia, and Michigan, they agreed to provide 
jointly a coded map of the United States that would allow 
users of their Internet Yellow Pages to access particular 
states and particular businesses.  Each of the regional Bell 
operating companies would provide exclusive service to a 
particular region, and the other companies apparently agreed 
not to compete with the designated exclusive server in its 
given region.  The regions designated to each regional Bell 
operating company corresponded to the region to which the 
company provided telecommunications service.  See id. at 5, 
reprinted in J.A. 185.  The regional Bell operating compa-
nies' next step was to obtain exclusive links for their map on 
well-known Internet browser sites run by Netscape Commu-
nications Corp. ("Netscape") and Yahoo, Inc!  ("Yahoo"), to 
ensure that users of these popular sites would be specifically 
directed to the operating companies' Internet Yellow Pages.

     Before the alleged conspiracy, GTE had a non-exclusive 
contract with Netscape, pursuant to which Netscape offered a 
choice of Internet business directories on its site, including 
GTE's SuperPages.  See id. at 7, reprinted in J.A. 187.  
When users accessed the "Yellow Pages" option on Net-
scape's toolbar, they had access to GTE's website.  GTE 
asserts, however, that Netscape terminated this arrangement 
on July 18, 1997, by removing its links to GTE's SuperPages, 
including hyperlinks on Yahoo.

     On October 6, 1997, GTE filed its complaint against the five 
regional Bell operating companies, Netscape, and Yahoo, 
claiming, among other things, violations of Sections 1 and 2 of 
the Sherman Antitrust Act.  Several defendants (i.e., Bell-
South, SBC Corp. and US West, excepting US West Dex, 
Inc.) moved to dismiss the complaint for lack of personal 
jurisdiction;  two (i.e., BellSouth and SBC Corp.) also argued 
that venue was improper in the District of Columbia.  On 
September 28, 1998, the District Court denied both motions 
to dismiss, finding that (1) the court had personal jurisdiction 

under section 13-423(a)(4) of the D.C. long-arm statute, be-
cause GTE had sufficiently alleged a tortious injury in the 
District caused by the defendants' acts outside of the District;  
and (2) because venue is proper under 28 U.S.C. s 1391 
wherever a party is subject to personal jurisdiction, the 
finding of personal jurisdiction also resolved the venue ques-
tion.  On March 29, 1999, however, the District Court certi-
fied an order for interlocutory appeal and ordered a stay of 
proceedings.  The District Court noted that, although it had 
found that the defendants operated an interactive website 
that supported a finding of personal jurisdiction,

     the instant case differs from any other reported case ... 
     in that it involves an interactive website with no other 
     contacts with the District of Columbia.  All of the inter-
     active website cases reviewed by this court involved 
     defendants with at least some physical contact with the 
     forum.  While this court has concluded that the quality 
     and nature of the [operating companies'] website favors 
     the exercise of personal jurisdiction in the District of 
     Columbia, certainly a substantial ground for difference of 
     opinion concerning the ruling exists.
     
GTE New Media Servs. Inc., Order Certifying for Interlocu-
tory Appeal the Court's Ruling That Personal Jurisdiction 
Exists and Staying Proceedings at 3, reprinted in J.A. 218 
(emphasis added).  On April 8, 1999, the defendants filed a 
petition for permission to appeal.  This court entered an 
order granting permission to appeal on May 28, 1999.

                          II. Discussion

A.    The District of Columbia Long-Arm Statute and the 
     Due Process Clause of the U.S. Constitution

     To establish personal jurisdiction over a non-resident, a 
court must engage in a two-part inquiry:  A court must first 
examine whether jurisdiction is applicable under the state's 
long-arm statute and then determine whether a finding of 
jurisdiction satisfies the constitutional requirements of due 
process.  See United States v. Ferrara, 54 F.3d 825, 828 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995).

     The District's long-arm statute provides, in relevant part, 
that

     [a] District of Columbia court may exercise personal 
     jurisdiction over a person, who acts directly or by an 
     agent, as to a claim for relief arising from the person's--
     (1) transacting any business in the District of Columbia;  
     ... (4) causing tortious injury in the District of Columbia 
     by an act or omission outside the District of Columbia if 
     he [i] regularly does or solicits business, [ii] engages in 
     any other persistent course of conduct, or [iii] derives 
     substantial revenue from goods used or consumed, or 
     services rendered, in the District of Columbia.
     
D.C. Code Ann. s 13-423(a) (1981).  A plaintiff seeking to 
establish jurisdiction over a non-resident under the foregoing 
provisions of the long-arm statute must demonstrate, pursu-
ant to section (a)(1), that the plaintiff transacted business in 
the District, or show, pursuant to section (a)(4), that the 
plaintiff caused a tortious injury in the District, the injury 
was caused by the defendant's act or omission outside of the 
District, and the defendant had one of the three enumerated 
contacts with the District.  Section (a)(1)'s "transacting any 
business" clause generally has been interpreted to be coex-
tensive with the Constitution's due process requirements and 
thus to merge into a single inquiry.  See Ferrara, 54 F.3d at 
828.  Section (a)(4) has been construed more narrowly, how-
ever.  See Crane v. Carr, 814 F.2d 758, 762 (D.C. Cir. 1987) 
("The drafters of this provision apparently intended that the 
(a)(4) subsection would not occupy all of the constitutionally 
available space....  This court has explicitly noted, more-
over, that (a)(4) of the D.C. long-arm statute may indeed stop 
short of the outer limit of the constitutional space.").

     Even when the literal terms of the long-arm statute have 
been satisfied, a plaintiff must still show that the exercise of 
personal jurisdiction is within the permissible bounds of the 
Due Process Clause.  In other words, a plaintiff must show 
"minimum contacts" between the defendant and the forum 
establishing that "the maintenance of the suit does not offend 
traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice."  Inter-

national Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  Under the "minimum 
contracts" standard, courts must insure that "the defendant's 
conduct and connection with the forum State are such that he 
should reasonably anticipate being haled into court there."  
World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297 
(1980).

     Cases applying the familiar personal jurisdiction analysis to 
the Internet are thus far relatively scarce;  only the Second, 
Fifth, Sixth, and Ninth Circuits have ventured into this 
domain.  Three decisions among the five issued by these four 
appellate courts have dismissed complaints for want of per-
sonal jurisdiction.

     In Bensusan Restaurant Corp. v. King, 126 F.3d 25, 29 (2d 
Cir. 1997), for example, the Second Circuit found that the 
operator of a Missouri jazz club named "The Blue Note" did 
not commit tortious acts in New York within the meaning of 
New York's long-arm statute when he established an Internet 
website for his club that contained a hyperlink to a New York 
club of the same name.  The court held that, because the 
Missouri club operator should not have reasonably expected 
his allegedly tortious acts to have consequences in New York 
and because he did not significantly engage in interstate 
commerce, it would not extend long-arm jurisdiction under 
another subsection of the long-arm statute.

     Similarly, in Mink v. AAAA Development LLC, 190 F.3d 
333, 336-37 (5th Cir. 1999), the Fifth Circuit declined to find 
personal jurisdiction in a case in which the developer of a 
computer software program brought an action against pur-
ported competitors and sought to rest personal jurisdiction on 
a finding that the defendant operated an Internet website 
that was accessible by residents in the forum state.  The 
court reasoned that "[t]here was no evidence that [the defen-
dant] conducted business over the Internet by engaging in 
business transactions with forum residents or by entering 
into contracts over the Internet."  Id. at 337.  Thus, although 
the defendant's website had an e-mail address that allowed 
consumers to interact with the company, the court noted that 

"[t]here is no evidence ... that the website allows [the 
defendant] to do anything but reply to e-mail initiated by 
website visitors."  Id.  The court also noted that the website 
was not interactive enough to support a finding of jurisdic-
tion, because customers could not purchase anything on-line.  
See id.

     Finally, in Cybersell, Inc. v. Cybersell, Inc., 130 F.3d 414, 
419-20 (9th Cir. 1997), the Ninth Circuit declined to find 
personal jurisdiction in an infringement action in Arizona 
against a Florida corporation that provided consulting ser-
vices for strategic management on the web and used the same 
name as the plaintiff's corporation.  The court found that the 
challenged web page was essentially passive.  The court 
found that there was "no question that anyone, anywhere 
could access that home page and thereby learn about the 
services offered," but it failed to "see how from that fact alone 
it can be inferred that [the defendant] deliberately directed 
its merchandising efforts toward Arizona residents."  Id. at 
419.  In addition, the court noted that because the defendant 
did not encourage people in Arizona to access its sites and 
there was no evidence that any part of the defendant's 
business was sought or achieved in Arizona--in fact, no 
Arizona resident other than the plaintiff had ever "hit" the 
defendant's site--there was no purposeful availment and thus 
no personal jurisdiction.  See id.

     The two decisions in which appellate courts have found 
personal jurisdiction in cases involving Internet-related dis-
putes present facts that are quite different from those in the 
instant case.  In CompuServe, Inc. v. Patterson, 89 F.3d 
1257, 1264 (6th Cir. 1996), for example, the Sixth Circuit 
found personal jurisdiction over a defendant in Ohio, because 
the defendant had entered into a contract that allowed him to 
market his software in other states with Ohio-based Compu-
Serve acting as his distributor.  The court concluded that it 
was reasonable to subject the defendant to suit in Ohio, 
because it was home to the computer network service that he 
himself had chosen to employ.  The court also determined 
that the defendant was on notice that he had created a 
connection with Ohio, because (1) he had entered into con-

tracts that would be governed by Ohio law with an Ohio-
based company;  and (2) he sent his software, via electronic 
links, to Ohio and advertised his products on CompuServe.  
The court highlighted that "it is Patterson's relationship with 
CompuServe as a software provider and marketer that is 
crucial to this case."  Id. at 1264.  In this case, however, GTE 
has yet to offer evidence of either a contractual relationship 
or a comparable marker of activity directed uniquely toward 
the District.

     Likewise, in Panavision International, L.P. v. Toeppen, 
141 F.3d 1316 (9th Cir. 1998), the Ninth Circuit upheld 
personal jurisdiction in a case involving a "cyber-pirate" (i.e., 
someone who steals valuable trademarks, establishes domain 
names on the Internet using the trademarks, and then offers 
to sell the domain names back to the rightful trademark 
owners), see id. at 1318, by employing the "effects doctrine," 
which holds that "jurisdiction may attach if the defendant's 
conduct is aimed at or has an effect in the forum state."  Id. 
at 1321.  The court concluded that "[t]he brunt of the harm to 
Panavision was felt in California," given that Panavision's 
principal place of business was in California and "the heart of 
the theatrical motion picture and television industry is located 
there."  Id.  In the instant case, unlike Panavision, there is 
nothing as yet to indicate that the defendants engaged in 
unabashedly malignant actions directed at or felt in this 
forum.

     The District Court in this case asserted personal jurisdic-
tion, pursuant to D.C. Code Ann. s 13-423(a)(4), on the 
ground that the defendants allegedly caused tortious injury in 
the District by an act outside the District followed by a 
persistent course of conduct in the District.  Under this 
theory of jurisdiction, it does not matter that the defendants 
have no demonstrated physical contacts in the District.  
Rather, it is enough, according to the District Court, that the 
defendants entered into an agreement outside of the District 
with an eye toward attracting Internet users in the District to 
their websites (instead of to GTE's SuperPages) and thereby 
draw advertisers away from GTE.  The District Court found 
that, on these asserted facts alone, the defendants foreseeably 

caused tortious injury to GTE's business in this forum.  See 
Ameritech Corp., Mem. Op. at 10, reprinted in J.A. 190.  The 
defendants' course of conduct was seen to be "persistent" by 
the District Court, because their websites are "highly interac-
tive" with District users and significantly commercial in both 
quality and nature.  Id. at 11-12, reprinted at J.A. 191-92.  
We disagree with this line of reasoning.

     There is no evidence in this record to support the claim 
that the defendants "secured advertising revenue by increas-
ing the user traffic on their websites."  Id. at 13, reprinted at 
J.A. 193.  At best, GTE has provided only conclusory state-
ments and intimations to buttress its assertion that it lost 
advertising revenues as a result of the defendants' actions.  
These are not enough.  Cf. First Chicago Int'l v. United 
Exchange Co., 836 F.2d 1375, 1378-79 (D.C. Cir. 1988) ("Con-
clusory statements ... '[do] not constitute the prima facie 
showing necessary to carry the burden of establishing person-
al jurisdiction.'  ... [T]he 'bare allegation' of conspiracy or 
agency is insufficient to establish personal jurisdiction." (cita-
tion omitted)).  We will neither assume nor infer that the 
alleged conspiracy had substantial effects of the sort alleged 
by GTE, because to do so would be to assume or infer the 
answer to the very question that is before us.

     Furthermore, it is difficult to understand, at least on the 
present record, what tortious injury has been suffered by 
GTE in the District.  GTE claims that it has lost advertising 
revenues by virtue of the defendants' allegedly unlawful 
conspiracy.  However, nothing has been offered to indicate 
that these advertising revenues were lost in the District, 
either by lost sales or lost revenue collections.

     Additionally, personal jurisdiction surely cannot be based 
solely on the ability of District residents to access the defen-
dants' websites, for this does not by itself show any persistent 
course of conduct by the defendants in the District.  Access 
to a website reflects nothing more than a telephone call by a 
District resident to the defendants' computer servers, all of 
which apparently are operated outside of the District.  And, 
as this court has held, mere receipt of telephone calls outside 

the District does not constitute persistent conduct "in the 
District" within the meaning of the long-arm statute.  See 
Tavoulareas v. Comnas, 720 F.2d 192, 194 (D.C. Cir. 1983).

     Finally, GTE appears to suggest that, when a District 
resident accesses the defendants' Yellow Pages websites, the 
defendants are somehow "transacting business" in the Dis-
trict.  This is a far-fetched claim on this record.  Access to an 
Internet Yellow Page site is akin to searching a telephone 
book--the consumer pays nothing to use the search tool, and 
any resulting business transaction is between the consumer 
and a business found in the Yellow Pages, not between the 
consumer and the provider of the Yellow Pages.  In short, 
there is nothing here to indicate that District residents actu-
ally engage in any business transactions with the defendants.

     When stripped to its core, GTE's theory of jurisdiction 
rests on the claim that, because the defendants have acted to 
maximize usage of their websites in the District, mere acces-
sibility of the defendants' websites establishes the necessary 
"minimum contacts" with this forum.  See Br. for Appellee at 
16.  This theory simply cannot hold water.  Indeed, under 
this view, personal jurisdiction in Internet-related cases 
would almost always be found in any forum in the country.  
We do not believe that the advent of advanced technology, 
say, as with the Internet, should vitiate long-held and invio-
late principles of federal court jurisdiction.  The Due Process 
Clause exists, in part, to give "a degree of predictability to 
the legal system that allows potential defendants to structure 
their primary conduct with some minimum assurance as to 
where that conduct will and will not render them liable to 
suit."  World-Wide Volkswagen Corp., 444 U.S. at 297.  In 
the context of the Internet, GTE's expansive theory of per-
sonal jurisdiction would shred these constitutional assurances 
out of practical existence.  Our sister circuits have not accept-
ed such an approach, and neither shall we.

B.   The Clayton Act

     GTE asserts an alternative basis for personal jurisdiction, 
resting on Section 12 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. s 22 
(1994).  Section 12 provides:

          Any suit, action, or proceeding under the antitrust 
     laws against a corporation may be brought not only in 
     the judicial district whereof it is an inhabitant, but also in 
     any district wherein it may be found or transacts busi-
     ness;  and all process in such cases may be served in the 
     district of which it is an inhabitant, or wherever it may 
     be found.
     
15 U.S.C. s 22 (emphasis added).  The language of the 
statute is plain, and its meaning seems clear:  The clause 
before the semi-colon relates to a supplemental basis for 
venue in actions under the Clayton Act;  the clause after the 
semi-colon relates to nationwide service of process in anti-
trust cases;  and invocation of the nationwide service clause 
rests on satisfying the venue provision.

     Although both parties agree that the clause regarding 
nationwide service also confers nationwide jurisdiction, they 
disagree over whether the venue clause must be satisfied for 
there to be nationwide personal jurisdiction over defendants 
in antitrust cases.  The defendants argue that "[p]roper 
venue under Section 12 is ... a prerequisite for nationwide 
service (and jurisdiction):  [I]f venue does not lie under the 
provision, nationwide service is impermissible."  See Reply 
Br. of Appellants at 22.  GTE contends that compliance with 
Section 12's venue provision is not a prerequisite for use of its 
national jurisdiction provision.  More specifically, GTE ar-
gues that venue may be obtained under either Section 12 or 
under the general federal venue provision of 28 U.S.C. 
s 1391, and that use of either route allows resort to Section 
12's national jurisdiction provision.

     GTE relies on Go-Video, Inc. v. Akai Electric Co., 885 F.2d 
1406 (9th Cir. 1989), to buttress its position.  In Go-Video, the 
Ninth Circuit rejected the argument that Section 12 must be 
read as an "integrated whole," even though the reference to 
serving process "in such cases" clearly seems to require that 
the preceding clause's venue requirements be established 
before nationwide service can be authorized. The court rea-
soned that "as a general matter, courts have interpreted 
special venue provisions to supplement, rather than preempt, 
general venue statutes."  Id. at 1409.  Under this analysis, an 

interpretation of Section 12 that viewed the first clause as 
restricting the second clause would contradict the general 
view of Section 12 as expanding the bounds of venue.  We 
disagree with the reasoning of the Ninth Circuit.

     The desire to view Section 12's venue provision as expan-
sive does not justify the Ninth Circuit's total disregard of the 
first clause, particularly given the literal convolutions re-
quired to jettison the first clause.  Indeed, it seems quite 
unreasonable to presume that Congress would intentionally 
craft a two-pronged provision with a superfluous first clause, 
ostensibly link the two provisions with the "in such cases" 
language, but nonetheless fail to indicate clearly anywhere 
that it intended the first clause to be disposable.  Even the 
Ninth Circuit seems to recognize that its sweeping interpreta-
tion of Section 12 tends to make the venue provision "wholly 
redundant."  Id. at 1413.

     On the question of the meaning of Section 12, we align 
ourselves with the position taken by the Second Circuit.  See 
Goldlawr, Inc. v. Heiman, 288 F.2d 579, 581 (2d Cir. 1961), 
rev'd on other grounds, 369 U.S. 463 (1962).  The court in 
Goldlawr reasoned that Section 12

     specifies where suit against a corporation under the 
     antitrust laws may be brought, namely, in a district 
     where it is an inhabitant and also where 'it may be found 
     or transacts business.'  Conversely, it should follow that 
     if a corporation is not an inhabitant of, is not found in, 
     and does not transact business in, the district, suit may 
     not be so brought.  By statutory grant if suit is brought 
     as prescribed in this section 'all process in such cases 
     may be served in the district of which it [the corporation] 
     is an inhabitant, or wherever it may be found.'  Thus, 'in 
     such cases,' Congress has seen fit to enlarge the limits of 
     the otherwise restricted territorial areas of process.  In 
     other words, the extraterritorial service privilege is given 
     only when the other requirements are satisfied.
     
Id.

     In our view, the Second Circuit's unadorned interpretation 
of Section 12 is clearly correct.  See also Herbert Hoven-

kamp, Personal Jurisdiction and Venue in Private Antitrust 
Actions in the Federal Courts, 67 Iowa L. Rev. 485, 509 (1982) 
("A better approach is to interpret section 12 the way it is 
written.  Worldwide service is proper only when the action is 
brought in the district where the defendant resides, is found, 
or transacts business.").  A party seeking to take advantage 
of Section 12's liberalized service provisions must follow the 
dictates of both of its clauses.  To read the statute otherwise 
would be to ignore its plain meaning.  Thus, because GTE 
has not shown that the defendants were inhabitants of, may 
be found in, or transacted business in the District, as required 
by Section 12's first clause, it cannot avail itself of Section 
12's second clause.

C.   Jurisdictional Discovery

     Finally, GTE contends that if, on the existing record, there 
are insufficient grounds to support personal jurisdiction, it is 
still entitled to jurisdictional discovery.  We agree.  This 
court has previously held that if a party demonstrates that it 
can supplement its jurisdictional allegations through discov-
ery, then jurisdictional discovery is justified.  See Crane, 814 
F.2d at 760 (vacating, in part, the District Court's judgment, 
because "Crane's case was dismissed with no opportunity for 
discovery on the issue of personal jurisdiction").

     Such is the case here.  The record now before this court is 
plainly inadequate.  We do not even know for certain which 
defendants own and operate which websites.  Even the par-
ties at oral argument agreed that the jurisdictional questions 
at issue are quite different for some defendants as opposed to 
others.  And, as the record now stands, there is absolutely no 
merit to GTE's bold claim that the parent companies and 
subsidiaries involved in this lawsuit should be treated identi-
cally.  Jurisdictional discovery will help to sort out these 
matters.  GTE also claims that it may be able to present new 
facts to bolster the District Court's theory of "substantial 
effects" within the District.  We cannot tell whether jurisdic-
tional discovery will assist GTE on this score, but it is entitled 
to pursue precisely focused discovery aimed at addressing 
matters relating to personal jurisdiction.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the case is hereby remanded to 
the District Court for further proceedings.

                                                          