                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 15, 2002      Decided July 12, 2002 

                           No. 01-1121

          Riggs National Corporation and Subsidiaries, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 
                             Appellee

             Appeal from the United States Tax Court 
                          (No. 24368-89)

     Thomas C. Durham argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were Joel V. Williamson, Russell R. Young, 
Kim Marie Boylan, Charles W. Hall and Stephen M. Fel-
dhaus.

     Stephen D. Gardner was on the brief for amicus curiae 
National Foreign Trade Council, Inc. in support of appellant.

     Charles Bricken, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief was 
David English Carmack, Attorney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  This case returns to us after 
decision on remand by the United States Tax Court.  Riggs 
Bank, asserting that the Central Bank of Brazil paid taxes to 
the Brazilian government on its behalf with respect to inter-
est income on loans it had made to the Central Bank, claimed 
foreign tax credits under section 901 of the Internal Revenue 
Code.  The Commissioner disallowed the credits and the Tax 
Court denied Riggs's petition for relief.  Upon review, we 
conclude that official tax receipts that the Central Bank 
submitted on behalf of Riggs Bank are entitled to the pre-
sumption of regularity.  Holding that the Commissioner 
failed to rebut this presumption through clear and specific 
evidence that the taxes had not, in fact, been paid, we reverse 
the decision of the Tax Court and hold that Riggs is entitled 
to the tax credits.  We remand to the Tax Court for determi-
nation of whether the tax credits owed to Riggs should be 
reduced by offsetting subsidies reportedly paid to the Central 
Bank.

               I. Background and Prior Proceedings

     The origins of this case are set out more fully in our prior 
opinion Riggs National Corporation & Subsidiaries v. Com-
missioner, 163 F.3d 1363 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (Riggs II), and will 
not be repeated at length here.  We instead provide an 
overview of this case's prior history with a recitation of the 
facts giving rise to the issues now before us.

     Riggs National Corporation's subsidiary, Riggs Bank 
("Riggs"), made loans to the Central Bank of Brazil during 
the early to mid-1980's.  These loans were of the "net loan" 
variety.  In a net loan, the borrower contractually agrees to 
pay both the interest on the loan to the lender and any local 
(in this case, Brazilian) tax that the lender incurs as a result 

of the interest income.  The attractiveness of such a loan is 
obvious:  the lender receives the agreed upon interest income 
while the borrower is obligated to pay any tax that the lender 
owes on that interest.  Making these types of loans even 
more appealing is an added benefit resulting from the United 
States's Internal Revenue Code ("IRC").  Under section 901 
of the IRC, a United States taxpayer is able to take a credit 
against his U.S. tax liability on income earned in a foreign 
country equal to the amount of foreign tax paid on that 
income.  26 U.S.C. s 901.  Thus, by providing ordinary net 
loans (i.e., net loans to individual foreign borrowers), Riggs 
could take a credit equal to the amount of taxes that Brazilian 
borrowers paid to Brazil on Riggs's behalf without running 
afoul of the IRC.  See Riggs II, 163 F.3d at 1365;  Continen-
tal Illinois Corp. v. Commissioner, 998 F.2d 513, 516-17 (7th 
Cir. 1993).

     At issue in Riggs II was the fact that the borrower was the 
Central Bank of Brazil, a government entity that is ordinarily 
immune from tax on its own income under the Federal 
Constitution of Brazil.  Despite its tax immune status, and 
possibly because of pressure from foreign lenders who fa-
vored the tax credits under section 901, Brazil's Minister of 
Finance--the highest ranking Brazilian tax authority--ruled 
that the Central Bank was required under Brazilian law to 
pay the tax obligation it assumed from foreign lenders.  The 
Minister of Finance justified his ruling under the rationale 
that the funds were available for "re-lending" by the Central 
Bank to private Brazilian borrowers.  See Riggs Nat'l Corp. 
v. Commissioner, 107 T.C. 301, 331 (1996) (Riggs I).  The 
Minister concluded that the Central Bank must, "as a substi-
tute for such borrowers [to-be,] pay the income tax incident 
on the interest from January 1, 1984 to the end of the period 
of availability for such funds to be relent."  Riggs II, 163 
F.3d at 1366 (quoting Riggs I, 107 T.C. at 331).  In response, 
the Central Bank issued official tax receipts, called 
"DARFs,"1 to the foreign lenders which purportedly indicat-

__________
     1 Documento de Arrecadacao de Receitas Federais.  DARFs are 
official forms authorized by the Brazilian government as the only 
form to pay taxes and prove payment of those taxes within Brazil.

ed the amount of tax paid on the lender's behalf.  This 
comported with the standard practice in Brazil:  taxpayers 
submit DARFs and the accompanying tax payment to com-
mercial banks, which then transfer the payments to the 
Banco do Brasil, a quasi-public, quasi-private bank that col-
lects taxes on behalf of Brazil's National Treasury.

     Despite the Minister's ruling that the Central Bank was 
required to pay the taxes, and despite the receipt of DARFs 
indicating that the taxes had been paid, the Commissioner 
rejected the DARFs as sufficient proof that the taxes were 
paid, reasoning instead that because the Central Bank was a 
tax immune entity, any tax payments made by the Central 
Bank were voluntary and not "taxes paid or accrued ... to 
any foreign country."  26 U.S.C. s 901(b)(1).  The Commis-
sioner consequently assessed a deficiency against Riggs.  Be-
fore the Tax Court, Riggs submitted its DARFs as proof that 
the Central Bank paid the foreign taxes on Riggs's behalf.  
Riggs also provided the Tax Court with entries from the 
Banco do Brasil which purportedly showed that the Central 
Bank paid to the National Treasury the taxes withheld from 
its payments of interest to Riggs.  The Tax Court, however, 
agreed with the Commissioner that the Central Bank was not 
obligated to pay the taxes and therefore disallowed the tax 
credits.  Riggs I, 107 T.C. at 360.  Riggs appealed.

     On appeal, we held that the Minister of Finance's ruling 
that the Central Bank was obligated to pay the taxes was an 
act of state, which precluded the Commissioner from inquir-
ing into its validity.  We remanded "so that the Tax Court 
may determine in the first instance ... whether the taxes 
were in fact paid by the Central Bank" on Riggs's behalf, and 
whether any of the potential tax credits must be reduced by 
pecuniary benefits, or subsidies, paid to the Central Bank.  
Riggs II, 163 F.3d at 1369.  Pecuniary benefits were original-
ly instituted in 1975 and allowed Brazilian borrowers who 
paid interest to foreign lenders to receive a benefit, or 
subsidy, equal to a percentage of the amount of the tax paid 
with respect to the interest.  The amount of the pecuniary 
benefit was originally 85 percent of the amount of the tax 

paid.  It was reduced to 50 percent of the tax in July 1979, 
increased to 95 percent of the tax in December 1979, reduced 
to 40 percent of the tax in May 1980, and reduced to zero in 
June 1985.  See Riggs I, 107 T.C. at 308.

     On remand, the Tax Court ruled that Riggs failed to 
establish that the Central Bank had, in fact, paid the taxes at 
issue on Riggs's behalf.  Riggs Nat'l Corp. & Subs. v. Com-
missioner, T.C. Memo. 2001-12, 81 T.C.M. 1023, 2001 Tax Ct. 
Memo LEXIS 20, *66 (Jan. 22, 2001) (Riggs III).  Specifical-
ly, the Tax Court noted that letters and spreadsheets the 
Central Bank submitted with the DARFs reported that, for 
some of the payments, a pecuniary benefit had been reported 
as received after June 28, 1985.  That is, the Central Bank 
continued to report pecuniary benefit information in docu-
ments submitted to Morgan Bank, the Central Bank's agent 
to foreign lenders such as Riggs, after Brazil stopped provid-
ing the pecuniary benefits.  Reasoning that errors of this sort 
would not have been made if payment of the taxes had 
actually occurred (in other words, had the Central Bank 
actually paid the taxes, it would know that it did not receive a 
pecuniary benefit for those tax payments after June 28, 1985 
and would therefore not report the receipt of such), the Tax 
Court found that the DARFs issued by the Central Bank 
were not reliable proof that the withholding taxes in issue had 
actually been paid by the Central Bank.  Id.  The Tax Court 
also disagreed with secondary accounting evidence relied on 
by Riggs to indicate that the taxes had been paid.  Id.  
Consequently, the Tax Court ruled that Riggs was not enti-
tled to the foreign tax credits at issue.  Id.  After ruling that 
Riggs was ineligible for the tax credits, the Tax Court had no 
occasion to reach the issue of whether Riggs's tax credits 
should be reduced by the value of any pecuniary benefits paid 
to the Central Bank.  Id.

     In this appeal, Riggs asserts that the Commissioner acted 
contrary to Treasury Regulations by refusing to accept the 
DARFs as definitive proof that the foreign taxes were paid.  
Riggs also contends that the DARFs are entitled to the 
presumption of administrative regularity and must be deemed 
reliable.  Finally, Riggs argues that its foreign tax credits 

should not be reduced by the offsetting pecuniary benefits 
paid to the Central Bank.  The Commissioner, however, 
contends that Riggs has the burden of proving its entitlement 
to the foreign tax credits.  The Commissioner relies on the 
language of IRC s 905(b), which allows foreign tax credits 
only to the extent "the taxpayer establishes to the satisfaction 
of the Secretary" the amount of foreign tax paid.  26 U.S.C. 
s 905(b).  The Commissioner argues that this section autho-
rizes him to require more satisfactory proof that foreign taxes 
were, in fact, paid.  The Commissioner also contends that 
Riggs waived its "presumption of regularity" argument by not 
raising it before the Tax Court, but that even if a presump-
tion of regularity exists with respect to the DARFs, irregular-
ities accompanying the issuance and submission of the 
DARFs rebut that presumption.  The Commissioner further 
contends that Riggs's secondary accounting evidence is un-
persuasive to show that the taxes were actually paid to the 
National Treasury by the Central Bank.

                           II. Analysis

A.    Availability of Foreign Tax Credits

     When we remanded this case to the Tax Court for it to 
determine "whether the taxes were in fact paid by the 
Central Bank," Riggs II, 163 F.3d at 1369, the Tax Court was 
required to determine whether the taxes were paid within the 
meaning of section 901 of the Internal Revenue Code.  Deter-
mining whether taxes for which a credit is sought under 
section 901 have been paid is governed by section 905 of the 
IRC.  Section 905 reads in applicable part that the foreign 
tax credit "shall be allowed only if the taxpayer establishes to 
the satisfaction of the Secretary ... the tax paid...."  I.R.C. 
s 905(b)(2).  The amount the taxpayer claims as having been 
paid, and thus the amount of the credit sought, shall "be 
determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary."  
Id.  For the type of credit at issue in this case, Treasury 
Regulation s 1.905-2 requires that if a taxpayer corporation, 
like Riggs, seeks to claim a foreign tax credit, the taxpayer 
must submit a Form 1118, Computation of Foreign Tax 

Credit--Corporations.  See Treas. Reg. s 1.905-2(a)(1).  This 
form "must be carefully filled in with all the information 
called for and with the calculations of credits indicated.  
Except where it is established to the satisfaction of the 
district director that it is impossible for the taxpayer to 
furnish such evidence, the taxpayer must provide upon re-
quest the receipt for each such tax payment if credit is sought 
for taxes already paid....  This receipt ... must be either 
the original, a duplicate original, a duly certified or authenti-
cated copy, or a sworn copy."  Treas. Reg. s 1.905-2(a)(2).  
In this case, while Riggs must in the first instance submit 
direct evidence of foreign tax withholding and payment where 
possible (i.e., "the receipt for each ... tax payment"), the 
district director has the discretion to accept secondary evi-
dence.  See id. s 1.905-2(b).  Regardless of the evidence 
upon which the Commissioner ultimately relies, the taxpayer 
"must plainly establish his right [to the foreign tax credit] by 
showing that he has fulfilled all the conditions upon which the 
allowance of the credit is made to depend."  Irving Air Chute 
Co. v. Commissioner, 143 F.2d 256, 259 (2d Cir. 1944).

     Riggs contends that it provided the Commissioner with 
both direct and secondary evidence that the taxes were paid 
on its behalf.  It is undisputed that Riggs provided the 
Commissioner with a DARF, or tax receipt, for each tax 
payment credit that it sought, and that it recorded the 
amount of taxes paid on an accompanying Form 1118.2  Riggs 
thus insists before this Court that the Commissioner failed to 
comply with Treas. Reg. s 1.905-2(a)(2) by not accepting the 
submission of the DARFs as definitive proof that the Central 
Bank paid the foreign taxes on Riggs's behalf.  We disagree, 
although our disagreement is not fatal to Riggs's position.  
The regulations do not require the Commissioner to accept 
foreign tax receipts at face value.  It follows that the regula-
tions do not require the Commissioner to allow foreign tax 
credits without scrutinizing the tax receipts on which the 

__________
     2 Indeed, the Tax Court accepted Riggs's DARFs into evidence as 
authenticated copies of the original tax receipts and agreed the 
receipts were official records of the Brazilian government.

claim for credits is premised.  In fact, the regulations do not 
require the Commissioner to take any action at all.  Rather, 
the regulations only set forth the necessary evidence a tax-
payer must provide, upon request, to the Commissioner if 
that taxpayer intends to claim a foreign tax credit.  This 
evidentiary requirement does not require the Commissioner 
to accept the tax receipts as sufficient proof that the taxes 
were paid.  Indeed, if, as here, the Commissioner questions 
the legitimacy of the accompanying receipts, section 1.905-2 
in no way compels the Commissioner to ignore a perceived 
inconsistency and accept the receipts as unquestionable proof 
of payment.  We conclude, therefore, that mere submission of 
a DARF is not absolute proof that the taxes reported therein 
were paid.

     Although we hold that the submission of DARFs, as re-
quired under section 1.905-2, is not conclusive proof of a 
foreign tax payment, we nonetheless conclude that the 
DARFs are entitled to a presumption of regularity.  Common 
law has long recognized a presumption of regularity for 
actions and records of public officials.  See United States v. 
Chemical Foundation, 272 U.S. 1, 14-15 (1926);  American 
Federation of Government Employees v. Reagan, 870 F.2d 
723, 727-28 & n.33 (D.C. Cir. 1989).  The presumption also 
applies to the actions of tax officials and in applying United 
States tax law.  See R.H. Stearns Co. v. United States, 291 
U.S. 54, 62-63 (1934);  cf. Utah Power & Light Co. v. Pfost, 
286 U.S. 165, 190 (1932).  Most pertinently, it applies to the 
actions and records of foreign public officials.  See United 
States v. King, 44 U.S. (3 How.) 773, 785-86 (1845);  Murarka 
v. Bachrack Bros., Inc., 215 F.2d 547, 552-53 (2d Cir. 1954).  
We therefore conclude that a DARF, as an official tax receipt 
of the Brazilian government, is entitled to a presumption of 
regularity.  While not irrebuttable, this presumption may 
only be rebutted through clear or specific evidence.  "The 
presumption of regularity supports the official acts of public 
officers and, in the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, 
courts presume that they have properly discharged their 
official duties."  Chemical Foundation, 272 U.S. at 14-15;  see 
also United States v. Studevent, 116 F.3d 1559, 1563 (D.C. 

Cir. 1997).  Thus the Commissioner must provide clear and 
specific evidence that the DARFs submitted on behalf of 
Riggs were inaccurate representations of the amount of tax 
paid by the Central Bank in order to justify its denial of 
Riggs's claimed tax credit.

     The Commissioner argues that Riggs waived its "presump-
tion of regularity" argument by not raising it before the Tax 
Court.  We disagree.  Riggs clearly argued before the Tax 
Court that the Commissioner had the burden of proving that 
the DARFs were inaccurate accountings of the amount of 
foreign tax paid on Riggs's behalf.  Riggs's argument before 
this Court--that the DARFs must be given a presumption of 
regularity--is merely an improved articulation of that previ-
ously raised argument.  Riggs is not raising a novel issue or 
argument before us that it failed to first bring before the Tax 
Court.  Riggs is instead reasserting and restating its earlier 
position--that the Commissioner has the burden of disproving 
the accuracy of the DARFs, and the Commissioner failed to 
meet that burden.

     The Commissioner argues next that inconsistencies in docu-
ments accompanying the submission of the DARFs "call into 
question" the accuracy and validity of the DARFs.  Specifi-
cally, the Commissioner relies on the finding of the Tax Court 
that schedules, or spreadsheets, that accompanied letters 
from the Central Bank and that were submitted along with 
the DARFs indicated that the Central Bank had received a 40 
percent pecuniary benefit with respect to the tax payments, 
even though the pecuniary benefit had by then been repealed.  
The Tax Court reasoned that:

     If, as [taxpayer] asserts, the Central Bank actually had 
     paid withholding taxes on [taxpayer's] ... behalf ..., we 
     then find inexplicable the Central Bank's erroneous ac-
     tions well after June 28, 1985, in continuing to report its 
     having received a nonexistent "pecuniary benefit."
     
Riggs III, 2001 Tax Ct. Memo LEXIS 20, at *65.  Thus when 
making its finding that the foreign tax had not been paid, the 
Tax Court relied on the reported receipt of a pecuniary 
benefit after the benefits were reduced to zero.  In the first 

instance, we note that an inconsistency that merely "call[s] 
into question" the validity of an official document is not "clear 
evidence" of that document's invalidity, or "clear evidence" of 
anything, for that matter.  That being so, we are not con-
vinced that the erroneous reporting of a pecuniary benefit in 
a document that accompanied the submission of an official 
government record entitled to a presumption of regularity, is 
clear and specific evidence that the official government record 
is itself erroneous.  The spreadsheets and transmittal letters 
indicated the receipt of a nonexistent pecuniary benefit.  The 
obvious irregularities in the accompanying documents do not, 
however, indicate clear and specific evidence that taxes re-
ported as paid in the DARFs were not paid.  At best, the 
accompanying documents reflect clerical errors;  at worst, 
they reflect the erroneous receipt of a disallowed pecuniary 
benefit.  Neither scenario, however, is clear evidence that the 
Central Bank failed to remit foreign tax payments on behalf 
of Riggs, as indicated by the DARFs.  Therefore, we con-
clude that the Commissioner did not rely on clear and specific 
evidence necessary to rebut the presumption of regularity 
that attaches to the DARFs.

     We understand that the payment of foreign taxes and the 
receipt of a pecuniary benefit are necessarily related:  while 
the pecuniary benefits were in effect, the pecuniary benefit 
was dependent on the payment of foreign taxes.  As we 
understand the Brazilian tax system, a borrower paid the 
entire amount of interest owed on a foreign debt and then 
later received a credit equal to the amount of the pecuniary 
benefit.  Such a system necessitates two separate and inde-
pendent transactions.  Perhaps if the payment of taxes and 
the receipt of the pecuniary benefits had taken place through 
one transaction (e.g., the borrower made interest payments 
that were already reduced by the amount of the pecuniary 
benefit), evidence of one (payment of the tax or receipt of the 
pecuniary benefit) might bear strongly upon the other.  But 
given that the receipt of a pecuniary benefit was the result of 
a separate transaction, we are altogether unconvinced that 
the impossibility of one establishes the impossibility of the 
other.  Thus the Central Bank's reported receipt of a nonex-

istent pecuniary benefit is not clear and specific evidence that 
the DARF, an official government document otherwise enti-
tled to a presumption of regularity, is erroneous.

     Inconsistencies or inaccuracies in documents accompanying 
official government records do not inherently rebut the pre-
sumption of regularity attaching to those official records, 
especially when the accompanying documents do not directly 
address the matter sought to be proved by the official rec-
ords.  Because the DARFs are entitled to a presumption of 
regularity, and because the Tax Court based its decision on 
inconsistencies in accompanying documents rather than the 
DARFs themselves, and because the accompanying docu-
ments did not in fact address the issue of whether the foreign 
taxes had, in fact, been paid, we conclude that the Commis-
sioner did not have clear and specific evidence that the 
DARFs were themselves erroneous representations of 
Riggs's claimed tax credits.

     As the Tax Court erroneously based its decision to reject 
the DARFs on the wrongly reported pecuniary benefit, we 
need not consider the other arguments, such as inconsisten-
cies in Riggs's secondary accounting evidence, now offered by 
the Commissioner to explain the Tax Court's decision.  We 
therefore reverse the decision of the Tax Court and hold that 
the foreign tax credits should have been allowed.

B.   Offsetting Subsidies

     In our initial remand of this case to the Tax Court, we 
directed it to determine whether any of Riggs's potential tax 
credits should be reduced by the pecuniary benefits, or 
subsidies, reportedly paid to the Central Bank.  Riggs II, 163 
F.3d at 1369.  Given the Tax Court's decision in favor of the 
Commissioner, the Tax Court never reached this issue.  As 
we now hold that the foreign tax credits should have been 
allowed, this issue is ripe for consideration.  However, rather 
than decide this issue for the first time on appeal, we remand 
this case to the Tax Court solely to determine whether any of 
the tax credits owed to Riggs must be reduced by the 
subsidies reportedly paid to the Central Bank.

                         III. Conclusion

     The official actions of foreign governments are entitled to a 
presumption of regularity.  While this presumption is not 
absolute, it may be rebutted only through clear and specific 
evidence.  The DARFs submitted by the Central Bank indi-
cating that it had paid taxes on Riggs's behalf are entitled to 
the presumption of regularity unless rebutted by the Com-
missioner.  We conclude that irregularities in documents 
accompanying the DARFs that do not specifically pertain to 
whether the taxes had, in fact, been paid do not rise to the 
level of clear and specific evidence showing that the taxes 
were never remitted.  We therefore reverse the decision of 
the Tax Court disallowing Riggs's tax credits for the taxes 
paid by the Central Bank on Riggs's behalf with respect to 
interest income on loans Riggs made to the Central Bank.  
We remand the case solely for the Tax Court to determine 
whether the tax credits should be reduced by any subsidies 
that may have been paid to the Central Bank.

                                                                       