                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 22, 2002      Decided June 28, 2002 

                           No. 01-1296

          American Forest and Paper Association, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     Russell S. Frye argued the cause for the petitioner.  Rich-
ard Wasserstrom was on brief.  Christina B. Parascandola 
entered an appearance.

     Andrew J. Doyle, Attorney, United States Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for the respondent.  Patrice Simms 
and Patricia Embrey, Attorneys, United States Environmen-
tal Protection Agency, were on brief.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  The American 
Forest and Paper Association, Inc. (Association), a national 
trade association of the forest, paper and wood products 
industry, seeks review of a notice published by the Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA) denying the Association's 
petition to delete the substance methanol1 from the list of 
"hazardous air pollutants" (HAPs) pursuant to section 112(b) 
of the Clean Air Act (CAA), 42 U.S.C. s 7412(b).  See 66 Fed. 
Reg. 21,929 (May 2, 2001).  Section 112(b)(3)(A) requires that 
EPA "either grant or deny the petition by publishing a 
written explanation of the reasons for the Administrator's 
decision."  42 U.S.C. s 7412(b)(3)(a).2  We review EPA's 
notice of denial under the Administrative Procedure Act to 
determine whether it is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
discretion, or not in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A).3  For the reasons set out below, we conclude 
__________
     1 Methanol, also known as "wood alcohol," is a clear liquid that is 
released into the air when wood is processed.

     2 Section 112(b)(2) describes HAPs as

     pollutants which present, or may present, through inhalation or 
     other routes of exposure, a threat of adverse human health 
     effects (including, but not limited to, substances which are 
     known to be, or may reasonably be anticipated to be, carcino-
     genic, mutagenic, teratogenic, neurotoxic, which cause repro-
     ductive dysfunction, or which are acutely or chronically toxic) 
     or adverse environmental effects whether through ambient 
     concentrations, bioaccumulation, deposition, or otherwise, but 
     not including releases subject to regulation under subsection (r) 
     of this section as a result of emissions to the air.                         
42 U.S.C. s 7412(b)(2).

     3 The Association erroneously argues that EPA is required to 
issue a far more extensive decision under CAA section 307(d)(9), 42 
U.S.C. s 7606(d), one "that includes the factual data on which the 
rule is based, the methodology used in obtaining and analyzing the 
data, the major legal interpretations and policy considerations 
underlying the rule, and a response to comments or criticisms of 

EPA's explanation of its reasons for denying the delisting 
petition satisfies the statutory standard and we therefore 
deny the Association's petition for review.

                                I.

     Section 112 requires EPA to set emission standards for 
"hazardous air pollutants."  See 42 U.S.C. s 7412.  In 1990 
the Congress amended section 112 to establish a statutory list 
of HAPs, including methanol.  See 42 U.S.C. s 7412(b)(1).  
Section 112(b)(2) requires that EPA "periodically review the 
list" and "publish the results thereof and, where appropriate, 
revise such list by rule, adding pollutants."  42 U.S.C. 
s 7412(b)(2).  Section 7412(b)(3) provides that "any person 
may petition the Administrator to modify the list of hazardous 
air pollutants under this subsection by adding or deleting a 
substance."  Id. s 7412(b)(3)(A).  EPA is required (1) to "add 
a substance to the list upon a showing by the petitioner or on 
the Administrator's own determination that the substance is 
an air pollutant and that emissions, ambient concentrations, 
bioaccumulation or deposition of the substance are known to 
cause or may reasonably be anticipated to cause adverse 
effects to human health or adverse environmental effects," id. 
s 7412(b)(3)(B);  and (2) to "delete a substance from the list 
upon a showing by the petitioner or on the Administrator's 
own determination that there is adequate data on the health 
and environmental effects of the substance to determine that 

__________
EPA's proposed action."  Pet'r Br. at 45.  CAA section 307(d)(9), 
however, by its terms applies only to "rulemakings" pursuant to the 
CAA sections enumerated in section 307(d)(1), 42 U.S.C. 
s 7607(d)(1).  Section 112(b) does not contemplate a formal rule-
making and is not among the sections enumerated in section 
307(d)(1) (although other subsections of section 112 are included 
there).  EPA was therefore not required to respond point-by-point 
to each objection raised in the Association's comments below.  Its 
decision may be upheld as long as EPA did not "entirely fail[ ] to 
consider" "an important aspect of the problem."  See Motor Vehicle 
Mfrs. Ass'n of the United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. 
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983).

emissions, ambient concentrations, bioaccumulation or deposi-
tion of the substance may not reasonably be anticipated to 
cause any adverse effects to the human health or adverse 
environmental effects," id. s 7412(b)(3)(C).

     The Association petitioned EPA to delist methanol in 
March 1996, relying on information it claimed shows exposure 
to methanol does not result in adverse effects to human 
health.4  "[T]o assess the potential for adverse human health 
effects due to inhalation exposure" to a particular substance 
EPA generally uses an "inhalation reference concentration" 
(RfC), 66 Fed. Reg. at 21,931, which "represents the estimat-
ed maximum exposure to a pollutant, as extrapolated from 
animal studies, that a human can tolerate continuously for 70 
years without experiencing any adverse health effect," Chem. 
Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 28 F.3d 1259, 1265 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  
Because EPA had not yet established an inhalation RfC for 
methanol, the Association proposed a "safe exposure level" 
(SEL) for the substance, asserting that "exposures at or 
below the SEL can be expected to produce no adverse human 
health effects from lifetime inhalation exposures."  66 Fed. 
Reg. at 21,931.  The Association derived its SEL from the 
"Rogers Study," which examined the effect on mice of metha-
nol exposure for seven hours per day.  The Association 
converted the No-Observable-Adverse-Effect-Level 
(NOAEL) derived from the Rogers Study to a human equiva-
lent and adjusted it for interspecies extrapolation and for 
individual variation.  The Association offered the resulting 
level of 83 milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3) as the SEL for 
methanol.  The Association further asserted that the highest 
predicted 24-hour average concentration of methanol from 
known sources is 3.65 mg/m3.  Because this maximum expo-
sure level was below its proposed SEL, the Association 
claimed that methanol exposure does not cause adverse ef-

__________
     4 The Association also offered evidence to show methanol does not 
cause adverse environmental effects but, because it denied the 
petition based on potential adverse health effects, EPA found it 
unnecessary "to make final determinations regarding these ele-
ments of the petition."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,939.  Accordingly, we 
too decline to address the environmental issues.

fects and therefore should be delisted pursuant to section 
112(b)(3)(C).  The Association supplemented its petition peri-
odically until EPA published a "notice of receipt of a complete 
petition" on July 19, 1999.  See 64 Fed. Reg. 38,668.  Subse-
quently the Association submitted additional materials ad-
dressing the "Burbacher Study," published in October 1999, 
which examined the effects of methanol inhalation on pri-
mates and which the Association contended supports delisting 
methanol.

     Following a comment period, EPA issued its notice of 
denial on May 2, 2001.  While generally approving the studies 
and the methodology the Association had used, EPA disa-
greed with the Association's analysis in three crucial respects.

     First, EPA took issue with the Association's SEL, contend-
ing it should have incorporated a "duration adjustment," to 
account for the difference between the Rogers Study's 7-hour 
daily exposure and potential human daily exposure of 24 
hours;5  and, in addition, it should have been derived using the 
"benchmark dose" (BMD) methodology6 rather than using the 
NOAEL methodology as the Association did.  EPA deter-
mined that recalculating the SEL using a duration adjust-
ment and the BMD methodology "would yield an SEL on the 
order of 4-6 mg/m3."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,932.  Because these 
values "are at the approximate midpoint of the values (0.3-30 
mg/m3) that might be derived from the data of the Burbacher 
Primate Study," EPA concluded that "a range of 0.3 to 30 
mg/m3 represents the most appropriate criterion for deter-
mining whether methanol emissions may reasonably be antici-
pated to cause adverse human health effects" and that "24-

__________
     5 The Association initially proposed an SEL of 24 mg/m3 which 
reflected a duration adjustment but subsequently advocated the 
higher 83 mg/m3 SEL without a duration adjustment.  See Delisting 
Petition at 2, 30-32;  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,932.

     6 BMD "is defined as the statistical lower confidence limit on the 
dose estimated to produce a predetermined level of change in 
response (the benchmark response--BMR) relative to controls."  
Proposed Test Rule for Hazardous Air Pollutants, 61 Fed. Reg. 
33,178, 33,179-80 (1996).

hour exposures below 0.3 mg/m3 are not likely to result in 
adverse human health effects."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,935-36.  
EPA cautioned that it was "unable to make a more precise 
determination at this time regarding the exposure levels at 
which adverse effects are likely to occur."  66 Fed. Reg. at 
21,936.

     Second, EPA challenged the Association's maximum 24-
hour exposure level as too low.  Based on the data initially 
submitted by the Association, EPA suggested that the "maxi-
mum 24-hour exposures to methanol emissions could be in 
the range of 2 to 7 mg/m3, but that such exposures may not 
reasonably be expected to exceed 7 mg/m3."  66 Fed. Reg. at 
21,939.

     Third, EPA determined that, contrary to the Association's 
contention, the Burbacher Study in fact supports retaining 
methanol on the list because it revealed several possible 
adverse health effects, namely, a decrease in gestation time, 
an increase in the number of required caesarian-section 
births, and, in prenatally exposed offspring, instances of a 
"severe wasting syndrome," concentration-related delay in 
sensorimotor development and lower performance on an in-
fant intelligence test.  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,932-33.  EPA 
concluded that, "based on the weight of evidence, ... there 
are reproductive and developmental health consequences fol-
lowing exposure to methanol in primates (Burbacher et al.) 
and that these effects should be considered relevant to poten-
tial risks in humans."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,935.

     Because EPA's maximum exposure level exceeded the floor 
of its SEL range and because the Burbacher Study, as EPA 
construed it, indicated potential adverse effects from metha-
nol, EPA determined it "c[ould ]not conclude that there are 
adequate data to determine that emissions of methanol may 
not reasonably be anticipated to cause any adverse effects to 
human health."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,929.

     The Association petitioned for review of the notice of denial 
on July 2, 2001.

                               II.

     The Association raises a series of challenges to the EPA's 
notice of denial.  We find none of them persuasive.

     First, the Association asserts EPA misinterpreted the stat-
utory standard for delisting a substance to permit it to rely 
on mere speculation about adverse effects.  Section 
112(b)(3)(C) requires that EPA delist an HAP "upon a show-
ing by the petitioner or on the Administrator's own determi-
nation that there is adequate data on the health and environ-
mental effects of the substance to determine that emissions, 
ambient concentrations, bioaccumulation or deposition of the 
substance may not reasonably be anticipated to cause any 
adverse effects to the human health or adverse environmental 
effects."  42 U.S.C. s 7412(b)(3)(C).  EPA construed the 
statutory language to impose a "burden ... on a petitioner to 
demonstrate that the available data support an affirmative 
determination that emissions of a substance may not be 
reasonably anticipated to result in adverse effects on human 
health or the environment" so that "EPA will not remove a 
substance from the list of HAP based merely on the inability 
to conclude that emissions of the substance will cause adverse 
effects on human health or the environment."  66 Fed. Reg. 
at 21,930.  We review EPA's construction of the statutory 
language under

     the familiar Chevron analysis:
     
          If ... " 'Congress has directly spoken to the precise 
          question at issue,' " we "must give effect to Congress's 
          'unambiguously expressed intent.' "  Secretary of La-
          bor v. F[ed. Mine Safety & Health Review Comm'n], 
          111 F.3d 913, 917 (D.C. Cir.1997) (quoting Chevron 
          USA, Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 
          467 U.S. 837, 842, 104 S.Ct. 2778, [2781], 81 L.Ed.2d 
          694 (1984)).  "If 'the statute is silent or ambiguous 
          with respect to the specific issue,' we ask whether the 
          agency's position rests on a 'permissible construction 
          of the statute.' "  Id. (quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 
          843, 104 S.Ct. 2778, [2782], 81 L.Ed.2d 694).
          
     Cyprus Emerald Resources Corp. v. Fed. Mine Safety & 
     Health Review Comm'n, 195 F.3d 42, 45 (D.C. Cir. 1999).
     
National Multi Housing Council v. EPA, No. 01-1159, slip 
op. at 4 (D.C. Cir. June 7, 2002).  EPA's interpretation easily 
passes muster under Chevron.  The statutory language un-
ambiguously places on a delisting petitioner the burden to 
make a "showing" that "there is adequate data" about a 
substance to determine exposure to it "may not reasonably be 
anticipated to cause" adverse effects.  This is precisely what 
EPA has construed it to require.  To the extent the Associa-
tion asserts EPA improperly applied the burden by relying on 
speculation, its assertion dovetails with its arbitrary-and-
capricious arguments, which we address next.

     The Association challenges EPA's technical calculations on 
a variety of grounds.  According EPA the "extreme degree of 
deference" it is due when "evaluating scientific data within its 
technical expertise," see Huls Am., Inc. v. Browner, 83 F.3d 
445, 452 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (internal quotations and citations 
omitted), we find its calculations are not arbitrary or capri-
cious.

     The Association argues that EPA's decision fails a "reality 
check" in two respects.  First, the Association points out that 
methanol levels far higher than the maximum predicted for 
industrial source exposure have been reported in unexposed, 
healthy humans and primates, particularly in the expelled 
breath of study subjects who had recently consumed substan-
tial amounts of fruit.  In the notice of denial, EPA set forth 
specific reasons why the methanol levels in study subjects' 
mouths after fruit consumption may not correspond to--and 
may in fact considerably exceed--the actual methanol levels 
in the subjects' blood.  See 66 Fed. Reg. at 21,935 (noting 
there was "no discussion as to whether these individuals 
rinsed their mouths out after consuming the fruit" and no 
"correction for off-gassing of methanol from the residual 
mouth contents or stomach contents");  see also Joint Appen-
dix (JA) 824-25.  EPA also noted that the high levels of 
methanol measured represented "an extreme case" and that 
consumption of fruit sufficient to produce them "most likely 

involves acute GI effects sufficient to discourage the at-
tempt."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,935.  Second, the Association 
contends that pharmacokinetic models show that an SEL of 
0.3 mg/m3 causes only a minuscule and inconsequential in-
crease in an exposed subject's blood methanol level.  EPA 
has reasonably rejected the Association's pharmacokinetic 
models as "not targeted to humans likely to be the most 
sensitive to methanol," notably pregnant women, developing 
fetuses and persons with enzyme and vitamin deficiencies.  
See Resp't Br. at 57;  JA 824 (noting "uncertainty in the 
[Association's interspecies] extrapolations, notably character-
ization of pregnancy and fetal transfer" which can be ad-
dressed "with the use of newer physiologically-based pharma-
cokinetic models");  755-56 (summary of meeting between 
Association and EPA indicating EPA scientist stated "EPA 
needs to see a data set of methanol levels in pregnant 
women").7  In addition, EPA noted the possible short window 
of exposure for adverse developmental effects to occur in 
developing fetuses and its consequent concern that, despite 
natural fluctuations in background methanol blood levels, 
there is a risk of negative effects from even short term peaks.  
See JA 476, 755.8

__________
     7 The Association asserts EPA "apparently ignor[ed] the fact that 
the pharmacokinetic data in the HEI Report were in pregnant 
female primates, and those data show no effect of pregnancy on 
methanol distribution or metabolism."  Reply Br. at 9 (emphasis 
original).  The HEI Report acknowledged, however, that "although 
Burbacher found that formate did not accumulate in maternal blood, 
the present study does not resolve the issue of possible formate 
accumulation in fetal tissues."  JA 449.

     8 The Association challenges EPA's justifications here, and else-
where, as improperly post hoc.  The record excerpts we cite, 
however, reveal that EPA relied below, at least in part, on the same 
reasoning it espouses here.  See National Mining Ass'n v. Mine 
Safety & Health Admin., 116 F.3d 520, 534 (D.C. Cir. 1997) ("In 
evaluating agency action, we look at the reasons given by the 
agency, not 'counsel's post hoc rationalizations.'  Motor Vehicle 
Mfrs. [Assoc. v. State Farm, 463 U.S. 29, 50 (1983)].  ' "[W]e will, 
however, 'uphold a decision of less than ideal clarity if the agency's 

     Next, the Association challenges EPA's decision to calcu-
late the SEL using the BMD methodology (specifically, the 
BMDL-5 lower confidence level) rather than the NOAEL.  
In the Association's view, the BMD introduces an "unex-
plained, unacknowledged level of conservativism," Pet'r Br. at 
22,9 and is, in any event, an untested, experimental approach.  
"We may reject an agency's choice of a scientific model 'only 
when the model bears no rational relationship to the charac-
teristics of the data to which it is applied.' "  See National 
Wildlife Fed'n v. EPA, 286 F.3d 554, 562 (D.C. Cir. 2002) 
(quoting Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 135 F.3d 791, 802 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing Am. Iron & Steel Inst. v. EPA, 115 
F.3d 979, 1005 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  Chem. Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 
28 F.3d 1259, 1265 (D.C. Cir. 1994))).  That is not the case 
here.  EPA has long advocated the BMD as superior to the 
NOAEL because "[u]nlike the NOAEL, the BMD takes into 
account dose-response information."  See The Use of the 
Benchmark Dose Approach to Health Risk Assessment, at 2 
(Feb. 1995) (available at http://www.epa.gov);  see also EPA 
Draft Benchmark Dose Technical Guidance Document, at 3 
(Oct. 2000) (available at http://www.epa.gov) ("[T]he BMD 
approach is an alternative to the NOAEL/LOAEL approach 
that has been used for many years in dose-response assess-

__________
path may reasonably be discerned." '  Id. at 43, 103 S.Ct. at 2866 
(quoting Bowman Transp., Inc. v. Arkansas-Best Freight Sys., 
Inc., 419 U.S. 281, 286, 95 S.Ct. 438, 442, 42 L.Ed.2d 447 (1974))");  
Southern Pac. Transp. Co. v. ICC, 69 F.3d 583, 594 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
("The ultimate question, however, is whether the court can discern 
the agency's path, based on the record and not on post hoc 
justifications.").

     9 The Association similarly contends, in footnotes, that EPA 
should not have used a duration adjustment.  EPA concluded "the 
current state of scientific understanding tends to support incorpo-
rating duration-adjustment in the petitioner's derivation of SEL," 
noting its position was "also consistent with studies showing that 
the critical period for induction of developmental toxicity from 
methanol exposure can be at least as short as 1-2 days."  JA 476.  
The Association offered nothing below contradicting these conclu-
sions or their bases.

ment.  The development of this approach has been pursued 
because of recognized limitations in the NOAEL/LOAEL 
approach.").  The BMD's advantages over NOAEL have also 
been acknowledged by private researchers, including those in 
the Rogers Study who calculated a BMD for methanol.  See 
John M. Rogers et al., The Toxicity of Inhaled Methanol in 
the CD-1 Mouse, with Quantitative Dose-Response Modeling 
Estimation Benchmark Dose, 47 Teratology 175, 176-77 
(1993).  Thus, EPA's choice of the BMD methodology was not 
arbitrary.

     As for EPA's choice of BMD confidence level, the Associa-
tion asserted, citing its technical comments below, that the 
BMDL-5 adds an unjustified "level of conservativism" based 
on the fact that the BMDL-5 produces a much lower SEL 
than does the NOAEL.  EPA, however, took a contrary view 
as did, apparently, the Rogers Study researchers who applied 
the identical BMD.  The "presence of disputing expert wit-
nesses" offers " 'a classic example of a factual dispute the 
resolution of which implicates substantial agency expertise' " 
and requires that we " 'defer to the informed discretion of the 
responsible federal agencies.' "  Wisconsin Valley Improve-
ment Co. v. FERC, 236 F.3d 738, 746-47 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
(quoting Marsh v. Oregon Natural Resources Council, 490 
U.S. 360, 376 377 (1989) (internal quotation omitted)).  We 
defer here to EPA's resolution of the dispute.

     The Association also challenges EPA's determination that 
the "maximum 24-hour exposures could be in the range of 2 
to 7 mg/m3."  66 Fed. Reg. at 21,929.  We need not resolve 
this issue, however, because the lower exposure level the 
Association proposed--3.65 mg/m3--also exceeds EPA's 
threshold SEL of 0.3 mg/m3 (which we uphold) and therefore 
does not support delisting.

     Next, the Association, relying on a report by the Health 
Effect Institute (HEI), which sponsored the Burbacher 
Study, asserts EPA arbitrarily attributed to methanol expo-
sure the adverse effects observed in the Burbacher Study.  
We believe EPA's findings were reasonable.  The HEI Re-
port itself recognized a possible connection between methanol 

and the decreased gestation time, suggesting that "[f]urther 
studies will be required to confirm the association between 
low-level methanol exposure and effects on pregnancy dura-
tion."  JA 377.  Similarly the HEI Report acknowledged that 
"prenatal methanol exposure was associated with the occur-
rence of a wasting syndrome in females after approximately 1 
year of age" but concluded that "further investigations are 
needed to confirm these findings."  JA 425.  Nor did the 
HEI Report rule out methanol exposure as the cause of the 
increased need for caesarian-sections but simply determined 
that "conclusions concerning methanol exposure as a caus-
ative factor in uterine bleeding are not warranted at this 
time."  JA 377 (emphasis added).10  Finally, the HEI Report 
recognized that "[m]ethanol exposure was also associated 
with a delay in early sensorimotor development for male 
infants" and that "[t]he results of the Fagan Test of Infant 
Intelligence indicated a possible effect of methanol exposure 
on visual recognition memory when complex stimuli (social 
problems) were used in testing."  JA 425.  In sum, the HEI 
Report confirms EPA's position that the study data indicate 
methanol may reasonably be anticipated to cause adverse 
health effects but are insufficient at this time to determine 
conclusively that it does or does not.

     Finally, the Association claims EPA violated the express 
directive in section 112(b)(3)(A) that EPA "may not deny a 
petition solely on the basis of inadequate resources or time 
for review."  42 U.S.C. s 7412(b)(3)(A).  We disagree.  EPA 
reviewed the Association's petition thoroughly and at great 
length, repeatedly requesting additional submissions before it 
deemed the Association's petition complete.  In the end, 
based on its analyses, EPA concluded, consistently with the 

__________
     10 The Association also cites an expert opinion that the research-
ers inaccurately concluded the caesarian-section deliveries were 
necessary.  EPA, however, was entitled to rely on the opinion of the 
Burbacher Study researchers rather than on the opinion of the 
Association's expert.  See Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 236 
F.3d at 746-47.  In any event, there is no dispute regarding the 
increase in vaginal bleeding.  See JA 370.

statute, that the Association had not produced sufficient data 
to satisfy its statutory burden.11

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is

                                                                      Denied.

__________
     11 The Association also contends that, "[i]n at least six respects, 
[it] raised points in its petition that were of such import that they 
might have changed EPA's determination, and yet EPA failed to 
respond to those points or explain why it was denying the [Associa-
tion's] petition in spite of those points."  Pet'r Br. at 45.  We reject 
these assertions because, as the foregoing discussion indicates, none 
of the six points cited (failure of the reality check, objection to the 
BMDL-5 methodology and the arguments against attributing to 
methanol exposure the neurobehavioral effects observed in the 
Burbacher Study) is "an important aspect of the problem" that EPA 
"entirely failed to consider."  See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n of the 
United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 
43 (1983).

                      