                  United States Court of Appeals

              FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUUIT

                       Filed April 28, 2000

                           No. 98-1534

                         Billy Proffitt, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

             Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
                            Respondent

         On Petitioner's Petition for Rehearing En Banc

                            ---------

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Silberman, Williams, 
Ginsburg, Sentelle, Henderson, Randolph, Rogers, Tatel, 
and Garland, Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     Petitioner's Petition for Rehearing En Banc and the re-
sponse thereto have been circulated to the full court.  The 
taking of a vote was requested.  Thereafter, a majority of the 
judges of the court in regular active service did not vote in 

favor of the petition.  Upon consideration of the foregoing, it 
is

     ORDERED that the petition be denied.

                              Per Curiam

                              FOR THE COURT:

                              Mark J. Langer, Clerk

      

     Circuit Judges Silberman, Williams, and Sentelle would 
grant the petition for rehearing en banc.

     A statement of Circuit Judge Silberman dissenting from 
the denial of rehearing en banc, in which Circuit Judges 
Williams and Sentelle join, is attached.































     Silberman, Circuit Judge, with whom Williams and 
Sentelle, Circuit Judges, join, dissenting from the denial of 
rehearing en banc:  I believe that this case merits en banc 
consideration, since it concerns the proper application of the 
important and oft-used provision under which the bank regu-
latory agencies bring enforcement actions against individuals 
in the banking industry.  For the reasons set forth in my 
dissent, see Proffitt v. FDIC, 200 F.3d 855, 865 (D.C. Cir. 
2000) (Silberman, J., dissenting), I think that the panel major-
ity's construction is incorrect and gives those agencies virtual-
ly unlimited discretion as to when they initiate proceedings.  
The majority opinion therefore has the curious result of 
formally extending our holding in Johnson v. SEC, 87 F.3d 
484 (D.C. Cir. 1996) to bank regulatory agency enforcement 
actions, but doing so in a manner that nullifies Johnson's 
effect.
     On reflection, I think that my dissent should have respond-
ed more fully to the majority's claim that my reading of 
section 8(e) would fail to give effect to all of the provision's 
language.1  Section 8(e) states that a regulatory agency may 
bring an enforcement action against a banker if, among other 
things, the depository institution "has suffered or will proba-
bly suffer financial loss or other damage."  12 U.S.C. 
s 1818(e)(1)(B)(i).  Reasoning that an institution always "will 
probably suffer" financial loss before it suffers actual financial 
loss, the majority asserts that the provision's language per-
mitting an enforcement action where there is probable or 
actual loss indicates Congress' intent to create separate "has 
suffered" and "will probably suffer" causes of action, each 
with its own limitations period.  See Proffitt, 200 F.3d at 863-
64.  Otherwise, it is argued, the "has suffered" language is 
superfluous.
     I think this analysis--based on the notion that actual loss is 
included within the concept of probable loss--is wholly artifi-
cial.  One does not normally use the phrase "will probably 
suffer" a loss with the intention of incorporating the concept 
of an actual loss.  No one talks or writes like that--certainly 
not a legislative draftsman.  Take for example those provi-
__________
     1 Nor were Proffitt's briefs terribly helpful in responding to this 
argument.

sions in the Sentencing Guidelines that impose an increased 
sentence in the event that the offense causes "death or 
serious bodily injury."  See, e.g., U.S.S.G. s 2D1.1(a)(1).  Of 
course, a person who has been killed has also suffered serious 
bodily injury, and thus the word "death" is in a metaphysical 
sense a "superfluous" term.  But we would not be inclined to 
afford special temporal meaning to this modest overlap--to 
the contrary, it would seem odd if the word "death" were not 
separately mentioned.

     Even if one thought that the term "will probably suffer" a 
loss necessarily includes an actual loss and is therefore redun-
dant, a bit of redundancy is common not only in everyday 
speech but in legislation where the draftsman has an under-
standable desire to, as Macbeth put it, "make assurance 
double sure."  See, e.g., Shook v. D.C. Fin. Responsibility 
and Management Assistance Auth., 132 F.3d 775, 782 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998);  United States v. Microsoft, 147 F.3d 935, 959 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (Wald, J., concurring in part and dissenting 
in part).  This textual canon is a most slender thread upon 
which to hang so dubious a construction of section 8(e).

                                                           