                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 15, 2001   Decided January 4, 2002 

                           No. 00-1427

          Transportation Maintenance Services, L.L.C., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

    Petition for Review and Cross-Application for Enforcement 
        of an Order of the National Labor Relations Board

     Larry P. Kaplan argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Mark W. Weisman and Michelle M. 
Gaffney.

     Richard A. Cohen, Senior Attorney, National Labor Rela-
tions Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John 
H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Arm-

strong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Fred L. Corn-
nell, Supervisory Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson, Circuit Judge, 
and Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  An employee of Transportation 
Maintenance Services petitioned the National Labor Rela-
tions Board to hold an election to decertify his union.  The 
Board conducted an election but then impounded the ballots 
pending its review of the Union's claim that the election was 
time-barred.  Before the Board had ruled upon that objec-
tion, the employee moved to withdraw his petition, claiming 
that he and his co-workers no longer wanted to decertify the 
Union.  The Board granted that request and thus set the 
election to naught.  Because the Board's decision is inconsis-
tent with the preference for secret ballot elections expressed 
in the National Labor Relations Act, we grant TMS's petition 
for review and remand this matter for further proceedings 
before the Board.

                          I. Background

     Transportation Maintenance Services fuels and services 
trucks in Bridgeton, Missouri.  The employees at its nearby 
sister company, C & M Services, Inc., are represented by two 
unions:  the Machinists represent the skilled mechanics while 
Local 618, an affiliate of the Teamsters, represents the un-
skilled employees.  In May, 1996 Local 618 charged TMS 
with unfair labor practices for, among other things, transfer-
ring unskilled workers from C & M to TMS in breach of the 
collective bargaining agreement between C & M and Local 
618.  The parties settled the matter in late 1996 with TMS 
agreeing to recognize Local 618 as the exclusive bargaining 
representative of its unskilled employees.

     TMS and Local 618 bargained from January to early May, 
1997 without reaching an agreement.  Meanwhile, in late 
April one of the six TMS employees represented by Local 
618, Charles Maher, petitioned for a decertification election.  

The Regional Director of the Board granted Maher's petition 
over the objection of the Union that an election was barred 
because the Union had not had a reasonable time to bargain.  
See Mar-Jac Poultry Co., Inc., 136 N.L.R.B. 785, 786 (1962).  
The Regional Director reasoned that, absent "affirmative 
evidence ... establishing that the recognition was extended 
in good faith, on the basis of a previously demonstrated 
majority, and at a time when only that union was actively 
engaged in organizing the unit employees," a settlement 
agreement by which an employer recognizes a union does not 
erect a so-called 'recognition bar' to a decertification election 
and that, in any event, a reasonable period of time had 
elapsed between recognition and the decertification petition.  
Regional Director's Decision, 14-RD-1568, at 4 n.3 (May 29, 
1997).

     The decertification election was scheduled for June 26, 
1997.  On June 25 the Board granted Local 618's request to 
review the Regional Director's decision authorizing the elec-
tion.  The election was held as scheduled, but the ballots 
were impounded pending the Board's review.  More than a 
year had passed without the Board's having decided whether 
the election should have been held when, on July 15, 1998 
Maher asked to withdraw his petition for election.  The 
Board granted Maher's request with alacrity and almost 
another year later denied, by a vote of 3-2, TMS's motion to 
reconsider.

     Local 618 then requested that TMS resume contract nego-
tiations.  When TMS refused based upon its disagreement 
with the Board's ruling, Local 618 charged TMS with an 
unfair labor practice.  The Board ruled against TMS, Transp. 
Maint. Servs., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 140 (2000) (Decision), and 
the Company now petitions this court for review.

                           II. Analysis

     The Board granted Maher's request to withdraw his elec-
tion petition on the ground that, as expressed in the Board's 
Casehandling Manual, its "general policy ... favor[s] the 
effectuation of a petitioner's genuine voluntary desire to 

[terminate] the proceeding."  Transp. Maint. Servs., 328 
N.L.R.B. No. 93, at 1 (1999) (quoting NLRB Casehandling 
Manual, Representation Proceedings (Part II), s 11110).  
TMS contends that the Board erred in adhering to its policy 
in this case because here the employee's request came after 
the election had been held.

     The National Labor Relations Act provides that "[i]f the 
Board finds ... that ... a question of representation exists, 
it shall direct an election by secret ballot and shall certify the 
results thereof."  29 U.S.C. s 159(c)(1).  As a matter of 
practice, however, the Board does not always certify the 
results of an election;  if there is a challenge to the legitimacy 
of the election, then the Board impounds the ballots pending 
its resolution of the dispute.  If the Board ultimately deter-
mines that the election is barred or otherwise invalid, then it 
simply discards the ballots.

     In this case, however, the Board failed to certify the results 
even though it had not determined that the election was 
barred, as the Union claimed.  That step is in some tension 
with the Act's directive that the Board "shall certify the 
results" of a (valid) election, but in at least one circumstance 
such a failure to certify seems only reasonable even though 
the election has not been held invalid:  When a union states 
that if elected it will not represent the employees, the results 
of the election are made moot and the Board does not tally 
the ballots.  See Transp. Maint. Servs., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 93, 
at 2 n.2 (Members Hurtgen and Brame, dissenting).

     Cases presenting a reason good enough for the Board to 
disregard an election are rare.  The Act establishes an elec-
toral apparatus to be administered by the Board because 
formal elections with secret ballots best express employees' 
free choice.  See NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575, 
602 (1969) ("[S]ecret elections are generally the most satisfac-
tory--indeed the preferred--method of ascertaining whether 
a union has majority support");  Conair Corp. v. NLRB, 721 
F.2d 1355, 1383 (D.C. Cir. 1983) ("Our national labor relations 
policy is designed to effectuat[e] ascertainable employee free 
choice and expressed majority sentiment").  When a valid 

election has been held, the results are to be counted and 
given effect except when there is a particularly compelling 
reason for not doing so, as in the case of the unwilling union.

     The Board argues that denying Maher's withdrawal re-
quest could, by saddling the employees with the results of the 
votes they cast a year earlier, deprive them of representation 
they later came to value:  Maher wrote in his request that the 
"employees were getting upset with the Employer and want-
ed to withdraw the [decertification] petition."  Transp. 
Maint. Servs., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 93, at 1.  The Board saw no 
reason to doubt Maher's assertion because the Company 
offered no evidence to rebut it.  Id.

     The Board's position ignores the presumption in favor of an 
election to resolve a question of representation.  Whether an 
election may be disregarded even upon the basis of solid 
evidence that most employees' preferences have changed 
since they voted is a nice question but one we need not 
address today, cf. Garvey Marine, Inc. v. NLRB, 245 F.3d 
819, 828-29 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (upholding Board's decision to 
enforce bargaining order despite significant turnover among 
employees after order was issued), for the evidence before the 
Board in this case could hardly have been more flimsy.  The 
only indication of the employees' post-election preference was 
Maher's hearsay assertion that his co-workers agreed with 
him.  Although hearsay evidence can be sufficient to raise a 
question of representation, see Allentown Mack Sales & 
Serv., Inc. v. NLRB, 522 U.S. 359, 368-71 (1998) (hearsay 
evidence created good-faith doubt about union's majority 
status), Maher's unsubstantiated, self-serving statement can-
not possibly be thought to overcome the presumption--if the 
presumption is to have any force at all--in favor of adhering 
to the results of the electoral process.  Otherwise it would be 
open to a zealous union adherent--or indeed, a zealous oppo-
nent of the union in a case involving an initial election the 
employer's exceptions to which are pending before the 
Board--to displace the electoral process with a series of one-
on-one chats with his co-workers.

     Relatedly, the Board erred by faulting TMS for failing to 
rebut Maher's claim.  First, the burden of showing the 
unusual circumstance that justifies disregarding the electoral 
process lay with the General Counsel, not with the employer.  
Second, the employer would have risked an unfair labor 
practice charge if, in order to rebut Maher's assertion, it had 
followed Maher's example by polling its employees about 
their preferences regarding union representation.  See Alle-
gheny Ludlum Corp. v. NLRB, 104 F.3d 1354, 1359 (D.C. Cir. 
1997) ("An employer 'poll' may in itself interfere with employ-
ees' exercise of their s 7 rights because any attempt by an 
employer to ascertain employee views and sympathies re-
garding unionism generally tends to cause fear of reprisal in 
the mind of the employee if he replies in favor of unionism 
and, therefore, tends to impinge on his Section 7 rights").

     In sum, the Board did not base its acceptance of Maher's 
request upon substantial evidence.  It disregarded the results 
of a potentially valid election merely because one employee 
said that he and his fellows wanted the results thrown out.  
We therefore vacate the Decision and remand this matter for 
the Board to decide at long last whether, as the Union claims, 
there was a recognition bar to the decertification election of 
June 26, 1997.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is

                                                                 Granted.

              