                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 4, 2000        Decided July 21, 2000 

                           No. 99-7239

     The District of Columbia Hospital Association, et al., 
                            Appellees

                                v.

                    District of Columbia and 
     Herbert Weldon, Deputy Director for Health Care Finance 
              of Medical Assistance Administration, 
                            Appellants

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02575)

                            ---------

     Donna M. Murasky, Senior Assistant Corporation Counsel, 
with whom Robert R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, and 
Charles L. Reischel, Deputy Corporation Counsel, were on 
the briefs, argued the cause for appellants.

     Christopher L. Keough, with whom Ronald N. Sutter and 
Kimberly N. Brown were on the brief, argued the cause for 
appellees.

     Before Silberman and Sentelle, Circuit Judges, and 
Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the court filed by Senior Judge Buckley.

     Buckley, Senior Judge:  The District of Columbia appeals 
the district court's ruling that its method of computing certain 
payments to hospitals violated the federal Medicaid statute.  
Because we agree that the District of Columbia's interpreta-
tion of the law is contrary to its plain meaning, we affirm the 
district court's grant of summary judgment to the District of 
Columbia Hospital Association.

                          I. Background

A.   Regulatory Framework

     The Medicaid statute, Subchapter XIX of the Social Securi-
ty Act, establishes a cooperative plan between the federal 
government and the States to provide medical services to low-
income individuals.  42 U.S.C. ss 1396-1396v (1994 & Supp. 
III 1997).  The program is jointly funded by the Federal and 
State governments and is administered by the States pursu-
ant to federal guidelines.  See generally id. ss 1396a, 1396b;  
42 C.F.R. s 430.0-.25 (1999).  The statute treats the District 
of Columbia ("District") as a State.  42 U.S.C. s 1396d(b) 
(Supp. III 1997).  To qualify for federal funding, a State must 
have its own Medicaid plan approved by the Health Care 
Financing Administration ("HCFA") of the United States 
Department of Health and Human Services.  Id. s 1396;  42 
C.F.R. s 430.10.

     All State plans are required to provide Medicaid beneficia-
ries with inpatient hospital services.  42 U.S.C. 
ss 1396a(a)(10)(A), 1396d(a)(1).  Because of the greater costs 
it found to be associated with the treatment of indigent 
patients, Congress has directed that hospitals providing inpa-
tient care must be compensated under the Medicaid program 

at rates that "take into account ... the situation of hospitals 
which serve a disproportionate number of low-income patients 
with special needs."  Id.  s 1396a(a)(13)(A)(iv);  see also H.R. 
Rep. No. 100-391(1), at 524, reprinted in 1987 U.S.C.C.A.N. 
2313-1, 2313-344 (discussing adjustments in payments to 
"disproportionate share hospitals" ("DSH")).  The adjust-
ments mandated by Congress ("DSH adjustments" or "DSH 
payments") are achieved through increases in the "rate or 
amount of payment for such services."  42 U.S.C. 
s 1396r-4(a)(1)(B).

     States may select one of three complex formulae for calcu-
lating the DSH payments.  Id. s 1396r-4(c)(1), (2), (3).  Un-
der the formula selected by the District ("(c)(1) formula"), see 
D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 29, s 908.4(b) (1999), the DSH adjust-
ment must equal "at least the product of [ ] the amount paid 
under the State plan to the hospital for operating costs for 
inpatient hospital services" ("base amount"), multiplied by the 
hospital's "disproportionate share adjustment percentage."  
42 U.S.C. s 1396r-4(c)(1).  Because this case hinges on the 
calculation of the base amount, we will spare the reader the 
labyrinthine process by which the disproportionate share 
adjustment percentage is derived.  We simply observe that it 
alone would justify the Supreme Court's description of the 
Medicaid statute as "an aggravated assault on the English 
language, resistant to attempts to understand it."  Schweiker 
v. Gray Panthers, 453 U.S. 34, 43 n.14 (1981) (quoting Fried-
man v. Berger, 409 F. Supp. 1225, 1226 (S.D.N.Y. 1976)).

B.   The District of Columbia's Plan

     The District's Medicaid plan is administered by an agency 
within the Department of Human Services that was called the 
Commission on Health Care Finance ("CHCF") at the time 
this controversy originated.  Although it has since been re-
named the Medical Assistance Administration, the parties 
have continued to refer to the agency as the CHCF, as will 
we.

     District of Columbia residents who qualify for Medicaid on 
the basis of their eligibility for assistance under the Tempo-
rary Assistance for Needy Families program (formerly Aid to 

Families with Dependent Children) are required by the Dis-
trict's Medicaid Managed Care Amendment Act of 1992 to 
enroll in managed care plans.  D.C. Code Ann. s 1-359(d)(2) 
(1999 Repl. & Supp. 2000).  Other Medicaid beneficiaries 
continue to receive services on a fee-for-service basis.  The 
District pays the managed care organizations ("MCOs") that 
administer the managed care plans a fixed pre-paid amount 
per Medicaid enrollee.  The MCOs, in turn, are responsible 
for providing these enrollees with all the health care services 
to which they are entitled under the statute, including inpa-
tient hospital services provided under contract between the 
MCOs and participating hospitals.  Id. s 1-359(d)(2), (3).

C.   The Litigation

     Without delving too deeply into the tortuous history of this 
litigation, it suffices to say that the District and the District of 
Columbia Hospital Association ("Association") have been en-
gaged for the better part of the past decade in an argument 
over the District's calculation of DSH payments.  In 1994, the 
Association filed a suit in which it claimed, among other 
things, that the District's method of computing DSH adjust-
ments violated the Medicaid statute by failing to take into 
account the services provided managed care patients through 
the MCOs.  While the suit was pending, a newly appointed 
Commissioner of the CHCF agreed to revise the District's 
methodology.  Because the parties believed this would re-
solve their dispute, the district court dismissed the suit as 
moot.  Subsequent to the dismissal of the case, it became 
apparent that the parties were not in fact in accord as to how 
DSH adjustments should be computed.  The bone remaining 
in contention was the District's failure to include, in the (c)(1) 
formula's base amount, the operating costs incurred by hospi-
tals in providing inpatient services to Medicaid managed care 
patients.

     In 1998, the Association initiated the present action seeking 
a declaratory judgment that the District's exclusion of Medic-
aid managed care patients from the base amount violated the 
Medicaid statute.  The Association subsequently filed a mo-
tion requesting the district court to compel the District to 

comply with representations the Association claims the Dis-
trict made in settling the earlier litigation.  The court grant-
ed the Association's motion for summary judgment based on 
its holding that the District's method of calculating DSH 
payments was contrary to law, and it granted the Associa-
tion's motion to compel compliance with its version of the 
earlier understanding.  District of Columbia Hosp. Ass'n v. 
District of Columbia, 73 F. Supp. 2d 8 (D.D.C. 1999).  The 
District filed a timely appeal, and we have jurisdiction to 
review the district court's final order pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
s 1291.

                           II. Analysis

     We review a grant of summary judgment de novo, applying 
the same standard as the district court.  See, e.g., Everett v. 
United States, 158 F.3d 1364, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1998), cert. 
denied, 526 U.S. 1132 (1999).  Summary judgment is appro-
priate where there is no genuine issue as to any material fact 
and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of 
law.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c).

     The dispositive question in this case is one of statutory 
interpretation.  Specifically, we are concerned here with the 
proper application of the formula selected by the District for 
the computation of the DSH adjustment.  That formula pro-
vides that the adjustment must

     be in an amount equal to at least the product of (A) the 
     amount paid under the State plan to the hospital for 
     operating costs for inpatient hospital services (of the kind 
     described in section 1395ww(a)(4) of this title), and (B) 
     the hospital's disproportionate share adjustment percent-
     age (established under section 1395ww(d)(5)(F)(iv) of this 
     title)[.]
     
42 U.S.C. s 1396r-4(c)(1) (emphasis added).

     The controversy in this case centers on the meaning to be 
given the word "under" in the quoted text.  The District 
contends that it is not required to include the cost of provid-
ing inpatient services to Medicaid managed care patients in 

the base amount because the hospitals receive payments for 
those services from MCOs rather than from the District.  
Because the payments are not made directly by the District, 
it reasons that they are not made "under the State plan."

     It is axiomatic that "[t]he starting point in statutory inter-
pretation is the language of the statute itself."  Ardestani v. 
INS, 502 U.S. 129, 135 (1991) (internal quotation marks and 
brackets omitted).  The Supreme Court has observed that 
"[t]he word 'under' has many dictionary definitions and must 
draw its meaning from its context."  Id.  We see nothing in 
the context of the Medicaid statute, however, that would 
require us to give the word other than its ordinary meaning.  
"Under" is defined as "required by[,] in accordance with[, or] 
bound by."  Webster's Third New International Dictionary 
2487 (1981);  see also Ardestani, 502 U.S. at 135 (finding "the 
most natural reading" of "under" in context of Equal Access 
to Justice Act to mean " 'subject [or pursuant] to' or 'by 
reason of the authority of' ") (quoting St. Louis Fuel and 
Supply Co. v. FERC, 890 F.2d 446, 450 (D.C. Cir. 1989)).

     Although payments from MCOs to hospitals for the care of 
Medicaid patients are not made directly by the District, they 
are clearly made pursuant to, and under the authority of, the 
District's Medicaid plan.  MCOs may not receive payment for 
services to Medicaid patients unless they have completed a 
Medicaid managed care provider agreement with the District.  
D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 29, s 5308.1.  The contracts between the 
MCOs and the hospitals that serve their Medicaid enrollees 
are closely regulated by the District.  For example, District 
regulations require MCOs to submit their contracts with 
hospitals to the District for prior approval, id. s 5313.1;  to 
notify the District before effecting any changes in such 
agreements, id. s 5304.2-.3;  to contract only with hospitals 
located in the District, id. s 5313.9;  and to assure that 
financial and programmatic information maintained by the 
hospital regarding Medicaid managed care patients will be 
available for inspection by the MCO or the District.  Id. 
s 5313.10(d).

     Moreover, we can find nothing in the statute that would 
require us to confine "the amount paid under [a] State plan to 
[a] hospital" to that paid by the State itself.  To the contrary, 
if Congress had so intended, it could have specified that only 
a State's "direct" payments were to be taken into account, as 
it did in the preceding subsection of the statute.  See 42 
U.S.C. s 1396r-4(b)(3)(A)(i)(II) (referring to "the amount of 
the cash subsidies for patient services received directly from 
State and local governments") (emphasis added).  That it did 
not do so here is compelling evidence that Congress did not 
intend to limit the computation of payments to those made 
directly by the District.  See Russello v. United States, 464 
U.S. 16, 23 (1983) ("[W]here Congress includes particular 
language in one section of a statute but omits it in another 
section of the same Act, it is generally presumed that Con-
gress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclu-
sion or exclusion.") (internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted).

     If more were required, our construction of the statutory 
language is wholly consistent with Congress's purpose in 
creating the DSH adjustment.  See Holloway v. United 
States, 526 U.S. 1, 6 (1999) ("In interpreting the statute at 
issue, we consider not only the bare meaning of the critical 
word or phrase but also its ... purpose in the statutory 
scheme.") (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).  
"Congress's 'overarching intent' in passing the disproportion-
ate share provision was to supplement the ... payments of 
hospitals serving 'low income' persons."  Legacy Emanuel 
Hosp. and Health Ctr. v. Shalala, 97 F.3d 1261, 1265 (9th Cir. 
1996) (quoting Jewish Hosp. v. Secretary of Health & Human 
Serv., 19 F.3d 270, 275 (6th Cir. 1994)).  As the Ninth Circuit 
has noted, "[p]atients meeting the statutory requirements for 
Medicaid do not cease to be low-income patients on days that 
the state does not pay Medicaid inpatient hospital benefits."  
Id. at 1266.  Similarly, patients who must be enrolled in 
MCOs pursuant to the District's Medicaid plan do not cease 
to impose higher costs on the hospitals that serve them.

     Finally, we are unpersuaded by the District's offer of a 
letter from the General Accounting Office asserting that 
States have the discretion to exclude Medicaid managed care 
patients from their calculation of the maximum DSH adjust-
ment a given hospital may receive under another section of 
the Medicaid statute.  As the Supreme Court has recently 
made clear, "[i]nterpretations such as those in opinion let-
ters--like interpretations contained in policy statements, 
agency manuals, and enforcement guidelines, all of which lack 
the force of law--do not warrant Chevron-style deference."  
Christensen v. Harris County, 120 S. Ct. 1655, 1662 (2000).  
This is a reference to Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), which 
holds that courts must defer to an agency's permissible 
construction of a statute it is charged with administering 
when "the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the 
specific issue" before the court.  Id. at 843.  Because the 
provision at issue here is unambiguous, we owe no deference 
to a contrary construction even if formally adopted by the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services.

                         III. Conclusion

     Because the District's interpretation is contrary to the 
plain meaning and purpose of the Medicaid statute, we hold 
that the District may not exclude the operating costs incurred 
by hospitals in their service of Medicaid managed care pa-
tients in calculating DSH payments pursuant to the (c)(1) 
formula.  We have no need, therefore, to reach the district 
court's alternative holding based on the Association's motion 
to compel.  The district court's grant of summary judgment 
to the Association is therefore

                                                            Affirmed.

                                                 