                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 5, 2002   Decided October 25, 2002 

                           No. 00-1272

           Competitive Telecommunications Association, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                    AT&T Corporation, et al., 
                           Intervenors

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Robert J. Aamoth argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Mark D. Schneider argued the cause for intervenors 
WorldCom, Inc., et al., in support of petitioner.  With him on 

the briefs were Michael B. DeSanctis, Katherine A. Fallow, 
Thomas F. O'Neil III, William Single IV, David W. Carpen-
ter, Peter D. Keisler, C. Frederick Beckner III, Mark C. 
Rosenblum, Charles C. Hunter, and Catherine M. Hannan.

     John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, argued the cause for respon-
dents.  With him on the briefs were John Rogovin, Deputy 
General Counsel, and Laurence N. Bourne, Counsel.  Nancy 
C. Garrison, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, entered 
an appearance.

     Michael K. Kellogg argued the cause for intervenors SBC 
Communications Inc., et al., in support of respondents.  With 
him on the briefs were Aaron M. Panner, Michael E. Glover, 
Edward Shakin, Gary L. Phillips, James D. Ellis, and 
Robert McKenna, Jr.

     Before:  Edwards and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  The Telecommunications 
Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (codified at 47 
U.S.C. s 151 (2000)), requires "incumbent" Local Exchange 
Carriers ("ILECs")--the Bell Operating Companies and their 
successors, inheritors of AT&T's local exchange facilities and 
services--to lease unbundled network elements ("UNEs") to 
their competitors, the competitive Local Exchange Carriers 
("CLECs").  See s 251(c)(3) of the Act, 47 U.S.C. s 251(c)(3).  
The object is to enable CLECs to provide telecommunications 
services in competition with the ILECs.  Petitioner Competi-
tive Telecommunications Association ("CompTel") is com-
posed of CLECs, many of whom--perhaps all--are also inter-
exchange carriers ("IXCs").  CompTel seeks review of two 
interim Federal Communications Commission orders, In re 
Implementation of the Local Competition Provisions of the 
Telecommunications Act of 1996, Supplemental Order, 15 
FCC Rcd 1760 (1999) ("Supplemental Order"), and In re 
Implementation of the Local Competition Provisions of the 

Telecommunications Act of 1996, Supplemental Order Clari-
fication, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 (2000) ("Clarification"), which 
impose some limits on CompTel's members' access to certain 
UNEs.

     Specifically, the orders address CLECs' access to a combi-
nation of UNEs known as the enhanced extended link 
("EEL").  EELs consist of unbundled loops and transport 
network elements.  Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 at p 2.  A 
loop is a telephone line that runs from the customer's premis-
es to the ILEC "end office," which houses switches used to 
route calls to their destination.  A transport then takes the 
traffic to the IXC or CLEC office, which will route the call to 
its final destination.  Leasing this combination of facilities 
enables new entrants to compete without building their own 
local loops and transport facilities.  And it is especially desir-
able for them to acquire EELs as UNEs because as such 
they are priced under a formula of the Commission's known 
as "total-element long run incremental cost," or "TELRIC."  
By contrast, the same functions are more costly if they are 
purchased as a part of the ILEC's tariffed services (evidently 
under mandates imposed by the Commission pursuant to 
s 201), and known in this guise as Special Access services.

     An EEL is useful both for the provision of long distance 
and local service, and the Commission here sought to channel 
CLECs' use of EELs toward local service.  In the Supple-
mental Order it limited access to firms who would use EELs 
to provide "a significant amount of local exchange service."  
Supplemental Order, 15 FCC Rcd 1760 at p 2.  In the Clarifi-
cation it refined this concept and embodied it in numerically 
defined safe harbors.  Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 at p 22.

     CompTel contests the restriction favoring provision of local 
service, stating that the 1996 Act does not allow the FCC to 
make that sort of distinction (referred to as a use or a 
service-by-service restriction).  It further argues that none of 
the FCC's justifications for the interim rules makes it accept-
able.  Finally, it argues that the safe harbor provisions of the 
order are arbitrary and capricious, mainly asserting that they 
impose tracking burdens that are difficult or impossible for 

the CLECs to fulfill and that they impose needless restric-
tions against commingling of local and long distance traffic.  
We first address the timeliness of this appeal.  Once having 
found jurisdiction, however, we are unpersuaded by Comp-
Tel's merits claims.

                             *  *  *

     A petition for judicial review of a final order of the FCC 
must be filed "within 60 days after its entry."  28 U.S.C. 
s 2344 (2000);  see also 47 U.S.C. s 402(a).  In this case, the 
petition for review was filed within 60 days of the Clarifica-
tion but not within 60 days of the Supplemental Order.  
Respondent argues that it is timely only as to claims that 
arose from the Clarification, not as to ones essentially aimed 
at the Supplemental Order.

     But the Clarification radically changed the Supplemental 
Order in a way we have not yet mentioned.  In the Supple-
mental Order the Commission said that it would issue a final 
decision on the EELs restriction in the Fourth Further 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking ("FNPRM"), which notice 
"will occur on or before June 30, 2000."  Supplemental 
Order, 15 FCC Rcd 1760 at p 2 (emphasis added).  In its 
Clarification, the FCC freed itself of this deadline, continuing 
to state that the order would last until the Fourth FNPRM 
but giving no time period in which that would occur.  Clarifi-
cation, 15 FCC Rcd 9587, at p p 1, 35.

     We hold that this extension newly aggrieved CompTel and 
thus made its petition timely.  See Sam Rayburn Dam Elec. 
Coop. v. Fed. Power Comm'n, 515 F.2d 998, 1007 (D.C. Cir. 
1975) (stating that where a party was "aggrieved" by a later 
interpretation of a rule that it could not have reasonably 
anticipated, the time limit starts to run at the later event).  
Cases have held that extension of a temporary order may 
entitle the parties to seek judicial review of the order.  See 
Public Citizen v. Nuclear Regulatory Comm'n, 901 F.2d 147, 
151 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (holding that where a temporary order is 
later made permanent, the permanent order may be chal-
lenged);  Illinois Cent. Gulf R.R. v. Interstate Commerce 

Comm'n, 720 F.2d 958, 961 (7th Cir. 1983) (holding that a 
temporary order with no fixed time period had lasted so long 
as to make judicial review timely).

     Here the initial order appeared to present CompTel with 
the prospect of enduring an interim order for a period of no 
more than six months.  After six months, another order was 
issued extending the time period and setting no ultimate date 
of resolution.  The rules have now been in place for over two 
and a half years.  If we were to hold that such a petition is 
not timely, a party that found an order not worth litigating 
because of its apparently short term would have to sue for 
fear that it might drag on indefinitely.  And we might also 
create a temptation for the FCC to let its deadlines slip.  
Thus we find the petition for review timely.

                             *  *  *

     CompTel finds in the language of the 1996 Act a bar on the 
Commission's making a service-by-service distinction in decid-
ing under what circumstances an ILEC is required to lease 
UNEs.  We review, of course, under the usual standard of 
Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 
467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984), under which the court must give 
effect to the clearly expressed intent of Congress, and must if 
the statute is ambiguous defer to any reasonable construction 
by the agency.  The parties appear to assume that neither 
the Act as a whole nor s 251(d)(2)(B) in particular requires 
that impairment findings be service-by-service or that the 
UNE mandates be confined to services as to which such a 
finding has been made;  accordingly we do not address those 
issues, but rather try only to answer the question of whether 
the Act bars such service-by-service distinctions.

     The first source CompTel points to as a basis for barring a 
service-by-service distinction--in other words, requiring that 
any UNE be mandatory for all telecommunications services, 
once it is found appropriate for one telecommunications ser-
vice--is s 251(c)(3).  It says that incumbent local exchange 
carriers have

     [t]he duty to provide, to any requesting telecommunica-
     tions carrier for the provision of a telecommunications 
     service, nondiscriminatory access to network elements on 
     an unbundled basis at any technically feasible 
     point....  
     
47 U.S.C. s 251(c)(3).

     We do not see that the phrase "for the provision of a 
telecommunications service" helps CompTel.  If Congress 
had spoken of "the provision of any telecommunication ser-
vice," the language might conceivably be taken to suggest 
that once an element was ordered to be made available for 
one telecommunications service, it must be made available for 
all.  But the vaguer phrasing chosen by Congress does not 
lend itself even to that suggestion.

     CompTel also sees hope in s 251(d)(2)(B), which states that

     [i]n determining what network elements should be made 
     available for purposes of subsection (c)(3) of this section, 
     the Commission shall consider, at a minimum, whether-- 
     ... 
     
          (B) the failure to provide access to such network ele-
          ments would impair the ability of the telecommunica-
          tions carrier seeking access to provide the services that 
          it seeks to offer.
          
47 U.S.C. s 251(d)(2) (emphasis added).  Far from helping 
CompTel's cause, this passage seems to cut strongly against 
it.  By referring to the "services that [the requesting carrier] 
seeks to offer," it seems to invite an inquiry that is specific to 
particular carriers and services.  That the Commission has 
never gone down the path of carrier-by-carrier UNE analysis 
provides no basis that we can see for making it forego 
service-by-service limitations.

     In United States Telecom Association v. Federal Commu-
nications Commission, 290 F.3d 415 (D.C. Cir. 2002) 
("USTA"), we clearly found in the FCC an authority to make 
distinctions that were based on regional differences or on 
customer markets.  See id. at 422-23.  If these are permissi-

ble, it is hard to understand why the Act would not allow 
restrictions keyed to a specific "service" of the requesting 
carriers.  The Clarification offers the essential and compel-
ling reasoning:

     Although ambiguous, that language [s 251(d)(2)] is rea-
     sonably construed to mean that we may consider the 
     markets in which a competitor "seeks to offer" services 
     and, at an appropriate level of generality, ground the 
     unbundling obligation on the competitor's entry into 
     those markets in which denial of the requested elements 
     would in fact impair the competitor's ability to offer 
     services.
     
Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 at p 15.  CompTel's theory, 
by contrast, would mean that once the Commission found a 
single purpose as to which an "element" met the impairment 
standard, no matter how limited, it would be forced to man-
date provision of the element for all, no matter how little 
potential impairment was involved in the remainder of the 
telecommunications field.  CompTel never explains what logic 
could have persuaded Congress to lock the Commission into 
such a scheme.

     CompTel also claims support in the Act's definition of a 
"network element" as "a facility or equipment used in the 
provision of a telecommunications service."  See 47 U.S.C. 
s 153(29).  We cannot discern a bar on service-by-service 
mandates in this bland phrasing.

     Finally, CompTel argues that past orders of the FCC make 
it clear that the FCC understood the statute not to allow it to 
make a service-by-service distinction.  CompTel points to 
orders issued by the FCC both before and after the court's 
decision in AT&T Corp. v. Iowa Utilities Board, 525 U.S. 366 
(1999).  See In re Implementation of the Local Competition 
Provisions in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, First 
Report and Order, 11 FCC Rcd 15499 at p p 264, 356, 358 
(1996) ("Local Competition Order");  In re Implementation of 
the Local Competition Provisions of the Telecommunications 
Act of 1996, Third Report and Order and Fourth Further 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 15 FCC Rcd 3696 at p 484 

(1999) ("UNE Remand Order").  In the Clarification the FCC 
indeed acknowledged that

     [b]efore the Supreme Court issued its decision in Iowa 
     Utilities Board, we sometimes approached an incum-
     bent's obligation to unbundle network elements as 
     though it were an all-or-nothing proposition, suggesting 
     that, if a competitor were entitled to obtain access to an 
     element for one purpose, it was generally also entitled to 
     obtain access to that element for wholly different pur-
     poses as well.
     
See Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 at p 12.  The FCC 
further acknowledged that it had not properly focused on the 
relationship between that issue and the impair standard, and 
that the court's opinion in Iowa Utilities Board made it 
appropriate to "revisit the issue."  Id.  The Commission is 
clearly correct that Iowa Utilities Board required it to limit 
its former all-encompassing interpretation of the necessary 
and impair language of 47 U.S.C. s 251(d)(2).  Iowa Utils. 
Bd., 525 U.S. at 388-90;  see also USTA, 290 F.3d at 418-19.

     CompTel points out that the FCC's statement in the UNE 
Remand Order followed Iowa Utilities Board;  CompTel 
reads the statement as a reaffirmation of a prohibition on use 
restrictions.  But the relevant section plainly does no more 
than accurately recount past Commission conclusions, re-
peatedly saying, "the Commission found ...," and closing 
with the observation that its rule against usage restrictions 
"was not challenged in court by any party."  UNE Remand 
Order, 15 FCC Rcd 3696 at p 484.  Other provisions of the 
order made it clear that the FCC did not consider the issue at 
all settled.  See, e.g., id. at p p 489, 493-96.  The FCC is 
obviously entitled--indeed required--to reconsider orders 
that rest on faulty readings of a statute.  That is all it has 
done here.

                             *  *  *

     CompTel next argues that even if the Commission is autho-
rized to place service-by-service restrictions on the use of 
UNEs, it acted arbitrarily and capriciously because its justifi-

cations for doing so here were unreasonable.  As we said 
above, all hands assume that the Commission can mandate 
provision of a UNE for all telecommunications services even 
though its finding of s 251(d)(2)(B) impairment is based on 
only one service.  But it is far from obvious to us that the 
FCC has the power, without an impairment finding as to non-
local services, to require that ILECs provide EELs for such 
services on an unbundled basis.  Here there is no finding by 
the Commission that lack of access to EELs would "impair" 
CLECs' ability to provide long distance or exchange access 
service.  Rather the FCC observed in the Clarification that it 
had the power to inquire into whether there was any such 
impairment, Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 at p 15, but it 
then explicitly declined to reach that question without a 
chance to "gather evidence," id. at p p 16-17.  CompTel 
makes no argument that the Commission should have (or 
even could have!)  made any finding without further evidence.  
As both parties assume, however, that the Commission can 
require a network element to be unbundled for all services 
when it only finds it to be impaired as to one service, we 
accept the assumption arguendo and address the question of 
whether it exercised reasonable judgment in withholding such 
a requirement here.

     The FCC gives in essence two justifications for its interim 
restrictions on the unbundling of EELs.  First, it argues that 
the rule is necessary to avoid disruption of its reform of 
access charge policies and of the implicit subsidies for univer-
sal service that remain embedded in access charges.  It also 
reasons that its restrictions are needed to promote facilities-
based competition.

     Avoidance of market disruption pending broader reforms 
is, of course, a standard and accepted justification for a 
temporary rule.  See, e.g., MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. 
Fed. Communications Comm'n, 750 F.2d 135, 141 (D.C. Cir. 
1984);  see also ACS of Anchorage, Inc. v. Fed. Communica-
tions Comm'n, 290 F.3d 403, 410 (D.C. Cir. 2002).  Here the 
broader reform involves an attempt to make access charges 
more truly cost based and to correct the divergences from 
cost that have been mandated in the interest of implicitly 

subsidizing some users at the expense of others.  See In re 
Access Charge Reform, First Report and Order, 12 FCC Rcd 
15982 at p p 42, 44 (1997) ("Access Charge Reform Order").  
Both of the orders that the FCC cites as part of its "access 
charge reform policies" are steps on the way to eliminating 
implicit subsidies.  Id.;  In re Access Charge Reform, Sixth 
Report and Order in CC Docket Nos. 96-262 and 94-1, 
Report and Order in CC Docket No. 99-249, Eleventh Report 
and Order in CC Docket No. 96-45, 15 FCC Rcd 12962 at 
p p 24-25 (2000) ("CALLS Order").

     The link between access charge reform and unrestricted 
access to EELs is that without the restrictions competitive 
carriers would use EELs as an alternative to switched access 
services and thus avoid paying the implicit subsidy, under-
mining the subsidy scheme.  Supplemental Order, 15 FCC 
Rcd 1760 at p 7.

     CompTel does not appear to deny either that the Commis-
sion can justify a policy by reference to the purposes of 
avoiding disruption pending a broader reform, or that the 
EEL restriction would disrupt implicit subsidies contained in 
access charges.  Rather, it asserts that the access reform is 
actually complete rather than pending, so that the Commis-
sion's justification is pure pretext.

     The first variation of this claim is an argument that 47 
U.S.C. s 254(a) requires elimination of implicit subsidies 
within 15 months of adoption of the Act, i.e., by May 1997;  
thus, apparently, any residual implicit subsidies are illegiti-
mate and not a permissible basis for the Commission's orders.  
This is a misreading of s 254(a).  The section requires that 
the Commission start a proceeding to assess recommenda-
tions of a Federal-State Joint Board on the subject and 
complete the proceeding within 15 months of the date of 
enactment, setting a timetable for the reform.  47 U.S.C. 
s 254(a).  But there is no time limit on realization of the 
reform.  And the petitioner offers no evidence to show why 
the proposed timetable given by the CALLS Order is unrea-
sonable.

     Second, CompTel argues that the CALLS Order, issued 
two days prior to the Supplemental Order, immediately 
eliminated implicit subsidies for universal service, replacing 
them with an explicit mechanism of support.  Since the FCC 
has totally removed implicit subsidies, CompTel claims there 
are none left to protect.  In support CompTel cites p 202 and 
other sections of the CALLS Order, arguing that the FCC 
estimated the cost of universal support to be $650 million per 
year and immediately created an explicit support mechanism 
of exactly that amount.  See CALLS Order, 15 FCC Rcd 
12962 at p p 30, 32, 186, 196, 201, 202, 226.  But a close look at 
the CALLS Order makes clear that implicit subsidies are 
phased out over time.

     The CALLS Order identifies a number of elements in 
access charges that have been sources of revenue for implicit 
subsidies.  See id. at p 23.  It names (1) the multi-line 
business Presubscribed Interexchange Carrier Charge 
("PICC"), which is a flat per-line charge imposed by a ILEC 
on an end user's IXC, see id. at p p 2, 19;  (2) Carrier 
Common Line ("CCL") rates (per-minute charges assessed on 
the end user's IXC whenever the end user placed an inter-
state long-distance call), see id. at p 18, which have per-
minute charges for a service that has a fixed cost;  and (3) 
geographic averaging, which suppresses geographically based 
cost differentials and subsidizes users in the more costly low-
density areas.  Id. at p 23.

     The CALLS Order's treatment of these charges makes us 
confident that it did not stop the subsidies on a dime.  While 
multi-line business PICCs are higher than would be appropri-
ate (vis-A-vis cost) given the caps on subscriber line charges 
for residential and single-line businesses, id. at p 23, the 
CALLS Order phases them out over a five-year period.  See 
id. at p 110 ("For example, we estimate that by July 2004, the 
multi-line business PICC will be eliminated under ... the 
proposal for all BOCs except for BellSouth, which would have 
a multi-line business PICC at that time of approximately 
$0.20 per line.")  If this were not strong enough evidence, 
p 111 specifically recognizes that the existence of this rate in 
some areas "may constitute an implicit non-portable subsidy."  

Id. at p 111.  It then goes on to justify this subsidy as an 
interim mechanism that provides a reasonable solution to the 
tension between protecting universal service and providing 
cost based rates.  Id.

     Similarly the Commission provides for gradual phase-out of 
the CCL charges, see id. at p 144 ("Upon the earlier of the 
elimination of the CCL charges or June 30, 2004"), speaks of 
"reducing" averaging, id. at p 26, and indicates that deaverag-
ing will proceed under "limited conditions and safeguards," 
id. at p 115.

     Thus, in three major areas, subsidies are gradually pared 
back over time.  As the implicit subsidies for universal ser-
vice have not been eliminated, the FCC has an interest in 
preserving the process of their gradual reduction and extinc-
tion.

     Finally, CompTel attacks the Commission's explanation of 
the orders as an effort to protect facilities-based access 
providers.  Invoking this interest, the Commission said that 
immediate provision of special access as a UNE "could under-
cut the market position of many facilities-based competitive 
access providers," a form of access that originated in the mid-
1980s and "is a mature source of competition in telecommuni-
cations markets."  Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 9587 at p 18.  
CompTel argues that favoring facilities-based competition is 
not a valid policy goal.

     But the Supreme Court's discussion of the incentive effects 
of TELRIC in Verizon Communications, Inc. v. Federal 
Communications Commission, 122 S. Ct. 1646 (2002), would 
be meaningless if the Court had not understood the Act to 
manifest a preference for facilities-based competition.  In-
deed, the Court puts it expressly, characterizing the ILECs' 
critique of TELRIC as a claim that its "result will be, not 
competition, but a sort of parasitic free-riding, leaving 
TELRIC incapable of stimulating the facilities-based competi-
tion intended by Congress."  Id. at 1669.  Obviously accept-
ing the ILECs' view that Congress preferred "facilities-based 
competition" over "parasitic free-riding," the Court went on 
to decide that the FCC could reasonably conclude that 

TELRIC would not create the perverse incentives the ILECs 
claimed.  Id. at 1669-78.  See also our opinion in USTA, 290 
F.3d at 424-25.

     In this case, the FCC has only issued an interim rule while 
it further studies the issues to determine what rule will best 
promote facilities-based competition.  Certainly when com-
bined with the other rationales in this case this constitutes 
adequate justification for the rule.

                             *  *  *

     Finally, CompTel makes two arguments that the safe har-
bor provisions are arbitrary and capricious.  First, it says 
that CLECs don't have the information needed to comply 
with them, and that the difficulties of obtaining such informa-
tion will in most cases outweigh the benefits of the EELs.  
Second, it argues that the commingling restrictions will deny 
its members a substantial market benefit of the EELs and, 
like the information requirements, are unnecessary.

     Expressed in its most plausible form, CompTel's argument 
about the safe harbors' information demands--going simply 
to the usage patterns for the facilities--is that the data are 
not information that the companies normally obtain, that 
obtaining the information and insuring its accuracy would be 
difficult and costly, and that in most instances the costs of 
complying outweigh the benefits of the EELs.

     The difficulty with this argument is that it suggests no 
alternative way for ensuring that EELs are only provided 
where they are used for "a significant amount of local ex-
change service."  Thus, if we were to find that the safe 
harbor provisions were too demanding on carriers, we would 
essentially be deciding that the FCC simply could not imple-
ment its use restriction because it is not administratively 
feasible.  But it is plain that supplying the information is 
feasible, as the FCC has produced evidence that some carri-
ers are taking advantage of the safe harbors.

     CompTel's second target, the Commission's anti-
commingling rule, essentially "does not allow loop-transport 

combinations [taken as UNEs] to be connected to the incum-
bent LEC's tariffed services."  Clarification, 15 FCC Rcd 
9587 at p 22.  CompTel and intervenors argue that it is much 
more cost effective to use the same transport facility for both 
local and long distance than to have two separate facilities, 
each carrying a smaller amount of traffic.  They further 
argue that there is no reason not to allow commingling, as it 
is impossible for parties to use commingling to eviscerate the 
local use requirement.  The FCC, on the contrary, argues 
that a restriction against commingling is the only way to 
prevent carriers from using these units "solely or primarily to 
bypass special access services."  Id. at p 28.  We find that 
CompTel has not met its burden of showing that the restric-
tion is arbitrary and capricious.

     One of the difficulties of this question is the way in which it 
is raised and addressed in the briefs.  In their opening briefs 
both CompTel and intervenors argued that the restriction on 
commingling was oppressive, and they stated in a cursory 
manner (CompTel devoting all of one page to the issue) that 
it was not needed to carry out the FCC's goal of preventing 
special access bypass.  The FCC responded in an equally 
cursory way, saying that allowing commingling would allow 
carriers to avoid the requirement that each customer be 
provided a significant amount of local exchange service.  In 
their reply briefs, both petitioner and intervenors explained in 
more detail exactly why allowing commingling would not 
result in "gaming" of the system.  As we explain below, we 
find in the record indications of why the Commission might 
have fears about commingling--even under the conditions 
suggested by the petitioner and intervenors.  The FCC did 
not raise these reasons in its brief, but we cannot fault it for 
this omission given the sketchy character of CompTel's and 
the intervenors' initial arguments.  "[T]he Commission cannot 
be asked to make silk purse responses to sow's ear argu-
ments."  City of Vernon v. FERC, 845 F.2d 1042, 1047 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988);  see also McBride v. Merrell Dow and Pharms., 
Inc., 800 F.2d 1208, 1210 (D.C. Cir. 1986) ("We generally will 
not entertain arguments omitted from an appellant's opening 
brief and raised initially in his reply brief.")

     There are, as we said above, two more complex reasons 
why gaming might occur.  The first appears to be that 
commingling will allow the entire base of the loop or "channel 
termination" portion of special access circuits to be converted 
into unbundled loops.  The reason is that there are no use 
restrictions on unbundled loops, and therefore allowing loops 
to be freely connected to special access services would allow 
loops that provide no local services to be unbundled and then 
merely attached to special access transports.  See May 11, 
2000 letter from MCIWorldCom to FCC at pp. 2-3 ("World-
Com Letter"), Joint Appendix ("J.A.") at 418-19.  The second 
concern appears to depend on possible erosion of the line 
between UNEs and certain non-UNE capabilities that an 
ILEC, seeking authority to offer long distance service in the 
region where it provides local services, is required to offer 
under the so-called "competitive checklist."  See 47 U.S.C. 
s 271(c)(2)(B);  UNE Remand Order, 15 FCC Rcd 3696 at 
p 468;  WorldCom Letter at 3-5, J.A. at 419-21.  The idea is 
evidently that through the interaction between s 251 and 
s 271, free "mixing and matching" in the present context 
would lead ultimately to CLECs' securing UNE rates for 
these competitive checklist capabilities even when the Com-
mission had found that lack of the capabilities would not meet 
the "impair" standard for UNEs under s 251(d)(2).  World-
Com Letter at 3-5, J.A. 419-21.

     As we have said, the FCC did not present this argument or 
point to a place in the record where it had made it.  We know 
of it from a WorldCom letter to the FCC articulating it and a 
possible solution that WorldCom said would still allow com-
mingling in the case at hand.  See WorldCom Letter at 2-5, 
J.A. 418-21.  Because neither CompTel nor intervenors dealt 
with these more difficult questions in their briefs, we are in 
no position to assess the feasibility of the solution, or to 
decide whether the FCC might have solved the problem in a 
different and less burdensome way.  But on the present 
record we are plainly unable to say that the restriction on 
commingling is arbitrary and capricious.

     The intervenors raise a third issue (collocation) regarding 
the safe harbor provisions, but since this was not raised by 

the principal parties, the intervenors are procedurally barred 
from arguing it.  See United States Tel. Ass'n v. Fed. Com-
munications Comm'n, 188 F.3d 521 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     For the reasons stated above, the petitions for review are

                                                                 Denied.

                                                                    