                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 11, 2001      Decided April 6, 2001 

                           No. 00-7105

        Ashcraft & Gerel, a general partnership organized 
           under the law of the District of Columbia, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Edward Paul Coady, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv01735)

     John G. Roberts, Jr. argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were H. Christopher Bartolomucci, Cather-
ine E. Stetson and Mark S. London.

     Stuart H. Newberger argued the cause for appellee.  With 
him on the brief was Barry E. Cohen.  Tara W. Blanchard 
entered an appearance.

     Before Henderson, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Edward Paul Coady appeals the 
judgment that he breached his employment contract with the 
law firm of Ashcraft & Gerel and was therefore required to 
pay liquidated damages to the firm.  He contends that the 
district court erred in denying him summary judgment on the 
breach of contract claim when the firm had committed a prior 
material breach of the contract and had concealed that breach 
from him until long after he was fired.  He also contends that 
the district court erred in precluding him from introducing 
any evidence of the law firm's prior breach, most significantly, 
evidence of the firm's alleged "surreptitious manipulation of 
income and expenses" going "to the very heart of [his] 
defense and counterclaims."  Finally, Coady contends that 
the district court erred in refusing to strike the liquidated 
damages claim as a penalty.  We hold that the district court 
erred in precluding the admission of evidence that was rele-
vant to Coady's defense to the breach of contract claim, and 
that the error was not harmless.  Accordingly, we reverse the 
judgment.

                                I.

     Coady was an attorney at the law firm of Ashcraft & Gerel 
from 1989 until April 1998, when he was fired.  At that time, 
he was the managing attorney of the firm's Boston office, a 
position he had held since 1993.  Early in 1997, a number of 
disagreements about his compensation and his management 
of the Boston office flared up between Coady and the firm.  
By letter of July 15, 1997, Coady advised the firm that it had 
breached the employment contract1 by failing to pay his semi-

__________
     1  The employment contract of July 29, 1993, consisted of two 
parts:  a "Prenuptial Agreement" specifying the apportionment of 
fees generated from Coady's representation of firm clients upon his 
voluntary or involuntary departure from the firm, and the "Employ-
ment Agreement" setting out the particulars of his employment, 
including, among other things, provisions setting his compensation 
and the amount of liquidated damages to be paid by either party 

annual salary bonus and that he would exercise his contractu-
al right to take the matter to arbitration unless he was paid 
by August 15.  On August 1, 1997, the firm sued Coady in the 
United States District Court for the District of Columbia for 
breach of his contractual and fiduciary duties to the firm and 
for conversion.  Coady counterclaimed, alleging that the firm 
had breached its contractual and fiduciary duties to him.  
Coady also pursued his contractual right to arbitrate the 
dispute before an arbitration panel in Boston, Massachusetts.

     Coady prevailed before the arbitration panel on his claim 
that the firm had breached the employment contract by 
improperly "straddling" income and expenses to manipulate 
his bonus compensation.  "Straddling" refers to the firm's 
alleged effort to "shift[ ] 1997 income into 1998 and acceler-
ate[ ] 1998 expenses in an effort to defraud [him]."  The 
arbitration panel found that he was therefore owed a larger 
bonus in 1997 than he had received.2  The federal district 
court in Massachusetts upheld the panel's ruling.  However, 
the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit 
reversed, holding that the arbitration panel lacked jurisdic-
tion to consider Coady's claim that the firm had deliberately 
underpaid its senior partners in 1997 in order to lower the 
salary cap and thereby reduce Coady's bonus.  See Coady v. 
Ashcraft & Gerel, 223 F.3d 1, 10 (1st Cir. 2000).  The 
employment contract authorized the arbitration panel only to 
interpret ambiguities in the contract, and the court viewed 
Coady's claim as a breach claim, not a contract interpretation.  
The court ordered that Coady's bonus claim (and the records 

__________
upon a material breach of the Employment Agreement.  See Coady 
v. Ashcraft & Gerel, 996 F. Supp. 95, 98 (D. Mass. 1998).  For each 
reference, we refer to "the employment contract."

     2  The arbitration panel concluded that "at least $700,000 should 
have been attributed to and been available for distribution by [the 
firm] as 1997 partner draw."  Noting that the firm had failed to 
comply with its discovery orders, the panel was unable to determine 
the precise amount that Coady's 1997 bonus should have been, other 
than to find that he was entitled to at least $45,000 more than he 
received.  The panel gave Coady the option of accepting the $45,000 
or pursuing further discovery;  Coady opted for the $45,000.

of the arbitration panel) be transferred to the district court in 
the District of Columbia.  Prior to the decision by the First 
Circuit, the jury in the district court for the District of 
Columbia returned a verdict that the firm had good cause to 
terminate Coady from employment and that Coady had not 
breached his fiduciary duties to the firm.  The district court 
denied Coady's motion for judgment and for a new trial under 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(b) and 59, and granted the firm's motion for 
judgment on the breach of contract claim in the amount of 
$400,000, which corresponded to the liquidated damages pro-
vision in the employment contract.

                               II.

     On appeal, Coady contends that the district court erred in 
three respects.  First, he challenges the district court's denial 
of his motion for summary judgment on the firm's contract 
claim.  Our review is de novo.  See, e.g., Kirkland v. District 
of Columbia, 70 F.3d 629, 635 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (citing Barbour 
v. Merrill, 48 F.3d 1270, 1276 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  Mackey v. 
United States, 8 F.3d 826, 829 (D.C. Cir. 1993));  see also 
Berkeley v. Home Ins. Co., 68 F.3d 1409, 1413 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).

     In the district court, Coady moved for partial summary 
judgment on the grounds that the firm had straddled income 
and expenses between 1997 and 1998 in an attempt to deny 
him the bonus to which he was entitled under the employ-
ment contract, and that this prior material breach, which the 
firm concealed from him until after the firm fired him, should 
preclude the firm from being able to sue him for his alleged 
subsequent breach.  The district court ruled that there was 
no such bar because Coady's selective non-performance and 
misdeeds did not constitute the type of action that he would 
have been entitled to take had he been aware of the firm's 
breach.  In Coady's view, "[s]ettled law establishes that the 
firm's prior, hidden breach relieved [him] of the obligation to 
perform his duties, in whole or in part, under the employment 
agreement."  Looking to section 237 of the Restatement 
(Second) of Contracts, he explains that this "long-standing" 

rule is designed to prevent the party to the first breach from 
profiting from concealing its bad acts while the party to the 
later breach is penalized.

     The Restatement (Second) of Contracts s 237 states that a 
party's continuing obligations under a contract are condi-
tioned on there being no "uncured material failure by the 
other party to render any such performance due at an earlier 
time."  Comment c explains that "one party's material failure 
of performance has the effect of the non-occurrence of a 
condition of the other party's remaining duties ... even 
though the other party does not know of the failure."  Illus-
tration 8 further explains:

     A and B make an employment contract.  After the 
     service has begun, A, the employee, commits a material 
     breach of his duty to give efficient service that would 
     justify B in discharging him.  B is not aware of this but 
     discharges A for an inadequate reason.  A has no claim 
     against B for discharging him.
     
     As a general proposition, we take no issue with the rule in 
the Restatement.  Rather, we hold that Coady is not in a 
position to rely on section 237.  As the district court ruled in 
denying him partial summary judgment, Coady's "alleged bad 
acts would not have been justified [even if he had] known 
about the firm's material breach.  [Instead,] Coady would 
have been justified in quitting or otherwise repudiating the 
contract, or in suspending performance entirely ...."  See, 
e.g., Cities Serv. Helex, Inc. v. United States, 543 F.2d 1306, 
1313 (Ct. Cl. 1976);  Vermont Marble Co. v. Baltimore Con-
tractors, Inc., 520 F. Supp. 922, 927 (D.D.C. 1981) (citing 
John W. Johnson, Inc. v. Basic Constr. Co., 292 F. Supp. 300 
(D.D.C. 1968), aff'd, 429 F.2d 764 (D.C. Cir. 1970));  13 
Samuel Williston, A Treatise on the Law of Contracts 
s 39:32, at 642-45 (Richard A. Lord ed., 4th ed. 2000).  Had 
Coady known of the firm's prior breach, the district court 
observed, that knowledge would nevertheless not excuse his 
own breaches so long as he continued to work at the firm:

     Coady would be sheltered by Comment c if he had quit 
     or refused to perform for an inadequate reason, but this 
     
     is not what transpired.  Material breach entitles the 
     injured party to an election of remedies, including rescis-
     sion or termination of the contract, not a license to 
     commit torts or otherwise breach the contract.
     
The district court's analysis effectively responds to Coady's 
contention that imposition of an election of remedies analysis 
is flawed because he was unaware of the firm's breach by its 
income straddle.  The only actions by Coady that could bar 
the firm's breach of contract claim would be actions that he 
would have been within his rights to take if he had known of 
the firm's breach.  Because Coady remained at the firm, he 
could not ignore his obligations for performance under the 
employment contract, even if he was ignorant of the firm's 
breach.

     The rationale for this result stems from the perverse 
incentives that would arise in contractual relationships if 
Coady's view was adopted.  Under his approach, an employ-
ee's theft of clients and computer information could not be 
considered conduct in breach of contract by an employee who 
had decided to continue to work for an employer that had 
previously breached an employment contract.  The authori-
ties on which Coady relies do not support his contention that 
the firm's prior material breach barred its suit against Coady 
for his alleged later breach.  Rather, those authorities sup-
port the proposition that Coady should have been allowed to 
defend by presenting evidence of the firm's prior breach.  See 
infra Part III.

                               III.

     Coady contends that the district court erred in denying his 
alternative request to introduce evidence at trial that the firm 
materially breached the employment contract by straddling 
its income and expenses.  The district court determined that 
there was "no reason for the jury to hear any evidence 
regarding [the firm's] income-straddle" because the arbitra-
tion panel "conclusively found that [the firm] did in fact 
engage in such behavior" and had awarded damages to Coady 
based on the firm's improper revenue manipulation.  As 

noted, this part of the district court's ruling predated the 
decision of the First Circuit reversing the district court's 
affirmance of the arbitration panel's decision.3  Even so, 
Coady maintains that notwithstanding his successful pursuit 
of arbitration at the time the district court ruled, he was 
entitled to introduce evidence of the firm's prior material 
breach as part of his defense to the firm's claim that he had 
breached his contractual and fiduciary duties to the firm.

     The "income straddle" evidence that Coady sought to intro-
duce at trial was based on his claim, denied by the firm at 
oral argument in this court, that the law firm had manipulat-
ed its income and expenses in 1997 in order to reduce the 
salaries of senior partners.  This evidence was relevant be-
cause Coady's bonus was capped by the "senior partner 
draw";  that is, Coady's total compensation, including his 
bonus, could not exceed what the senior partners earned.  
Coady contends that the "income straddle" evidence was 
relevant for the additional reason that it showed that the firm 
had a plan in 1997 to oust him, and thereby placed the firm's 
other adverse conduct toward him in a different light.

     The arbitration panel initially found that Coady had "sub-
mitted prima facie evidence of a substantial straddle of in-
come in 1997."  The panel concluded that the firm's obligation 
to Coady required it to follow its normal course in accounting 
for income and expenses that straddle two years and that 
Coady's evidence raised a substantial question about the 
firm's recording of 1997 income because the firm's rebuttal 
"fell far short of adequately explaining the reasons for the 
substantial deposits in 1998 of certain checks bearing 1997 
dates."  After a further hearing affording the firm an oppor-

__________
     3  Prior to the decision of the First Circuit, and before the case 
went to the jury, the district court here vacated the arbitration 
panel decision, as beyond its authority, to the extent that the panel 
purported to decide the breach of contract issues.  However, in 
denying the firm's compensation counterclaim, the district court 
also ruled that the parties were bound by the panel's factual finding 
that the firm had intentionally manipulated its 1997 income in order 
to lower Coady's bonus.

tunity to rebut Coady's prima facie case, the arbitration 
panel's supplemental findings concluded that the firm "en-
gaged in a series of actions designed to artificially reduce the 
'senior partner draw' for 1997, and to thereby lower the 'cap' 
on Coady's bonus income ...."

     The district court ruled that the "income straddle" evidence 
was inadmissible at trial because the arbitration panel "con-
clusively found that the firm did in fact engage in such 
behavior."  Because the firm conceded that it breached Coa-
dy's contract and because the arbitration panel subsequently 
awarded Coady damages based on the harm he suffered as a 
result of the breach, the district court concluded that there 
was no reason to introduce the "income straddle" evidence.  
The court explained that

     [i]f the jury finds that [the firm] wrongfully terminated 
     Coady, Coady will also be entitled to severance pay and 
     the unpaid settlement damages described in [the employ-
     ment contract].  If the jury finds that [the firm] had 
     good cause to terminate Coady, or that Coady otherwise 
     breached the contract, Coady will owe [the firm] the 
     same amount in liquidated damages and [the firm] will be 
     relieved of its obligation to pay Coady the unpaid settle-
     ment damages.
     
     Upon reviewing the district court's evidentiary ruling for 
abuse of discretion, see Whitbeck v. Vital Signs, Inc., 159 F.3d 
1369, 1372 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing United States v. Smart, 98 
F.3d 1379, 1386 (D.C. Cir. 1996)), we hold that the district 
court erred when it ruled that the arbitration panel decision 
precluded Coady from introducing at trial--as part of his 
defense to the firm's breach claims--evidence of the firm's 
manipulation of his bonus.  The cases that Coady cites sup-
port his contention that he was entitled to introduce such 
evidence as part of his defense.  For example, in Mardell v. 
Harleysville Life Ins. Co., 31 F.3d 1221 (3d Cir. 1994), 
vacated on other grounds, 514 U.S. 1034 (1995), the Third 
Circuit noted that "[i]n contract actions, if one party commits 
a material breach, the other party may generally use it to 
justify nonperformance even if, at the time of its own nonper-

formance, the second party was unaware of the first party's 
material breach."  Id. at 1231 n.16 (citing College Point Boat 
Corp. v. United States, 267 U.S. 12, 15-16 (1925);  Restate-
ment (Second) of Contracts s 385, cmt. a;  s 225 & cmt. e;  
s 237 & cmt. c (1981)).  Similarly, in Western Auto Supply 
Co. v. Sullivan, 210 F.2d 36 (8th Cir. 1954), the Eighth 
Circuit noted that "it seems to be generally accepted by 
well[-]considered decisions that a party to a contract may 
defend on the ground that there existed at the time a legal 
excuse for non-performance by him although he was ignorant 
of that fact at the time of the breach."  Id. at 39-40 (citations 
omitted).  These authorities indicate not--as Coady main-
tains--that the firm was barred by its alleged prior breach 
from suing Coady for his subsequent breach, but that Coady 
would be entitled to introduce evidence of the firm's prior 
material breach as part of his defense to the firm's claims 
that he breached the employment contract.

     The record makes clear that Coady did not seek to intro-
duce evidence of the "income straddle" in an attempt to 
duplicate damages already awarded him by the arbitration 
panel.  Nor, as the firm argued, did Coady seek simply to 
introduce evidence that he had won his case before the 
arbitration panel;  rather, he wanted to introduce evidence of 
the underlying facts.  Evidence may properly be used in 
different proceedings for different purposes.  Cf., e.g., United 
States v. Spicer, 57 F.3d 1152, 1158 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(discussing Brown v. Felsen, 442 U.S. 127 (1979));  18 
Charles Alan Wright et al., Federal Practice & Procedure 
s 4422 (1981).  Here, in defense to the firm's claim that he 
had breached the employment contract, Coady sought to 
show that the firm had "long planned to oust him from the 
Boston office and had pressured him in every way to achieve 
that intended result."  Admission of this evidence was not 
barred by the fact that it was the basis for the arbitration 
panel's award.  See Leone v. Mobil Oil Corp., 523 F.2d 1153, 
1158 (D.C. Cir. 1975) (citing Alexander v. Gardner-Denver 
Co., 415 U.S. 36, 60 (1974)).

     The question remains whether the error was harmless.  In 
determining whether an error is harmless, the court mea-

sures the harm in terms of "whether the error had substan-
tial and injurious effect or influence in determining the jury's 
verdict, not merely whether the record evidence is sufficient 
absent the error to warrant a verdict of guilt."  United States 
v. Johnson, 231 F.3d 43, 47 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (citing Smart, 98 
F.3d at 1390).  Consequently, an evidentiary error is harm-
less if "(1) the case is not close, (2) the issue not central, or (3) 
effective steps were taken to mitigate the effects of the error 
...."  Rogers v. Ingersoll-Rand Co., 144 F.3d 841, 846 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998) (quoting Carter v. District of Columbia, 795 F.2d 
116, 132 (D.C. Cir. 1986)).

     Coady contends that evidence that the firm sought to drive 
him away lacked the "smoking gun" of the firm's income 
straddle.  As the case went to the jury, the jury heard what 
Coady describes as the firm's "detailed story of Coady's 
alleged malfeasances, but not Coady's defense," and "al-
though the jury was instructed that [the firm] had a duty to 
deal fairly and in good faith with [him], [the jury] never heard 
the key evidence supporting the conclusion that [the firm] had 
utterly failed to meet that standard."  Coady maintains, 
therefore, that his defense was

     prejudiced ... beyond repair.  Instead of hearing the 
     full story of the parties' troubled relationship, including 
     [the firm's] surreptitious attempts to force Coady out of 
     the firm by substantially decreasing his compensation, 
     the only complete story the jury heard was [the firm's]--
     a tale chock full of anecdotes about Coady's allegedly 
     disloyal acts, and a tale devoid of the pivotal counter-
     evidence of [the firm's] bad faith.
     
In Coady's view, "[t]he evidence [he] had available of [the 
firm's] actions and was permitted to share with the jury 
would have taken on an entirely different light if the factfin-
der had known that, before those actions, [the firm] had 
begun to straddle income and expenses with an eye to driving 
Coady from the firm."  The firm maintains that the district 
court properly ruled that the evidence was inadmissible be-
cause it did not excuse Coady's breaches and, in any event, 

Coady presented "considerable evidence of bad faith" on the 
part of the firm.

     At trial, the firm introduced evidence that Coady had 
breached his contractual and fiduciary duties to it in numer-
ous ways.  Evidence relating to deliberate acts of misconduct 
included Coady's attempt to steal clients and to sabotage the 
firm's computer database.  As the firm explained at oral 
argument in this court, most of the evidence regarding Coa-
dy's breach focused on his conspiracy with a former associate 
and the fact that he did not inform the firm that the associate 
had left the firm.  Coady's defense attempted, in turn, to 
show that the firm had planned to oust him from its Boston 
office for a long time.  For example, he introduced evidence 
that in late 1996, he requested that the firm make him a 
senior partner, as he was the only managing attorney not also 
a senior partner.  The firm denied his request.  In the 
beginning of 1997, the firm told Coady that he must hire for a 
litigating position a new attorney who had no trial experience 
but who was the nephew of one of the senior partners.  
Coady resisted and was subsequently "threatened" that if he 
did not comply with the directive, his career would be "histo-
ry."  In June 1997, Coady was told that he could henceforth 
communicate with only certain partners in the Washington, 
D.C. office.  In January 1998, the firm rejected Coady's 
request for reimbursement for expenses incurred in attending 
an annual conference on toxic tort litigation.  This represent-
ed the first time such a reimbursement request by Coady was 
denied.  In addition, the firm began refusing to pay monthly 
office expenses for the Boston office.  Coady also introduced 
evidence that the firm did not inform him of its affiliation with 
another Boston firm.

     The court need not be in a position to evaluate the "income 
straddle" evidence in order to conclude that without hearing 
about the firm's "income straddle," the jury could reasonably 
have viewed the evidence that Coady introduced in his de-
fense as involving disputes likely to arise between an employ-
er and its employee.  Deciding whom to make a managing 
partner, whom to hire, and what expenses to pay are deci-
sions that employers normally make, and an employee might 

not always agree with those decisions;  the firm could reason-
ably argue it was entitled to make these decisions under the 
employment contract.  Denying a contractually entitled bo-
nus, however, is conduct of a different order.  Evidence that 
the firm had improperly shifted revenues and expenses be-
tween 1997 and 1998 could well have affected the jury's 
assessment of the totality of the firm's adverse conduct 
toward Coady.  From evidence that the firm would go so far 
as to violate its contractual obligation and its duty to act in 
good faith toward Coady by manipulating income and ex-
penses in order to deny Coady his full bonus, a jury could 
reasonably conclude that the firm's other conduct was to be 
viewed in a different light.  See, e.g., Ciullo v. United States, 
325 F.2d 227, 229-30 (D.C. Cir. 1963).  Such evidence would 
have exposed the jury to venal conduct by the firm that was 
otherwise missing.  Under the circumstances, the evidence 
was central to Coady's defense, and in the absence of any 
steps by the district court to mitigate the effects of the error, 
we hold that denying Coady the opportunity to present 
evidence of the firm's income straddle was not harmless 
error.

                               IV.

     Finally, Coady's contention that the district court erred in 
refusing to strike the firm's claim for liquidated damages is 
meritless.  Our review is de novo.  See, e.g., American Nat'l 
Bank & Trust Co. v. Regional Transp. Auth., 125 F.3d 420, 
439 (7th Cir. 1997) (citing Lake River Corp. v. Carborundum 
Co., 769 F.2d 1284, 1290 (7th Cir. 1985));  Ruckelshaus v. 
Broward County Sch. Bd., 494 F.2d 1164, 1165 (5th Cir. 
1974).

     This circuit has long recognized the validity of liquidated 
damages provisions, observing in Progressive Builders, Inc. v. 
District of Columbia, 258 F.2d 431, 433-34 (D.C. Cir. 1958), 
that so long as the amount agreed to by the parties prior to 
the breach is reasonable, the court will uphold the provision:  
"[There is] difficulty of laying down any narrower test than 
the reasonableness in each particular case of the sum agreed 

upon as compensation for the breach."  Id. (quoting 3 Samuel 
Williston, A Treatise on the Law of Contracts s 2214 (rev. 
ed. 1936)).  Under District of Columbia law, liquidated-
damages clauses are valid and enforceable.  See, e.g., Horn & 
Hardart Co. v. National Rail Passenger Corp., 843 F.2d 546, 
550 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (citing Vicki Bagley Realty, Inc. v. 
Laufer, 482 A.2d 359, 368 (D.C. 1984));  Burns v. Hanover 
Ins. Co., 454 A.2d 325, 327 (D.C. 1982).  Coady, too, acknowl-
edges that liquidated damages provisions can be legitimate, 
but he contends that the $400,000 amount is unenforceable on 
public policy grounds and because it is a penalty inasmuch as 
the contractual provision had no relationship to the actual 
damages suffered or anticipated.  The authorities on which 
he relies, however, fail to advance his cause.

     The Restatement (Second) of Contracts s 356(1) states that

     [d]amages for breach by either party may be liquidated 
     in the agreement but only at an amount that is reason-
     able in the light of the anticipated or actual loss caused 
     by the breach and the difficulties of proof of loss.  A 
     term fixing unreasonably large liquidated damages is 
     unenforceable on grounds of public policy as a penalty.
     
Id.;  see also Davy v. Crawford, 147 F.2d 574, 575 (D.C. Cir. 
1945);  Kingston Constructors, Inc. v. WMATA, 930 F. Supp. 
651, 656 (D.D.C. 1996), aff'd, 172 F.3d 919 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  
Coady contends that where parties provide that one fixed 
sum be awarded as damages for any material breach, courts 
should "look askance at the liquidated damages provision."  
He also points to the prohibition in Rule 5.6 of the D.C. Rules 
of Professional Conduct on a law firm "restrict[ing] the rights 
of a lawyer to practice after termination of the [employment] 
relationship ...."  District of Columbia Bar, District of 
Columbia Rules of Professional Conduct s 5.6(a) (2001).

     Our response can be brief.  First, the employment contract 
did not specify that all breaches triggered the liquidated 
damages provision;  rather, only those breaches deemed "ma-
terial" triggered the payment of liquidated damages.  See 
Horton v. Horton, 487 S.E.2d 200, 204 (Va. 1997);  15 Samuel 
Williston, A Treatise on the Law of Contracts s 44:55, at 

231-33 (Richard A. Lord ed., 4th ed. 2000).  Second, in 
context, the liquidated damages amount was not unreason-
able.  When Coady was first hired by the firm in 1993, the 
amount of liquidated damages was set at $50,000.  In 1994, 
the employment contract was amended to set the liquidated 
damages amount in increments:  breaches occurring from 
1994 to 1996 would carry an award of $150,000;  breaches in 
1997, $300,000;  and breaches in 1998, $400,0000.  Increasing 
the amount of damages each year was justified to reflect 
Coady's increasing value to the firm and his increased respon-
sibilities within the firm.  See, e.g., Mercer Management 
Consulting, Inc. v. Wilde, 920 F. Supp. 219, 237 (D.D.C. 1996) 
(citing Ellis v. Hurson Ass'n, Inc., 565 A.2d 615, 618 (D.C. 
1989)).  Coady was not only the head of the Boston office, 
but, according to the firm, he was "the only lawyer in that 
office with substantial experience in the firm's Boston prac-
tice areas."  Consequently, the firm can reasonably argue 
that his termination for cause would likely be disruptive and 
create both considerable losses and expenses while the firm 
sought to replace him.  Indeed, a firm partner testified that 
the estimated business opportunities lost as a result of Coa-
dy's termination was between $1 million and $1.5 million.

     Finally, Rule 5.6 of the District of Columbia Rules of 
Professional Conduct is inapplicable because the liquidated 
damages were not linked to Coady's decision to compete with 
the firm.  See District of Columbia Bar, Opinions of the 
Legal Ethics Committee of the District of Columbia Bar 
Interpreting the Code of Professional Responsibility, Nos. 
77 & 97 (1984).  Notwithstanding testimony by a firm partner 
that the liquidated damages provision was designed to penal-
ize an attorney who sought to compete with the firm, the 
terms of the employment contract are readily distinguishable 
from a contract not to compete.  Cf. Hackett v. Milbank, 
Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, 654 N.E.2d 95, 97-102 (N.Y. 1995).  
Rather, the liquidated damages provision was like that ap-
proved in Mercer, 920 F. Supp. at 237.

     Accordingly, we affirm the district court's denial of judg-
ment on the ground that the firm was not barred from suing 
Coady for breach of contract by reason of its own prior 

material breach of the contract, and we affirm the district 
court's refusal to strike the firm's claim for liquidated dam-
ages.  However, because Coady was prejudiced by the denial 
of an opportunity to introduce evidence of the firm's income 
straddle, we reverse the judgment and remand the case to 
the district court.

                                        