                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued April 10, 2000        Decided July 25, 2000 

                           No. 99-1222

         East Texas Electric Cooperative, Inc., et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

            Central Power and Light Company, et al., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     A. Hewitt Rose, III argued the cause for the petitioners.

     David H. Coffman, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for the respondent.  John H. 
Conway, Acting Solicitor, Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission, was on brief.  Jay L. Witkin, Solicitor, and Susan J. 

Court, Counsel, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, en-
tered appearances.

     Clark Evans Downs argued the cause for the Intervenors.  
Martin V. Kirkwood was on brief.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners 
East Texas Electric Cooperative, Inc., Northeast Texas Elec-
tric Cooperative, Inc. and Tex-La Electric Cooperative of 
Texas, Inc. (collectively, Texas Electric) seek review of three 
orders of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
(FERC, Commission) ultimately approving the open access 
transmission tariff the CSW Operating Companies (CSW)1 
proposed for their provision of electric power to Texas Elec-
tric, inter alia.  Texas Electric argues that the Commission, 
in its Tariff Order, Central Power & Light Co., 81 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,311 (1997), accepted certain rates included in CSW's 
proposed rates but rejected and ordered modification of 
another.  CSW not only responded to the Commission's di-
rective regarding modification of the specified rate, they also 
eliminated a different rate which, Texas Electric argues, had 
been accepted and was therefore not supposed to be eliminat-
ed.  The Commission accepted CSW's compliance filing in 
relevant part in its Compliance Order, Central Power & Light 
Co., 85 F.E.R.C. p 61,224 (1998), including the alleged rate 
change resulting from the elimination of the rate earlier 
accepted.  Finally, in its Rehearing Order, Central Power & 
Light Co., 87 F.E.R.C. p 61,073 (1999), the Commission reject-
ed Texas Electric's arguments and concluded CSW had com-
plied with the Tariff Order directives.

__________
     1  The Central and South West Corporation, a registered public 
utility holding company, is comprised of four operating companies 
(CSW):  Southwestern Electric Power Company;  Public Service 
Company of Oklahoma;  Central Power and Light Company;  and 
West Texas Utilities Company.  CSW filed a brief as intervenors in 
support of the Commission.

     Texas Electric argues, citing 16 U.S.C. s 824d, that CSW 
failed to justify the rate change as the Federal Power Act 
(Act) requires and that the Commission's acceptance, without 
explanation, of CSW's compliance filing and its resulting 
approval of CSW's elimination of the previously accepted 
charge (thereby effecting a rate change) also failed to satisfy 
the Commission's duty under the Administrative Procedure 
Act, 5 U.S.C. s 706(2).  Texas Electric further contends the 
new rates unduly discriminate against it (and other CSW 
customers) and that the Commission violated its duty under 
the Act, 16 U.S.C. s 824e, to assure that rates are not unduly 
discriminatory.

     The Commission on the other hand claims it did not accept 
the proposed rates in the Tariff Order and that nothing 
therein prohibited CSW from eliminating the rate at issue.  
Rather, the Commission claims that its Tariff Order makes 
clear the decision was left to CSW's discretion.  We defer to 
FERC's interpretation of its Tariff Order as not limiting 
CSW's revised transmission tariff.  We conclude, however, 
that the Tariff Order did not sufficiently notify Texas Electric 
of CSW's discretion to modify the original proposal, particu-
larly in light of the Tariff Order's language approving the 
rates at issue.  Hence Texas Electric's failure to seek rehear-
ing does not bar it from raising this issue before us.  More-
over, the Commission failed to explain why the revised tariff 
was lawful, that is, just and reasonable.  Given that the 
revision at issue could not fairly have been anticipated by 
Texas Electric, the Commission erred in summarily approv-
ing that part of the Compliance Tariff without explaining 
whether the new rates were just and reasonable;  accordingly, 
we remand for FERC to make that determination.

                                I.

     The CSW System operates in two power districts:  the 
Southwest Power Pool (SPP) and the Electric Reliability 
Council of Texas (ERCOT).  Of the four operating companies 
in the CSW System, two are entirely within SPP and the 

other two are entirely within ERCOT.2  CSW's facilities are 
interconnected, however, forming a single, integrated system.

     In 1996 FERC addressed the rate systems of public utili-
ties, like those comprising CSW, who are members of regis-
tered public utilities holding companies.  In Order No. 888 
(filed May 10, 1996), Promoting Wholesale Competition 
Through Open Access Non-discriminatory Transmission 
Services by Public Utilities, FERC Stats. & Regs. p 31,035, 
61 Fed. Reg. 21,540 (1996), codified as revised at 18 C.F.R. 
Pts. 35 & 385 (1999),3 which resulted from a rule-making 
proceeding designed to remedy undue discrimination in the 
transmission of electric power, FERC required all such utili-
ties to file a tariff permitting transmission service across the 
holding company's entire system at a single price.  See 
Transmission Access Policy Study Group, 2000 WL 762706, 
at *3, *5 (D.C. Cir. June 30, 2000);  see also Tariff Order, 81 
F.E.R.C. at 62,430 (discussing Order No. 888).  Thus, individ-
ual member utilities within a holding company could no longer 
charge separate, "pancaked" rates4 for what is a single trans-

__________
     2  ERCOT operates entirely in Texas and, to a large extent, is 
governed by the Public Utility Commission of Texas.  Although the 
ERCOT companies became subject to FERC jurisdiction as a result 
of their interconnection with the SPP companies, FERC commonly 
defers to the Texas transmission ratemaking methodologies within 
ERCOT.  See Brief of Commission at 7;  Brief of Petitioners at 5.

     3  For the revisions and clarifications of Order No. 888, see 76 
F.E.R.C. p 61,009 (1996), 76 F.E.R.C. p 61,347 (1996), and 79 
F.E.R.C. p 61,182 (1997), on reh'g, Order No. 888-A, FERC Stats. 
& Regs. p 31,048, 62 Fed. Reg. 12,274 (1997), on reh'g, Order No. 
888-B, 81 F.E.R.C. p 61,248, 62 Fed. Reg. 64,688 (1997), on reh'g, 
Order No. 888-C, 82 F.E.R.C. p 61,046 (1998), aff'd in part and 
remanded sub nom. Transmission Access Policy Study Group v. 
FERC, 2000 WL 762706 (D.C. Cir. June 30, 2000).

     4  A "pancaked" rate is equal to the sum of the rates for a single 
transmission of two or more utilities within a holding company's 
system.  In other words, the customer must pay each utility's 
separate charge for a single transmission:  here, the customer would 
pay both SPP and ERCOT rates for a transmission through their 

mission over the holding company's system.  Id. at 62,432.  
Instead, the utilities must provide the transmission under a 
single rate, resulting in a de facto reduction of the overall 
charge.  FERC addressed the CSW System specifically, di-
recting the utilities therein to file "a system tariff that will 
provide comparable service to all wholesale users on the CSW 
System, regardless of whether they take transmission service 
wholly within ERCOT or the SPP, or take transmission 
service between the reliability councils over the North and 
East Interconnections."  Order No. 888, 61 Fed. Reg. at 
21,595.  Furthermore, FERC noted that "[i]t may be appro-
priate to have different rates for transmission service wholly 
within ERCOT or the SPP, and for service between [them]."  
Id. at 21,595 n.422.

     CSW filed a proposed transmission tariff that provided 
separate rates for wholly intra-ERCOT service and wholly 
intra-SPP service but did not provide a single CSW System-
wide rate for transmissions through both ERCOT and SPP.  
Thus, customers requiring service traversing the SPP- 
ERCOT boundary would pay pancaked rates.  In its Tariff 
Order the Commission analyzed CSW's separate rates for the 
two service areas (ERCOT and SPP) and determined that the 
rate structures were reasonable.

     Assessing different rates for service in the different 
     regions is reasonable....  [I]t is appropriate to allow 
     CSW to adopt the Texas Commission's regional network 
     pricing structure for services wholly in ERCOT.  As a 
     corollary, it is also reasonable for CSW to assess a single 
     postage stamp rate for service wholly within SPP.
     
Tariff Order, 81 F.E.R.C. at 62,432-33.  The Commission, 
however, then rejected the pancaked rates for service tra-
versing both areas.  See id. at 62,433.  It "require[d] CSW to 
revise its tariff to propose a single rate for use of the entire 
CSW system" and added that, "[w]hile CSW may continue to 
propose multiple charges, their total sum may not exceed 

__________
separate service areas but within the CSW System.  See Brief of 
Commission at 11.

CSW's average system cost."  Id.  In closing the Commission 
further described its action:

     The Commission orders:
     
          (A) CSW is hereby directed to make the changes 
     discussed in the body of this order within 30 days of the 
     date of this order.
     
          (B) The proposed CSW Tariff is hereby accepted for 
     filing, as modified as directed in Ordering Paragraph (A) 
     above, effective January 1, 1997....
     
Id. at 62,440.

     CSW filed a Compliance Tariff proposing a single four-
company, system-wide rate applicable both to customers 
served by transmissions through ERCOT and SPP and to 
customers accessing only SPP service.5  The tariff also set a 
rate applicable to customers using only ERCOT but eliminat-
ed the comparable rate for "SPP-only" customers it had 
originally proposed.  Texas Electric protested the Compli-
ance Tariff's elimination of the intra-SPP rate.  It argued 
that the Tariff Order had approved the intra-SPP rate and, 
therefore, CSW must justify elimination of the rate as the Act 
requires.  In addition, Texas Electric argued that the intra-
SPP rate was necessary to prevent undue discrimination in 
light of the intra-ERCOT rate which remained in effect and 
was less expensive than the system-wide rate to which 
SPP-only customers had become subject.  In the Compliance 
Order the Commission focused on whether CSW had com-
plied with the Tariff Order.  The Commission found that it 
had:  "In the [Tariff Order], we directed [CSW] to submit a 
single, system-wide rate, and they have done so."  Compli-
ance Order, 85 F.E.R.C. at 61,924.  Accordingly, the Commis-
sion approved elimination of the intra-SPP rate.

     Texas Electric requested rehearing challenging FERC's 
approval of the elimination of the intra-SPP rate in the 

__________
     5  Although Texas Electric requested rehearing on "the Com-
mission's approval of direct assignment of the costs of transmission 
facility upgrades," Joint Appendix 42, it did not challenge the 
system-wide rates or CSW's authority to establish multiple charges.

Compliance Tariff.  It argued that elimination of the rate was 
not consistent with the Tariff Order and lacked adequate 
justification by CSW and adequate consideration by the Com-
mission.  In the Rehearing Order, the Commission again 
rejected Texas Electric's challenges because it found CSW 
had complied with its directive in the Tariff Order (that is, to 
propose a single rate for use of the entire CSW system) when 
it eliminated the intra-SPP rate in favor of a single-system 
rate.  See Rehearing Order, 87 F.E.R.C. at 61,300.  The 
Commission added that, if Texas Electric wished to challenge 
the directive, it could have done so on rehearing of the Tariff 
Order but not on rehearing of the Compliance Order.  See id.

                               II.

     "As a general matter, we will uphold FERC's factual 
findings if supported by substantial evidence and will endorse 
its orders so long as they are based on reasoned decision 
making."  Texaco, Inc. v. FERC, 148 F.3d 1091, 1095 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999) (citing Koch Gateway Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 136 
F.3d 810, 814 (D.C. Cir. 1998)).  And if FERC interprets its 
own orders reasonably, we will sustain its interpretations.  
See Natural Gas Clearinghouse v. FERC, 108 F.3d 397, 399 
(D.C. Cir. 1997).

     Arguing that the Tariff Order left CSW free to eliminate 
the multiple charges they had proposed, FERC relies on the 
permissive "may" in the statement that "CSW may continue 
to propose multiple charges," Tariff Order, 81 F.E.R.C. at 
62,433 (emphasis added).  Although FERC precedent gener-
ally confines the scope of modifications in compliance filings 
to the Commission's particular directives, see Entergy Power 
Mktg. Corp., 75 F.E.R.C. p 61,282 at 61,903 (1996);  Southern 
Co. Servs., 63 F.E.R.C. p 61,217 at 62,595-96 (1993), here the 
Commission specifically left to CSW the decision whether to 
"continue to propose multiple charges."  81 F.E.R.C. at 
62,433.  Thus, CSW's subsequent elimination of the intra-SPP 
rate was contemplated and in fact authorized, albeit not 
ordered, in the Tariff Order.  FERC points to specific lan-
guage supporting its interpretation of its Tariff Order as non-

prescriptive with regard to proposing multiple charges, see 
Brief of Commission at 21,6 and, finding FERC's interpreta-
tion of its own order reasonable, we must sustain it against 
Texas Electric's challenge.  See Natural Gas Clearinghouse, 
108 F.3d at 399.

     Nevertheless the Tariff Order did not provide sufficient 
notice to Texas Electric that CSW could eliminate the ap-
proved intra-SPP rate.  See McElroy Elecs. Corp. v. FCC, 
990 F.2d 1351, 1358 (D.C. Cir. 1993) ("[W]e look not at the 
reasonableness of the Commission's intended interpretation, 
but at the clarity with which the agency made that intent 
known.").  Much of the Tariff Order indicated acceptance of 
CSW's proposed tariff, including the declarations in the intro-
ductory paragraph:  "In this order, the Commission directs 
modifications to and accepts for filing, as modified, a joint 
system-wide open access transmission tariff."  Tariff Order, 
81 F.E.R.C. at 62,430 (emphasis added).  In the Commission's 
concluding list of orders, it also accepted the tariff for filing 
conditioned on the modifications CSW were directed to make.7  
See id. at 62,440.  The Commission approved the separate 
intra-SPP and intra-ERCOT rates so long as their sum did 
not exceed CSW's average system cost.  See id. at 62,432-33.  
In fact, FERC deemed the methodology used to determine 
separate rates "appropriate" and "reasonable."  Id. at 62,433.  
One reasonable interpretation of the phrase granting CSW 
discretion is an indication of FERC policy toward future rate 

__________
     6  In brief the Commission argued:

          As for any requirement that [CSW] must retain their intra-
     SPP rates, the Tariff Order spoke to that as well.  The Tariff 
     Order specifically stated that "[w]hile CSW may continue to 
     propose multiple charges, their total sum may not exceed 
     CSW's average system cost."  By using the permissive "may," 
     FERC made clear that [CSW] had the discretion to keep or 
     eliminate multiple charges including the SPP-only rates.
     
Brief of Commission at 21 (citations omitted) (emphasis in original).

     7  As noted earlier, proposed tariff modifications are ordinarily 
limited to what the Commission directs but the Commission did not 
direct CSW to eliminate the intra-SPP rate.

changes, as "may continue" implies future action.  This inter-
pretation is all the more reasonable if, given FERC's discus-
sion in approving the separate, regional rates, the reader 
interpreted the order as accepting the proposed rates that 
were not subject to the directed modification.  On the whole 
it was not unreasonable for Texas Electric to have overlooked 
or misread the permissive language of the Tariff Order so as 
to relieve it of the obligation to petition for clarification or 
rehearing.  It is for this reason we disagree with the Com-
mission's statement in the Rehearing Order that Texas Elec-
tric failed to preserve its challenge (thus precluding our 
exercise of jurisdiction) because it did not raise the objection 
in its petition for rehearing of the Tariff Order.

     The judicial review portion of the Act provides that "[n]o 
objection to the order of the Commission shall be considered 
by the court unless such objection shall have been urged 
before the Commission in the application for rehearing unless 
there is reasonable ground for failure so to do."  16 U.S.C. 
s 825l(b).  We have consistently rejected agency efforts to 
bind parties "by what the agency intended, but failed to 
communicate."  McElroy Elecs. Corp. v. FCC, 990 F.2d 1351 
(D.C. Cir. 1993).  Rather, an agency order must provide 
reasonable notice of its import:

     The policy requiring timely filing of motions for reconsid-
     eration is one of fairness to [FERC8] and to parties 
     affected by its order;  only a perversion of that policy 
     could be used to cut off the rights of a party that filed its 
     application in good faith, as soon as it could reasonably 
     have become aware of the import of an [FERC] order.  
     Endorsement of the position that the [FERC] takes 
     would permit an administrative agency to enter an am-
     biguous or obscure order, wilfully or otherwise, wait out 
     the required time, then enter an "explanatory" order that 
     
__________
     8  Instead of referring to FERC, the opinion refers to "FPC," 
the former Federal Power Commission and the predecessor of 
FERC.  See, e.g., Elizabethtown Gas Co. v. FERC, 575 F.2d 885, 
886 (D.C. Cir. 1978).

     would extinguish the review rights of parties prejudicial-
     ly affected.
     
Sam Rayburn Dam Elec. Coop. v. Federal Power Comm'n, 
515 F.2d 998, 1007 (D.C. Cir. 1975).  As earlier discussed, it 
was not clear that the Commission could allow elimination of 
the intra-SPP rate (absent statutorily mandated procedures) 
until it did so in the Compliance Order.  Texas Electric's 
challenge made in its request for rehearing of the Compliance 
Order, therefore, was not untimely.  See MCI Telecomms. 
Corp. v. FCC, 765 F.2d 1186, 1190-91 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (be-
cause implication of policy did not follow from earlier order, 
request for rehearing of subsequent order enunciating policy 
was timely);  Sam Rayburn Dam, 515 F.2d at 1007-08 (not 
clear until further clarification order that purchaser of elec-
tric power was "aggrieved" so application for rehearing was 
timely filed);  see also RCA Global Communications, Inc. v. 
FCC, 758 F.2d 722, 730-31 (D.C. Cir. 1985) ("We simply 
cannot agree that a fair reading of the Prescription Order ... 
permits the conclusion that [petitioner] did know or should 
have known that the Commission had confronted, much less 
resolved, the issue [petitioner] now petitions us to review.");  
cf. ANR Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 988 F.2d 1229, 1230 (D.C. Cir. 
1993) ("[W]e believe that an ordinary reader familiar with the 
industry background would have recognized a very substan-
tial likelihood that the order meant what the Commission 
ultimately said it meant.").

     Having concluded that Texas Electric's challenge to the 
Compliance Order was timely, we look at its merits.  The 
Commission's summary approval of the Compliance Tariff 
cannot be regarded as a finding that a modification beyond 
the modifications directed, that is, the new rate to which 
SPP-only customers were subjected, was just and reason-
able.9  Ultimately, the Commission failed to offer anything 

__________
     9  While it might be argued that the mere reference to the Tariff 
Order was sufficient to establish that the rates accepted in the 
Compliance Order were reasonable because no multiple rates would 
be summed and yield a rate exceeding CSW's average system cost 

from which the court can "discern a reasoned path ... to the 
decision [the Commission] reached."  K N Energy, Inc. v. 
FERC, 968 F.2d 1295, 1303-04 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  Accordingly, 
we conclude the Commission's approval of the rates proposed 
in the Compliance Tariff was arbitrary and capricious and 
remand for reconsideration.  See AT&T v. FCC, 974 F.2d 
1351, 1355 (D.C. Cir. 1992) ("We conclude that the Reconsid-
eration Order is arbitrary and capricious for want of an 
adequate explanation and remand it for further consider-
ation.").

     For the foregoing reasons, we remand to FERC for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                                                            So ordered.

__________
in violation of the condition the Commission had set, see Tariff 
Order, 81 F.E.R.C. at 62,433, nonetheless we cannot agree that the 
Commission determined the rates reflected in the Compliance Tariff 
were just.  For example, the Commission did not respond to Texas 
Electric's challenge that the elimination of the separate, intra-SPP 
rate constituted undue discrimination in light of the continued 
existence of a separate, intra-ERCOT rate.

                  