                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 18, 2000     Decided June 16, 2000 

                           No. 99-1198

                Contemporary Media, Inc., et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

                    Appeal of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Howard J. Braun argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs were Jerold L. Jacobs and Shelley Sadow-
sky.

     Lisa A. Burns, Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-
sion, argued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief 
were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, and Daniel M. 
Armstrong, Associate General Counsel.

     Before:  Silberman, Henderson, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Three radio licensees appeal the 
Federal Communications Commission's (FCC's) revocation of 
their licenses and construction permits, as well as its denial of 
their application for a new station.  The FCC took those 
actions after the licensees' sole owner and president was 
convicted of sexually abusing children, and after the licensees 
made misrepresentations to the Commission about the own-
er's continued involvement in station affairs.  In the end, the 
case is no more difficult than this recitation of the facts 
suggests, and we therefore affirm the FCC in all respects.

                                I

     The appellant licensees own and operate five radio stations 
in Missouri and Indiana, hold two construction permits for 
radio stations in Missouri, and have an application pending 
for another Missouri station.  Michael Rice is the sole share-
holder, president, and treasurer of all three licensees and 
serves on each licensee's board of directors.  In November 
1990, Rice was arrested for criminal conduct involving sexual 
acts with a teenager.  In April of the following year, he was 
formally charged with three felony counts of sexual assault on 
an individual between fourteen and sixteen years of age.  The 
prosecutor subsequently amended the charges to include 
eight felony counts of sexual assault on individuals between 
fourteen and sixteen years of age, and four felony counts of 
forcible sodomy of individuals under fourteen years of age.  
The sexual abuse involved five children and occurred between 
December 1985 and October 1990.  Two days after the 
charges were filed, Rice checked himself into a St. Louis 
hospital for in-patient psychiatric treatment.

     In June 1991, two of the licensees filed reports notifying 
the FCC of the charges against Rice.  The reports were filed 
pursuant to 47 C.F.R. s 165(a), which requires FCC license 
applicants to maintain "the continuing accuracy and complete-

ness of information furnished" in pending applications.  Each 
report stated that:

     Since Mr. Rice's hospitalization on April 3, 1991, he has 
     had absolutely no managerial, policy, or consultative role 
     in the affairs of the three broadcast corporations in which 
     he has ownership interests and officer positions.  In 
     other words, pending a resolution of the referenced 
     criminal charges, Mr. Rice is being completely insulated 
     and excluded from any involvement in the managerial, 
     policy, and day-to-day decisions involving any of the four 
     licensed stations and three construction permits held by 
     the three corporations.
     
J.A. at 15-16, 120 (citation omitted).  In October 1991, Rice 
was discharged from the hospital.  On May 14, 1992, one of 
the licensees filed another report with the FCC, stating:

     There has been no change in Mr. Rice's status with [the 
     reporting licensee] or in the status of the proceedings 
     against him....  Mr. Rice is no longer hospitalized, but 
     he continues to be treated by his physicians as an 
     outpatient, and he continues to have no managerial or 
     policy role in the affairs of the three broadcast corpora-
     tions ... in which he has ownership interests and corpo-
     rate positions.
     
Id. at 126-27 (citation omitted).

     On August 31, 1994, Rice was convicted of all twelve felony 
counts against him:  four counts of forcible sodomy, six counts 
of deviate sexual assault in the first degree, and two counts of 
deviate sexual assault in the second degree.  The court 
sentenced him to a total of eighty-four years in prison.  
Because the sentences were set to run concurrently, his 
maximum term of confinement amounted to eight years.  
Rice began his incarceration on September 30, 1994, and is 
currently eligible for release.

     On October 10, 1995, the FCC ordered an evidentiary 
hearing at which the licensees were directed to show cause 
why their licenses and construction permits should not be 
revoked and their pending application denied.  The central 

issues at the hearing were:  (1) the effect of Rice's felony 
convictions on the basic character qualifications of the licen-
sees, and (2) whether the licensees had misrepresented to the 
FCC that, subsequent to his arrest, Rice had been excluded 
from the management and operation of the stations.  After 
the hearing, the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) concluded 
that revocation of the licensees' authorizations was appropri-
ate due to the egregious nature of Rice's misconduct and to 
the misrepresentations made by the licensees in their reports 
to the Commission.  The FCC affirmed.

                                II

     The licensees' appeal raises a number of challenges, which 
we address in turn.  First, they challenge the legality of the 
character policy upon which the FCC's decision was based.  
We must sustain that policy unless we find it to be "arbitrary, 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accor-
dance with law."  Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(A);  see ACLU v. FCC, 823 F.2d 1554, 1574 
(D.C. Cir. 1987).1

     Section 308(b) of the Federal Communications Act provides 
that "[a]ll applications for station licenses, or modifications or 
renewals thereof, shall set forth such facts as the Commission 
by regulation may prescribe as to the citizenship, character, 
... and other qualifications of the applicant to operate the 
station."  47 U.S.C. s 308(b).  For many years, the FCC had 
no express policy concerning the character qualifications of its 
applicants;  the Commission considered a wide range of fac-
tors in evaluating character, and as a consequence its evalua-

__________
     1 The licensees rely on our decision in Bechtel v. FCC, 10 F.3d 
875 (D.C. Cir. 1993), which stated that agencies must be prepared to 
defend the underlying validity of policy statements because those 
statements "are exempt from the Administrative Procedure Act's 
notice-and-comment requirements and hence may take effect with-
out the rigors--and presumed advantages--of that process."  Id. at 
878 (citation omitted).  Because we conclude that the FCC did 
adequately justify its policies in the decision under review, Bechtel 
does not affect our analysis.

tions sometimes yielded inconsistent results.  See Policy Re-
garding Character Qualifications in Broadcast Licensing, 87 
F.C.C.2d 836, 836-37 (1981) (notice of inquiry).  The Commis-
sion responded to this problem in 1986 with the adoption of a 
comprehensive character policy statement.  See Policy Re-
garding Character Qualifications in Broadcast Licensing, 
102 F.C.C.2d 1179 (1986) [hereinafter 1986 Character Policy 
Statement].  The statement announced that the FCC's char-
acter analysis would focus on "misconduct which violates the 
Communications Act or a Commission rule or policy, and ... 
certain specified non-FCC misconduct which demonstrate[s] 
the proclivity of an applicant to deal truthfully with the 
Commission and to comply with [its] rules and policies."  Id. 
at 1190-91.  The relevant non-FCC misconduct was limited to 
adjudicated cases involving:  fraudulent representations to 
government agencies, criminal false statements or dishonesty, 
and broadcast-related violations of antitrust laws or other 
laws concerning competition.  See id. at 1195-1203.  The 
FCC noted, however, that "there may be circumstances in 
which an applicant has engaged in nonbroadcast misconduct 
so egregious as to shock the conscience and evoke almost 
universal disapprobation."  Id. at 1205 n.60.  "Such miscon-
duct," the Commission stated, "might, of its own nature, 
constitute prima facie evidence that the applicant lacks the 
traits of reliability and/or truthfulness necessary to be a 
licensee, and might be a matter of Commission concern even 
prior to adjudication by another body."  Id.2  The 1986 
statement also listed mitigating factors that the Commission 
would consider in evaluating specific acts of misconduct.  See 
id. at 1227-28.

     In 1990, the FCC determined that its 1986 policy had taken 
"an overly narrow view of the range of misconduct that 
should be relevant in licensing decisions."  Policy Regarding 
Character Qualifications in Broadcast Licensing, 5 F.C.C.R. 

__________
     2 In addition, the FCC explicitly reserved the option of expand-
ing the range of relevant misconduct "[s]hould [its] future experi-
ence indicate that [it had] erred ... in narrowing the range of non-
FCC misconduct to be considered for character purposes."  1986 
Character Policy Statement, 102 F.C.C.2d at 1208 n.75.

3252, 3252 (1990) [hereinafter 1990 Character Policy State-
ment].  It therefore amended that policy with a new state-
ment, which explained:

     [U]pon further reflection, we believe a propensity to 
     comply with the law generally is relevant to the Commis-
     sion's public interest analysis, and that an applicant's or 
     licensee's willingness to violate other laws, and, in partic-
     ular, to commit felonies, also bears on our confidence that 
     an applicant or licensee will conform to FCC rules and 
     policies....  Thus, evidence of any conviction for mis-
     conduct constituting a felony will be relevant to our 
     analysis of an applicant's or licensee's character.
     
Id.  The FCC further stated that although "not all convic-
tions for serious crimes are equally probative" of propensity 
to obey the law, it would not "establish a 'hierarchy' of 
felonies that may arise in individual cases."  Id.  Rather, the 
Commission would analyze misconduct on a case-by-case basis 
through the examination of mitigating factors.  As in 1986, 
the Commission stated that for non-FCC conduct it generally 
would consider only adjudicated cases.  However, it "contin-
ue[d] to believe that, where an applicant has allegedly en-
gaged in nonbroadcast misconduct 'so egregious as to shock 
the conscience and evoke almost universal disapprobation,' 
such conduct 'might be a matter of Commission concern even 
prior to adjudication by another body.' "  Id. at 3252 n.5 
(quoting 1986 Character Policy Statement, 102 F.C.C.2d at 
1205 n.60).

     The licensees' challenge to the legitimacy of the current 
character policy is threefold.  First, they contend that there 
is "no justification for license revocation based on non-FCC-
related criminal misconduct of a licensee's principal, even if 
such misconduct was 'egregious.' "  Br. of Appellants at 17.  
According to the licensees, such revocation is particularly 
inappropriate in this case because "there was no nexus 
between Mr. Rice's sexual misconduct and the Licensees' 
broadcast activities."  Id. at 16 (emphasis in original).

     We disagree, both as a general matter and with regard to 
the specifics of this case.  As to the former, it should be noted 

that the FCC's policy is not automatically to disqualify a 
license holder or applicant who commits a felony, but rather 
to consider the felony as a relevant factor in evaluating 
propensity to obey the law.  See 1990 Character Policy 
Statement, 5 F.C.C.R. at 3252.  We see nothing irrational in 
the conclusion that a violation of the criminal laws is relevant 
to that evaluation and to the issue of character in general.  
See generally DiCola v. FDA, 77 F.3d 504, 507-08 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  The FCC relies heavily on the honesty and probity of 
its licensees in a regulatory system that is largely self-
policing.  See Leflore Broad. Co. v. FCC, 636 F.2d 454, 461 
(D.C. Cir. 1980) ("[E]ffective regulation is premised upon the 
agency's ability to depend upon the representations made to 
it by its licensees....").  Under such a regime, a felony 
conviction--any felony conviction--is certainly a factor to be 
considered.  It may not necessarily be a dispositive factor, 
and all such convictions may not be equally probative--as the 
FCC recognizes.  See 1990 Character Policy Statement, 5 
F.C.C.R. at 3252.  But it is hard to see the argument that a 
felony conviction is not relevant at all.

     In this case, moreover, the argument is particularly weak.  
It is hardly irrational to conclude that if an individual is 
unwilling to obey the law with respect to such patently 
criminal behavior as sexual assault on children, he will be 
equally unwilling to obey FCC rules that require openness 
and honesty with the Commission.  Indeed, as discussed 
below, that connection was borne out in this case.  Because 
the policy of considering felonious misconduct was clearly 
permissible as applied to the licensees, they cannot succeed in 
their attempt to challenge it on its face.  Cf. Romer v. Evans, 
517 U.S. 620, 643 (1996);  Steffan v. Perry, 41 F.3d 677, 693 
(D.C. Cir. 1994) (en banc).

     Second, the licensees argue that the FCC's character policy 
is arbitrary and capricious because it does not provide any 
criteria for determining which non-FCC-related misconduct is 
sufficiently serious to affect a licensee's propensity for relia-
bility in its dealings with the agency.  Given the myriad 
forms of criminal misconduct, the FCC's decision is not 
unreasonable.  The Commission cannot be required to fore-
see the variety of criminal behavior in which licensees or their 

owners may partake.  And once again, whatever the issue 
with respect to crimes that might be regarded as being on the 
boundary of "egregiousness," the reasonableness of the 
FCC's decision in the instant case is clear.  There is no 
question but that the crimes at issue here are, as the FCC 
found, "characterized by moral turpitude" to such an extent 
that they "fall[ ] in the category of those that 'shock the 
conscience' and summon almost universal disapproval," Con-
temporary Media, Inc., 13 F.C.C.R. 14,437, 14,444 (1998)--a 
category that the FCC expressly warned would be the subject 
of special agency concern.  See 1990 Character Policy State-
ment, 5 F.C.C.R. at 3252. n.5.

     The licensees' third contention is that the FCC's character 
policy is inconsistent with the precedent of both this circuit 
and the Commission itself.  The licensees cite Wilkett v. ICC, 
in which this court reversed a license revocation based on the 
sole proprietor's convictions for second-degree murder and 
conspiracy to distribute a controlled substance.  See 710 F.2d 
861 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  That case, however, is readily distin-
guishable.  In Wilkett, the court's analysis focused on the fact 
that the Interstate Commerce Commission had "disregarded 
its own standards for evaluating [licensee] fitness."  Id. at 
864.  The court found that the Commission had failed to 
"carefully scrutinize[ ] the past violations and consider[ ] miti-
gating circumstances," as it had in "numerous cases" in the 
past.  Id.  Here, by contrast, the FCC not only gave careful 
consideration to Rice's crimes, but it did so pursuant to and in 
accordance with its published character policy.  After scruti-
nizing the misconduct at issue, the FCC concluded that it was 
"extremely serious" and involved "numerous acts."  Contem-
porary Media, 13 F.C.C.R. at 14,444.  Then, as discussed 
below, the Commission closely evaluated the licensees' claims 
of mitigation and reasonably rejected them.  Moreover, the 
convictions were not the sole ground for the revocation 
decision as they were in Wilkett;  here the licensees were also 
found to have violated the Commission's candor requirements 
in connection with the very matter now before us.

     The licensees also cite Kravis Co., 11 F.C.C.R. 4740 (1996), 
in which the FCC renewed radio licenses despite the fact that 
the company's president and sole shareholder had been 
charged with possession and exhibition of child pornography.  
As the Commission explained in its decision below, however, 
in that case neither a conviction nor a judgment of guilt had 
been entered against the defendant;  instead, the court had 
placed him on probation pursuant to the state's deferred 
judgment procedure, which permitted the expungement of the 
charges after successful completion of a probation period.  
See Contemporary Media, 13 F.C.C.R. at 14,442-43.  As 
noted above, the FCC's character policy states that the 
Commission generally will consider only instances of adjudi-
cated misconduct.  See 1990 Character Policy Statement, 5 
F.C.C.R. at 3252.  Regardless of whether it would be reason-
able to erase that line, it is not unreasonable to draw it.3

                               III

     Having found no merit to the licensees' challenges to the 
FCC's character policy itself, we now consider their chal-
lenges to the application of that policy in this case.  The 
licensees argue that even if the character policy is legitimate, 
the Commission erred both in failing to consider numerous 
mitigating factors that are relevant under the policy, and in 
concluding that the licensees misrepresented Rice's continued 

__________
     3 The licensees seek further support from Alessandro Broad-
casting Co., in which the FCC determined that no demerit was 
warranted for an applicant whose majority shareholder had been 
convicted of second-degree murder.  See 99 F.C.C.2d 1 (1984).  
That decision, however, was rendered before the Commission's 1990 
character policy statement gave import to felonies unrelated to 
dishonesty or broadcast-industry conduct.  Moreover, in Alessan-
dro, the agency noted that "the crime was an isolated event that 
occurred in the remote past and the state authorities connected 
with [the] conviction ... [had] determined officially that [the share-
holder was] rehabilitated and [had] restored his civil rights."  Id. at 
11 n.13.  None of those factors is present in this case.

involvement in station affairs.  We address each argument 
below.  Once again, we are mindful that we must sustain the 
FCC's order unless the challenged action is "arbitrary, capri-
cious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance 
with law," 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A), and that we must uphold its 
findings of fact if they are supported by substantial evidence, 
see id. s 706(2)(E);  Damsky v. FCC, 199 F.3d 527, 533 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000).

                                A

     The FCC's character policy sets forth a number of mitigat-
ing factors to be considered in evaluating misconduct:  "the 
willfulness of the misconduct, the frequency of the miscon-
duct, the currentness of the misconduct, the seriousness of 
the misconduct, the nature of the participation (if any) of 
managers or owners, efforts made to remedy the wrong, 
overall record of compliance with FCC rules and policies, and 
rehabilitation."  1990 Character Policy Statement, 5 F.C.C.R. 
at 3252.  Although the FCC credited the licensees' record of 
regulatory compliance, it rejected all of the other potential 
bases for mitigation.  We agree with the FCC's judgment;  
indeed, it is hard to regard most of the licensees' contrary 
arguments as anything but insubstantial.

     First, the licensees note that although Rice could have been 
sentenced to eighty-four years in prison, he was instead 
sentenced to concurrent terms of "only" eight years.  Br. of 
Appellants at 21.  We do not understand the argument.  We 
have no idea, and the licensees have offered none, as to why 
the state court showed such mercy.  Indeed, we have no idea 
whether it did show mercy--that is, whether the court had 
sentencing discretion, or whether Rice's crimes were subject 
to state sentencing laws or guidelines that dictated the sen-
tence he received.  Furthermore, we do not regard a sen-
tence of "only" eight years as indicating that Rice's felonies 
were somehow "less serious," or that the sentencing court 
found them so.  And finally, we do not understand how the 
repeated sexual assault of five children could be regarded as 
anything less than egregious;  perhaps wisely, licensees do 

not suggest what misconduct they would regard as more 
serious than that described in this record.

     Second, the licensees argue that they were entitled to 
benefit from the "participation of management or owners" 
mitigation factor.  Again, we do not understand the argu-
ment.  Although it is true that no other "owner" participated 
in Rice's misconduct, it is only true because there is no other 
owner:  Rice owns all of the equity in each of the licensees.  
Nor was Rice a minor player in management;  he was the 
president of all of the licensees and sat on the board of 
directors of each.  And while the other corporate managers 
did not participate in the sexual assaults for which Rice was 
convicted, they did--as we discuss below--participate in oth-
er serious misconduct:  namely, intentional misrepresenta-
tions to the FCC regarding Rice's continued role.

     Third, the licensees appeal to the "rehabilitation" factor, 
observing that the record contains no evidence of criminal 
activity subsequent to October 1990, and claiming that Rice's 
sexual misconduct ceased on that date.  The lack of further 
misconduct after October, however, is hardly coincidental.  In 
November, Rice was arrested on the assault charges.  His 
forbearance from criminal activity during the period in which 
he awaited trial and was subject to the conditions of pretrial 
release is hardly indicative of rehabilitation.4  Moreover, 
again as discussed below, the evidence shows that he partici-
pated in intentional misrepresentations to the FCC during 
this supposed rehabilitation period.

     Fourth, the licensees point to Rice's "reputation in the 
community," noting that "four individuals who have known 
Mr. Rice personally and/or professionally for many years" 
submitted statements attesting to his good character and 
reputation.  Br. of Appellants at 22.  The ALJ properly 
refused to credit these statements, however, since only one 
mentioned Rice's felony conviction and none expressed any 
familiarity with its details.  We cannot fault the FCC for 
concluding that those who vouched for Rice's character while 

__________
     4 It goes without saying that Rice's forbearance while in prison 
is not indicative of rehabilitation at all.

evidencing little if any knowledge of his egregious acts cannot 
be regarded as credible on the subject.

     Finally, the licensees complain that the FCC failed to 
award mitigation credit for the measures they took to prevent 
Rice from engaging in future misconduct, while simultaneous-
ly allowing him to "rehabilitate" himself through gainful 
employment.  The licensees emphasize that they adopted 
resolutions prohibiting Rice from having any "managerial, 
policy, or consultative role" in their affairs, but that they also 
permitted him some "limited participation" in accordance with 
his physician's recommendations.  Id. at 23-24.  The problem 
with this argument is that the FCC concluded it was factually 
untrue, finding that Rice participated extensively in station 
affairs even after the resolutions were passed and that the 
licensees intentionally misrepresented that participation.  As 
discussed in Part III.B below, we find substantial evidence to 
support the FCC's findings in this regard.  The actions taken 
by the licensees, therefore, become elements of aggravation 
rather than mitigation.

     In sum, we find no error in the FCC's evaluation of 
possible mitigating factors.  The FCC considered each of the 
relevant factors set forth in its character policy, and it 
reasonably rejected all save one--the licensees' "overall rec-
ord of compliance with FCC rules and policies."  We agree 
with the Commission's conclusion that "[t]he fact that the 
Licensees have had a good overall record of FCC rule compli-
ance is not alone sufficient to mitigate the overwhelming 
negative weight of all the other evidence" in this case.  Con-
temporary Media, 13 F.C.C.R. at 14,445.

                                B

     At oral argument, the licensees conceded that if we were to 
sustain the FCC's finding of intentional misrepresentation, 
that alone would be sufficient ground for the revocation of 
their licenses.  That concession was plainly correct, as "it is 
well recognized that the Commission may disqualify an appli-
cant who deliberately makes misrepresentations or lacks can-
dor in dealing with the agency."  Schoenbohm v. FCC, 204 
F.3d 243, 247 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  see also FCC v. WOKO, Inc., 

329 U.S. 223, 225-27 (1946);  Swan Creek Communications, 
Inc. v. FCC, 39 F.3d 1217, 1221-24 (D.C. Cir. 1994);  Garden 
State Broad. Ltd. v. FCC, 996 F.2d 386, 393-94 (D.C. Cir. 
1993).  We now turn to an examination of that issue.

     The ALJ found, and the FCC affirmed, that the licensees 
"misrepresented and lacked candor in reporting to the Com-
mission that, subsequent to his arrest, Rice was completely 
excluded from any further involvement in the management 
and operation of the Licensees' radio stations."  Contempo-
rary Media, 13 F.C.C.R. at 14,454;  see Contemporary Media, 
Inc., 12 F.C.C.R. 14,254, 14,295 (1997) (initial decision of 
ALJ).  The licensees counter by claiming that they never 
promised "to completely exclude Mr. Rice from having any 
involvement in their stations' activities, only to exclude him 
from having any involvement in the management, policy, and 
day-to-day decisions involving the stations."  Br. of Appel-
lants at 25 (emphasis in original).  They admit that this 
distinction is "subtle."  Id.  That is an understatement.

     As previously recounted, in June 1991 the licensees report-
ed to the FCC that:

     Since Mr. Rice's hospitalization on April 3, 1991, he has 
     had absolutely no managerial, policy, or consultative 
     role in the affairs of the three broadcast corporations in 
     which he has ownership interests and officer positions.  
     In other words, pending a resolution of the referenced 
     criminal charges, Mr. Rice is being completely insulated 
     and excluded from any involvement in the managerial, 
     policy, and day-to-day decisions involving any of the four 
     licensed stations and three construction permits held by 
     the three corporations.
     
J.A. at 15-16, 120 (citation omitted) (emphasis added).  There 
is no dispute that from April until October 1991, the period of 
his hospitalization, Rice had no involvement with the stations.  
The licensees concede, however, that several weeks after 
Rice's release from the hospital, their vice-president permit-
ted him to undertake a number of station-related tasks, which 
they describe as "occasional and isolated technical projects."  
Br. of Appellants at 26.  Nonetheless, the next report to the 
FCC, filed on May 14, 1992, stated:

     There has been no change in Mr. Rice's status with [the 
     reporting licensee] or in the status of the proceedings 
     against him....   Mr. Rice is no longer hospitalized, but 
     he continues to be treated by his physicians as an 
     outpatient, and he continues to have no managerial or 
     policy role in the affairs of the three broadcast corpora-
     tions ... in which he has ownership interests and corpo-
     rate positions.
     
J.A. at 126-27 (citation omitted) (emphasis added).

     According to the licensees, Rice's conceded involvement in 
"technical projects" is consistent with this representation 
because that involvement did not comprise managerial or 
decision-making activities but rather "mere opining and mus-
ings."  Br. of Appellants at 28.  The key point that the 
"hypertechnical" FCC overlooked, they claim, is that the May 
1992 report deleted the word "consultative" from the list of 
roles from which the June 1991 report had said Rice was 
being excluded.  Id. at 26.  In their eyes, this "critical 
distinction" between the two reports should have put the 
Commission on notice that Rice had moved from having no 
role to having an "opining and musing" role.  Id. at 27.  
Indeed, the licensees maintain that this distinction rendered 
their representations "fully forthcoming" and candid.  Id. at 
26.

     By this time, it should be quite clear who is being "hyper-
technical."  Only a side-by-side, line-by-line comparison of the 
two filings--conducted with some skepticism of the licensees' 
candor--would have detected the subtle difference in lan-
guage upon which the licensees now rely.  In 1992, however, 
the FCC had no reason to conduct such a forensic comparison 
of the two representations, particularly in light of the May 
report's opening declaration that "[t]here has been no change 
in Mr. Rice's status."  That declaration, alone, was plainly 
false.5

     Moreover, even if we were to accept that the licensees 
effectively advised the Commission that Rice was involved in 

__________
     5 At oral argument, the licensees argued that their intention 
was only to indicate that there had been no change in Rice's 

consultation but had no role in management, there is substan-
tial evidence in the record that Rice was involved in manage-
ment as well.  Cf. WBER, Inc. v. FCC, 420 F.2d 158, 164 
(D.C. Cir. 1969) (holding that questions regarding misrepre-
sentations are factual questions subject to substantial evi-
dence review).  As the ALJ stated:

     Apart from Rice's consultative role, the evidence estab-
     lishes that, after his release from the hospital in October 
     1991, Rice was also involved in at least some of the 
     programming matters and personnel decisions of the 
     Licensees, rejected offers to purchase one of the Licen-
     sees' construction permits, invited an offer to purchase a 
     station once it went on the air, suggested the trade of 
     specific broadcast properties, and directed the group 
     program director and two of the general managers of the 
     Licensees' stations to perform certain tasks.
     
Contemporary Media, 12 F.C.C.R. at 14,298.

     The licensees contend that there was only "conflicting" 
evidence on these matters, pointing out that their witnesses 
disputed much of the testimony upon which the ALJ's conclu-
sions were based.  As a consequence, they argue, "[w]itness 
credibility findings played a predominant role in the ALJ's 
and the FCC's adverse rulings under the misrepresentation 
issue."  Br. of Appellants at 30.  It is true, of course, that 
when witnesses present conflicting testimony an agency's 
decision must be based on an evaluation of their credibility.  
Under our precedents, however, we defer to credibility find-
ings affirmed by the Commission unless they are "patently 
unsupportable."  E.g., SL Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 168 
F.3d 1354, 1357 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  That is not the case here.

     Finally, the licensees contend that "intent to deceive" is a 
necessary element of proving misrepresentation or lack of 
candor in FCC proceedings, see Swan Creek Communica-
tions, 39 F.3d at 1222;  Fox River Broad., Inc., 93 F.C.C.2d 
127, 129 (1983), and that there is no credible record evidence 

__________
"ownership or managerial" status.  The quoted words, however, do 
not appear in the declaration, which was completely unqualified.

of any intent on their part to mislead or deceive the agency.  
The evidence discussed above, however, is more than suffi-
cient to support the Commission's finding that there was an 
intent to deceive.  As we have stated before, "the fact of 
misrepresentation coupled with proof that the party making it 
had knowledge of its falsity [is] enough to justify a conclusion 
that there was fraudulent intent."  Leflore Broad. Co., 636 
F.2d at 462.  The licensees concede that they intentionally 
deleted the word "consultative" from the 1992 filing, and we 
cannot credit the claim that they did not realize the resulting 
report would affirmatively mislead the agency as to Rice's 
resumption of such activities.  Moreover, as noted above, 
there is substantial evidence that the licensees' representa-
tions concerning Rice's exclusion from non-consultative (i.e., 
managerial and policy) activities were themselves false.  
There is also substantial evidence that the licensees' manage-
ment knew the representations were false, since management 
was on the receiving end of Rice's directives.6  Accordingly, 
we uphold the FCC's finding of intent to deceive, and with it 
the Commission's determination that the licensees' misrepre-
sentations warranted revocation.

                                IV

     Finally, we turn to the licensees' contention that the revo-
cation of their licenses and construction permits violates the 

__________
     6 To take just a few examples:

     Rice informed [vice president] Cox that he wanted Rhea [the 
     general manager of two of his radio stations] fired, and Cox 
     told Rhea that he was being fired because of Rice's displeasure 
     ... ;  Cox told Rhea that Rice wanted [radio announcer] Steel 
     fired after Steel changed [his station's] reporting status in a 
     trade publication;  after Rice asked Rhea for information about 
     the cost of the Satellite Music Network, Cox told Rhea that 
     Rice thought [one of the stations] could be programmed for less 
     money by bringing in Rice's own music;  and Leatherman [the 
     general manager of another licensee station] responded to Cox 
     after Rice asked him about the need for sound effects CDs.
     
Contemporary Media, 13 F.C.C.R. at 14,458.

Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment.7  In sup-
port of this contention, the licensees cite Austin v. United 
States, which held that the Excessive Fines Clause applies to 
forfeitures under 21 U.S.C. s 881(a)(4) and (a)(7) of property 
used to facilitate drug transactions.  See 509 U.S. 602, 604 
(1993).  Austin has no application here.

     In Austin, the Court held that the central question under 
the Excessive Fines Clause is whether the government action 
at issue is "punishment for some offense."  Id. at 609-10;  see 
United States v. Bajakajian, 524 U.S. 321, 327-28 (1998).  In 
concluding that the forfeitures in that case constituted pun-
ishment, the Court focused on the historical understanding of 
forfeiture as a penal measure, an understanding reflected in 
prior Supreme Court precedents and in the legislative history 
of the forfeiture statute.  See Austin, 509 U.S. at 614-20.

     These considerations do not apply to the case at bar.  
First, the Court's precedents do not reflect an understanding 
that FCC license revocations or nonrenewals based on char-
acter considerations constitute punishment.  To the contrary, 
in FCC v. WOKO, the Court rejected just such a claim.  See 
329 U.S. at 228.  There, an FCC licensee who had made 
misrepresentations to the agency contended that the resulting 
nonrenewal order "inflict[ed] a penalty, that the motive [was] 
punishment."  Id.  The Court disagreed, stating:  "A denial 
of an application for a license because of the insufficiency or 
deliberate falsity of information lawfully required to be fur-
nished is not a penal measure."  Id.  Nor have the licensees 
cited anything in the legislative history of the Federal Com-
munications Act to suggest that Congress had a punitive 
purpose.

     The FCC revokes a license not to punish a licensee for its 
conduct, but because that conduct indicates to the Commis-
sion that the licensee is no longer qualified to hold it.  See 47 
U.S.C. ss 303(l), 308, 312;  Contemporary Media, 13 F.C.C.R. 
at 14,459-60.  Revocation comes when the Commission con-
cludes that the licensee can no longer be trusted to deal with 

__________
     7 See U.S. Const. amend. VIII ("Excessive bail shall not be 
required, nor excessive fines imposed....").

it honestly, to follow its regulations, and to operate in the 
public interest.  See, e.g., Syracuse Peace Council v. FCC, 867 
F.2d 654, 659 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 1989);  Leflore Broad. Co., 636 
F.2d at 461-62.  While the revocation of FCC license privi-
leges "may hurt and ... may cause loss," WOKO, 329 U.S. at 
228, it does not implicate the Excessive Fines Clause of the 
Eighth Amendment.

                                V

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the decision and order 
of the Federal Communications Commission.

