                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 27, 2000     Decided May 30, 2000 

                           No. 99-7171

            BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg), S.A., et al., 
                            Appellees

                                v.

                    Abdul Raouf Hasan Khalil, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 95cv01252)

     Stephen R. Johnson argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were James P. Linn and T. Jay Barry-
more.

     Eric L. Lewis argued the cause for appellees.  With him on 
the brief was A. Katherine Toomey.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  This case involves a civil action 
resting on the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organiza-
tion Act ("RICO"), 18 U.S.C. ss 1961, et seq. (1994), common 
law fraud, unjust enrichment, and conversion.  The lawsuit 
was brought by appellees, fiduciaries appointed on behalf of 
the Bank of Credit and Commerce International ("BCCI") to 
liquidate the principal BCCI holdings and recover assets on 
behalf of depositors and innocent creditors, against appellant, 
Abdul Raouf Hasan Khalil, and three co-conspirators.  The 
District Court found Mr. Khalil liable on many, but not all, of 
the claims arising under RICO, common law fraud, unjust 
enrichment, and conversion.  The total non-duplicative 
amount of actual damages entered in favor of appellees 
against Mr. Khalil was $388,402,534.  The District Court 
trebled this amount pursuant to 18 U.S.C. s 1964(c) (1994), 
for a total judgment of $1,165,207,602 against Mr. Khalil.

     On appeal, Mr. Khalil raises two principal issues:  First, 
Mr. Khalil claims that the District Court erred under Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure 39(b) in denying his late request for 
a jury trial;  second, Mr. Khalil contends that the District 
Court erred in holding that appellant's alleged RICO and 
common law tort violations were the legal cause of BCCI's 
losses.  With one exception, we find no merit in Mr. Khalil's 
arguments.

     Appellant's disputed motion for a jury trial was filed more 
than a year late, after discovery had been concluded and after 
a trial date had been set.  The trial judge denied the motion 
because of prejudice to the plaintiff, who had prepared for a 
bench trial.  The trial judge also noted that expediency would 
be served in holding to the existing trial schedule, to avoid 
undue delay and potential complications with other trials 
involving related issues.  In short, the District Court found 
that counsel's inexcusable neglect in failing to request a jury 
trial in a timely fashion waived defendant's right to a jury 

trial.  We find no error in this judgment, for the trial judge 
acted within the discretion afforded him under Rule 39(b).

     We also affirm most of the District Court's judgments on 
the merits.  As the court's opinion indicates, see BCCI Hold-
ings (Luxembourg), Societe Anonyme v. Khalil ("Khalil"), 56 
F. Supp. 2d 14 (D.D.C. 1999), there is ample evidence in the 
record to show but-for and proximate causation, supporting 
most of the judgments on the RICO and the common law tort 
claims.  We can find no record evidence, however, to support 
the District Court's finding that Mr. Khalil is liable to BCCI 
for damages in the amount of $62,021,193 for certain silver 
and copper trading losses.

     We reverse the District Court's judgment for damages 
resting on the silver and copper trading losses.  We affirm 
the District Court's judgment on all other points.  The case 
will be remanded for the District Court to recalculate the 
damages that are due to appellees.

                             I. Facts

     This lawsuit was spawned by BCCI's international collapse, 
which was the largest international bank failure in history.  
See Khalil, 56 F. Supp. 2d at 20.  BCCI's court-appointed 
liquidators filed a complaint on July 3, 1995 to recover 
damages suffered by BCCI as a result of Mr. Khalil's alleged 
violations of RICO, common law fraud, unjust enrichment, 
and conversion.  The liquidators charged that Mr. Khalil 
participated in a conspiracy with BCCI's management that 
allowed BCCI secretly to acquire ownership and maintain 
control of First American Corporation and First American 
Bankshares, Inc. (collectively "First American").  This illegal 
scheme operated through the use of nominee shareholders--
like Mr. Khalil--who allowed BCCI to hide financial losses 
from bank regulators.

     Mr. Khalil is a wealthy Saudi Arabian businessman and 
former government official who deposited large amounts of 

money in BCCI.  He may have been BCCI's largest deposi-
tor.  See id. at 21.  In their complaint, the liquidators claimed 
that, in the late 1970s and 1980s, BCCI's former management 
sought out Mr. Khalil and paid him large sums of money in 
exchange for the use of his name and prestige to disguise 
three schemes:  (1) Mr. Khalil agreed to act as a nominee 
shareholder of First American Bank's parent corporation to 
disguise BCCI's illegal acquisition of an American bank with-
out required regulatory approval;  (2) Mr. Khalil agreed to 
serve as a nominee shareholder of BCCI Holdings to disguise 
the truth about BCCI's artificially and misleadingly inflated 
capital resources and support;  and (3) Mr. Khalil agreed to 
allow BCCI to use his name, both individually and on behalf 
of his corporations, to disguise risky investments and to 
create the false impression that BCCI was servicing large 
loans that were actually in default.  See id.  The liquidators 
contended that Mr. Khalil's assent to these schemes prevent-
ed BCCI's true financial condition from becoming apparent 
much earlier, stopped BCCI from closing down much sooner, 
and thus precipitated significant financial losses for thousands 
of creditors and depositors.

     Not all of the liquidators' claims against Mr. Khalil rested 
on a passive view of Mr. Khalil's relationship with BCCI.  
The liquidators also asserted that Mr. Khalil and Mr. Syed 
Ziauddin Ali Akbar conspired to loot BCCI's assets so that 
they could create and fund a commodities brokerage that they 
called Capcom UK.  Mr. Akbar, who was a BCCI officer from 
1976 to 1986 and was in charge of BCCI's Treasury Division 
from 1982 to 1986, created loans in BCCI's books to Mr. 
Khalil and his companies.  Mr. Akbar never intended, howev-
er, for these loans to be repaid.  In particular, between 
October 1984 and December 1984, Mr. Akbar transferred 
$100,000,000 to Capcom that was not authorized by Mr. 
Akbar's superiors.  Mr. Akbar also transferred $25,000,000 to 
Capcom in June 1985 and $136,000,000 to Capcom between 
January and April 1986.  See id. at 42-43.  For his part, on 
August 20, 1985, Mr. Khalil negotiated a $12.5 million check 
from BCCI as a payment for his share of the "profits" from 
the trading operations, received a $15 million "parting gift" 

on July 3, 1987 that he had cajoled when he withdrew his 
deposits from BCCI, and, on June 25, 1987, coaxed a $17,000,-
000 "loan" from BCCI to General Securities Corp., a company 
co-owned by Mr. Khalil and Mr. Akbar that had an account at 
Capcom.  See id. at 43-45.

     Mr. Khalil does not disavow this general characterization of 
the facts.  And he does not claim that he was innocent.  His 
appeal is based on two much more narrow grounds.  The first 
ground centers on the District Court's denial of Mr. Khalil's 
request for a jury trial.  The liquidators filed their complaint 
on July 3, 1995, and Mr. Khalil filed his answer on February 
10, 1997.  Subsequently, on April 21, 1998, the parties had a 
status conference and agreed to schedule a bench trial to 
begin on January 25, 1999.  On April 24, 1998, Mr. Khalil's 
attorney filed a motion for a jury trial, claiming that counsel 
had inadvertently omitted a jury demand from Mr. Khalil's 
answer to the complaint.  Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 38(b), the 
jury demand was over a year late;  it was therefore deemed 
"waived" under Fed. R. Civ. P. 38(d).  Mr. Khalil's attorney 
argued, however, that the tardy demand for a jury trial could 
be granted by the District Court under Fed. R. Civ. P. 39(b).

     On October 8, 1998, guided by the Supreme Court's deci-
sion in Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U.S. 552, 562 (1988), the 
District Court denied Mr. Khalil's motion for a jury trial.  
The court found that (1) Mr. Khalil's lawyer's claimed inad-
vertent omission was not excusable, given that counsel had 
taken so long to discover the omission, discovery was com-
plete, the deadline for motions had passed, and the court and 
the opposing party had prepared for a bench trial;  (2) 
plaintiffs would be significantly prejudiced if the court were 
to grant Mr. Khalil's tardy request for a jury trial, because 
plaintiffs had premised many of their decisions in discovery 
upon their understanding that there would be a bench trial;  
(3) a bench trial would be much more efficient than a jury 
trial;  (4) granting Mr. Khalil's motion would translate into 
delays for other litigants awaiting trial;  (5) given Mr. Khalil's 
poor health, the court would be ill-advised to delay Mr. 
Khalil's case pending resolution of the other cases;  and (6) 
there was no real threat of bias or prejudice, even though the 

court had presided over related criminal and civil cases.  See 
BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg), Societe Anonyme v. Khalil, 
Civ. Act. No. 95-1252, Mem. Op. (D.D.C. Oct. 8, 1998) ("Mem. 
Op."), reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 277.

     The issues on the merits raised by Mr. Khalil focus on the 
District Court's award of damages and the underlying find-
ings of causation.  The District Court generally agreed with 
the liquidators that Mr. Khalil was liable for receiving money 
for his participation in the various nominee schemes, though 
the trial court did not accept all of the liquidator's claims.  In 
particular, the court found that Mr. Khalil was liable for 
$27,500,000 that he received as direct payments from BCCI 
for his participation in the nominee schemes, $15,249,283 that 
BCCI paid for Mr. Khalil's expenses, $47,069,808 that BCCI 
paid to Mr. Khalil's companies, an additional $236,562,250 
that BCCI sent to Capcom, and $62,021,193 that represented 
the losses that BCCI suffered from silver and copper trading 
that involved and was facilitated by accounts in Mr. Khalil's 
name.  The final result was that the liquidators were awarded 
damages of $388,402,534, which were tripled to $1,165,207,602 
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. s 1964(c).  See Khalil, 56 F. Supp. 2d 
at 66-69.  This appeal followed.

                          II. Discussion

A.   Standard of Review

     The parties agree that the standard of review covering the 
District Court's denial of Mr. Khalil's Rule 39(b) motion for a 
jury trial is abuse of discretion.  The parties also agree that 
the findings on the claims based on common law fraud, unjust 
enrichment, and conversion are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard.  The parties disagree, however, over the 
standard of review covering the findings of proximate cause 
under RICO.

     On this last point, we find the Supreme Court's decision in 
Exxon Co., U.S.A. v. Sofec, Inc., 517 U.S. 830, 840-41 (1996), 
to be persuasive.  In Sofec, the Court explained that "[t]he 
issues of proximate causation and superseding cause involve 

application of law to fact, which is left to the factfinder, 
subject to limited review."  Id.  Mr. Khalil argues that Sofec 
is inapposite, because the standard enunciated there is limited 
to admiralty cases.  There is nothing in the Court's opinion, 
however, that so narrows its applicability.  It seems clear 
here, just as in Sofec, that findings on proximate causation 
involve mixed questions of law and fact subject to limited 
review.  In any event, even if we were to engage in de novo 
review, as Mr. Khalil suggests, our judgments on the matters 
in issue would not change.

B.   The Jury Issue

     Mr. Khalil's jury-demand argument is specious.  Mr. Khalil 
did not file a jury demand either when the liquidators filed 
their complaint on July 3, 1995 or when he filed his answer to 
the complaint on February 10, 1997.  It took almost three 
years from the filing of the complaint and more than a year 
after the filing of the answer for Mr. Khalil to bring it to the 
District Court's attention that he wanted a jury trial.  By 
then, the trial court had scheduled the case for a bench trial, 
discovery had been extended and closed, and the deadline for 
motions had already passed.

     Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 38 is clear that a party 
waives his right to a trial by jury if he does not "(1) serv[e] 
upon the other parties a demand therefor in writing at any 
time after the commencement of the action and not later than 
10 days after the service of the last pleading directed to such 
issue, and (2) fil[e] the demand as required by Rule 5(d)." 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 38.  A party who fails to make a timely request 
for a jury trial may avoid waiver and secure a jury trial only 
if the District Court "in its discretion" acts favorably on such 
a request.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 39(b).

     Under Rule 39, a trial court may abuse its discretion in 
denying a late request for a jury trial.  This does not mean, 
however, that a trial court must indulge a presumption in 
favor of the neglectful party when faced with a late demand.  
Thus, a trial court is not required to grant a Rule 39(b) 
request based on nothing but inadvertence, because, 
"[t]hough the court might, in its discretion, have ordered a 

jury trial, it [is] under no obligation to do so."  May v. 
Melvin, 141 F.2d 22 (D.C. Cir. 1944);  see also Wall v. 
National R.R. Passenger Corp., 718 F.2d 906, 910 (9th Cir. 
1983) ("The record does not demonstrate any reason, other 
than counsel's inadvertence, for the failure to comply with 
rule 38(b).  The district judge did not abuse his discretion.");  
Rhodes v. Amarillo Hosp. Dist., 654 F.2d 1148, 1154 (5th Cir. 
Unit A 1981) (finding even under a presumption in favor of 
granting untimely jury demands that "[i]t is not an abuse of 
discretion by a District Judge to deny a Rule 39(b) motion 
... when the failure to make a timely demand for a jury trial 
results from mere inadvertence on the part of the moving 
party");  Paramount Pictures Corp. v. Thompson Theatres, 
Inc., 621 F.2d 1088, 1090 (10th Cir. 1980) ("By failing to make 
a timely demand defendants waived their rights.  The trial 
court then has the discretion, upon motion, to order trial by 
jury. That discretion is broad, and the court's exercise, either 
to grant or to deny a jury trial, is reversible only if it appears 
from all of the facts and circumstances that the court abused 
its discretion." (internal citations omitted)).

     In this case, mere inadvertence is the only leg upon which 
Mr. Khalil can stand, and it is at best a very weak base.  Mr. 
Khalil does not deny that he waived his right to a jury.  
Rather, he claims that despite his mistake, the burden should 
be on the opposing party to present strong and compelling 
reasons why the late demand for a jury trial should not be 
granted.  This is not what Rule 39 says, however.  The rule 
merely states that, upon motion from a party like Mr. Khalil, 
the District Court "may" (not shall) "in its discretion" order 
a trial by jury.  Absent an abuse of discretion by the trial 
court, a defaulting party who has already waived the right to 
a jury trial under Rule 38(d) has no viable claim.  This does 
not mean that a trial court can simply ignore a Rule 39(b) 
motion or whimsically deny it for no good reason.  But trial 
courts have wide latitude under the abuse of discretion stan-
dard to weigh the merits of late demands for jury trials.

     The District Court's judgment in this case easily survives 
review under the abuse of discretion standard.  The District 
Court reasonably considered the factors enunciated by the 

Supreme Court in Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U.S. 552.  In 
Pierce, the Court noted that,

     [o]ver the years, appellate courts have consistently up-
     held the trial judges in allowing or refusing late-
     demanded jury trials, but in doing so have laid down two 
     guidelines for exercise of the discretionary power.  The 
     products of cumulative experience, these guidelines re-
     late to the justifiability of the tardy litigant's delay and 
     the absence of prejudice to his adversary.
     
Id. at 562.  Following the Pierce Court's lead, the District 
Court found that Mr. Khalil's delay was not justified, because 
it was the product of mere inadvertence, and "where the 
length of time to discover the error is as long as here, where 
discovery is complete and the motions' deadline has passed, 
and where the Court and the opposing party have come to 
rely on a bench trial, this factor weighs against granting a 
trial by jury."  Mem. Op. at 8, reprinted in J.A. 284.  The 
trial court also reasonably found that BCCI had made a 
"plausible and specific enough showing of prejudice."  Id. at 
9, reprinted in J.A. 285.  In short, we have no basis upon 
which to second-guess the judgment of the District Court.

C.   Proximate Causation

     On the merits of this case, Mr. Khalil first posits that the 
District Court's standard of proximate cause under RICO was 
too lax.  He argues that "a RICO claimant must prove that 
he was the 'intended target' of the RICO scheme and that the 
alleged injury was the 'preconceived purpose' of the RICO 
activity."  Br. of Appellant at 35.  In our view, appellant's 
argument on this point is simply wrong.

     In Holmes v. Securities Investor Protection Corp., 503 U.S. 
258 (1992), which involved a civil action under RICO, the 
Court considered the meaning of the statutory phrase--
"[a]ny person injured in his business or property by reason of 
a [RICO] violation"--found in 18 U.S.C. s 1964(c).  The 
Court's discussion is illuminating:

          This language [18 U.S.C. s 1964(c)] can, of course, be 
     read to mean that a plaintiff is injured "by reason of" a 
     
     RICO violation, and therefore may recover, simply on 
     showing that the defendant violated s 1962, the plaintiff 
     was injured, and the defendant's violation was a "but for" 
     cause of plaintiff's injury.  This construction is hardly 
     compelled, however, and the very unlikelihood that Con-
     gress meant to allow all factually injured plaintiffs to 
     recover persuades us that RICO should not get such an 
     expansive reading.
     
     ... Congress modeled s 1964(c) on the civil-action provi-
     sion of the federal antitrust laws, s 4 of the Clayton Act.
     
     ... [W]e [have] held that a plaintiff's right to sue under 
     s 4 required a showing that the defendant's violation not 
     only was a "but for" cause of his injury, but was the 
     proximate cause as well.
     
          The reasoning applies just as readily to s 1964(c)....  
     Proximate cause is thus required [under RICO].
     
Id. at 265-68.

     The Court in Holmes defined proximate cause as essential-
ly reflecting "ideas of what justice demands, or of what is 
administratively possible and convenient."  Id. at 268.  Proxi-
mate cause exists to ensure that a random third party who 
suffers "merely from the misfortunes visited upon [him] by 
the defendant's acts" does not recover.  Id.  It also ensures 
that courts do not get ensnared in administratively complex 
questions over factual causation and apportionments of dam-
ages.  The Court reasoned that a proximate cause require-
ment would sufficiently deter injurious conduct, because "di-
rectly injured victims can generally be counted on to vindicate 
the law as private attorneys general, without any of the 
problems attendant upon suits by plaintiffs injured more 
remotely."  Id. at 269-70.  The Court never suggests, howev-
er, that the only or best way to prove proximate cause is for a 
plaintiff to prove he was the "intended target" and that the 
injury was the "preconceived purpose" of the RICO activity.  
We therefore reject appellant's highly restrictive reading of 
RICO.

     With one exception, the record in this case offers ample 
evidence to support the District Court's findings that Mr. 
Khalil was the proximate cause of RICO injuries suffered by 
BCCI, as well as the District Court's findings of common law 
violations.  The District Court's judgments on these points 
are well-explained in its published opinion;  that opinion needs 
no revision, save for one point.

     The one exception centers on the $62,021,193 in silver and 
copper trading losses that the District Court found were 
directly linked to the use of Mr. Khalil's name.  Unlike the 
other payments, which are directly traceable to Mr. Khalil's 
fees for participating in the nominee scheme, the silver and 
copper trading losses are much more contingent on other 
factors.  Without much other analysis, the trial court rea-
soned that, "[a]lthough market conditions played an impor-
tant role in bringing those losses about, the use of Khalil's 
name remained a substantial factor causing those losses.  
These losses can be traced directly to the fraudulent use of 
Khalil-owned companies."  Khalil, 56 F. Supp. 2d at 61.  The 
District Court and appellees seem to claim that the bank's 
losses would have been prevented or reduced had the bank 
known about the futures trading at issue.  In particular, they 
suggest that the Board of Directors had placed limits on 
investments and that Khalil facilitated the avoidance of these 
limits by lending his name to fraudulent endeavors, thus 
causing the bank to suffer losses.  We can find no record 
evidence demonstrating that this specific set of losses is 
directly traceable to the ability of the perpetrators to hide the 
losses in Mr. Khalil's name.  We therefore reverse the judg-
ment against Mr. Khalil resting on the disputed silver and 
copper trading losses.

                         III. Conclusion

     We reverse the judgment of the District Court resting on 
the silver and copper trading losses.  We affirm the judgment 
of the District Court in favor of appellees on all other points.  

The case is hereby remanded to the District Court to recalcu-
late the damages that are due to appellees.

                                                         So ordered.

             