                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued March 23, 2001    Decided June 5, 2001 

                           No. 00-1296

                      ITT Industries, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

      International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and 
         Agricultural Implement Workers of America, UAW, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Richard B. Hankins argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the brief were Curtis L. Mack and Robert D. Harris.

     Anna L. Francis, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were John H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, 
Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and 
Frederick L. Cornnell, Jr., Attorney.

     Lynn K. Rhinehart argued the cause for intervenor Inter-
national Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricul-
tural Implement Workers of America.  With her on the brief 
were James B. Coppess and Blair Kay Simmons.  Merrill J. 
Whitman entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  Petitioner ITT Automotive manu-
factures automotive parts at ten different plants across the 
Midwest, Arkansas, and New York.  The present action 
involves the so-called "Northern Plants," three facilities locat-
ed within a twenty-mile radius of one another in northeast 
Michigan.  The Oscoda plant is the largest, with nearly 650 
employees, while the Tawas and East Tawas plants each 
employ roughly 180 workers.  During the relevant times at 
issue in this case, the International Union, United Automo-
bile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of 
America ("UAW" or "Union"), was seeking to organize the 
employees at the Northern Plants.  ITT and the UAW stipu-
lated that the three plant facilities, together, constituted a 
single, appropriate bargaining unit for purpose of the repre-
sentation election.

     The unfair labor practice charges at issue arose in the 
midst of the Union's organization campaign.  On two different 
occasions, employees from the Oscoda plant attempted to 
handbill in the East Tawas parking lot.  Both times, East 
Tawas supervisors ordered them to leave under threat of 
arrest for trespass.  The National Labor Relations Board 
("NLRB" or "Board") found that management's enforcement 
of a no-access policy to union organizing by off-site employees 

constituted a violation of s 8(a)(1) of the National Labor 
Relations Act ("NRLA").

     ITT argues that the Board overstepped its authority by 
extending greater access rights to off-site employees than 
those afforded nonemployee union organizers.  Specifically, 
petitioner contends that the Supreme Court's access cases 
make clear that "trespassers," whether nonemployee union 
organizers or off-site employees, possess only limited deriva-
tive s 7 access rights, i.e., that any such rights derive entirely 
from on-site employees' s 7 organizational right to receive 
union-related information.

     It is not clear that the Supreme Court's access cases 
foreclose the Board's interpretation that s 7 confers upon off-
site employees some measure of free-standing, nonderivative 
organizational access rights.  The Court's cases do make 
clear, however, that the Board must take account of an off-
site employee's trespasser status.  In the present case, the 
Board utterly failed to bring that consideration to bear, first, 
in its decision that s 7 extended any nonderivative access 
rights to off-site employees and, second, in its determination 
that the scope of those rights be defined by the same balanc-
ing test used to assess the scope of on-site employee access 
rights.  We therefore vacate the Board's decision and remand 
for further consideration.

     In a separate incident, East Tawas management repri-
manded long time employee and union member Karen Rich-
ardson for harassing fellow workers with union solicitations 
during worktime.  The Board found that management had 
violated s 8(a)(1) by discriminatorily applying the plant's 
facially neutral no-solicitation policy to union-related activity.  
The Board's decision on this point is supported by substantial 
evidence.

                          I. Background

     In early 1998, the UAW, intervenor in this case, com-
menced an organizing campaign to unionize the nonsuperviso-
ry employees at the Northern Plants.  The Union subse-
quently filed an election petition in June, and the Board 

scheduled a representation election for July 30, 1998.  ITT 
and the UAW stipulated to an election covering a unit consist-
ing of nonsupervisory employees from all three plants.  With 
less than a week to go before the election, the UAW withdrew 
the petition.  By that point in time, the unfair labor practice 
charges at the heart of this case had already been filed.

A.   Restrictions on Oscoda Employee Handbilling in the 
     East Tawas Parking Lot

     On April 28, 1998 and again on May 14, 1998, employees 
from the Oscoda plant entered the East Tawas parking lot in 
order to distribute Union literature and solicit signatures for 
the Union organizing petition.  Despite the fact that the 
handbillers identified themselves as ITT employees from the 
Oscoda plant, supervisors from the East Tawas plant request-
ed them to leave the premises because they were trespassing 
on private property.  The handbilling employees left without 
incident.  Shortly thereafter the UAW filed unfair labor 
practice charges with the Board, alleging that management's 
application of the no-access policy to off-site employees violat-
ed s 8(a)(1) of the NLRA.

     At a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge ("ALJ"), 
petitioner presented evidence that its no-access policy was 
both neutral and justified.  East Tawas supervisor Jeff Min-
nick testified that management had instigated the zero-
tolerance, no-access policy in March 1998 following installa-
tion of a six-foot high cyclone fence around the parking lot.  
The new zero-tolerance policy limited parking lot access at all 
times solely to East Tawas employees.  There was one excep-
tion:  relatives or friends of employees could enter the park-
ing lot to pick up/drop off East Tawas employees as long as 
they did not exit their vehicles.  Minnick cited a number of 
precipitating events as grounds for the stricter policy, includ-
ing several acts of automobile vandalism, youths driving 
through the parking lot at night, nonemployees engaging 
employees in fights after work, and one incident in which an 
estranged husband of an East Tawas employee threatened to 
bring a gun to the plant in search of his wife.

     The ALJ was unpersuaded by ITT's evidence.  Quoting 
Tri-County Medical Center, Inc., 222 N.L.R.B. 1089 (1976), 
the ALJ noted that, " 'except where justified by business 
reasons, a rule which denies off-duty employees entry to 
parking lots, gates, and other outside nonworking areas will 
be found invalid.' "  ITT Industries, Inc., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 7, 
at 4 (May 10, 2000) ("Board Decision") (quoting Tri-County, 
222 N.L.R.B. at 1089).  The ALJ was not impressed by the 
fact that the handbillers were not only off-duty, but also off-
site, employees, remarking that "employees of the employer 
who work at one plant are still considered employees of the 
employer if they handbill at another of the employer's 
plants."  Board Decision, at 4 (citing S. Cal. Gas Co., 321 
N.L.R.B. 551 (1996), and U.S. Postal Serv., 318 N.L.R.B. 466 
(1995)).  Moreover, Oscoda and East Tawas employees be-
longed to the same representational unit.  Board Decision, at 
4.

     Having found that the Tri-County test applied, the ALJ 
refused to consider ITT's evidence of reasonable alternative 
means available to the Oscoda handbillers for communicating 
with East Tawas employees.  Id.  As to the proffered justifi-
cations for applying the policy to off-site employees, the ALJ 
found ITT's reasons to be "woefully inadequate," and belied 
by the policy of permitting entry to friends and spouses to 
pick up or drop off East Tawas employees.  Id.  The Board 
affirmed the ALJ's decision, and ordered management at the 
Northern Plants to grant parking-lot access to off-site em-
ployees for the purpose of distributing union materials.

B.   Reprimanding Karen Richardson for Union Solicitation 
     during Worktime

     On May 7, 1998, East Tawas plant manager Rod Kaschner 
and supervisor Jeff Binder called ten-year East Tawas em-
ployee and active union member Karen Richardson into Kas-
chner's office. Richardson memorialized the exchange in a 
letter to Kaschner of same date:

     Rod asked me to sit down.  He then said he has had a 
     few people on the floor complaining to him about me 
     talking about union related activities and union informa-
     
     tion to them and they were offended.  He told me then 
     that any more conversations about the union were to be 
     kept outside, in the lunch room and on my off time.  He 
     said I wasn't to be talking about the union on the floor 
     any more to anyone.
     
Letter from Karen Richardson to Rod Kaschner (May 7, 
1998) (emphasis added).  Kaschner responded with his own 
letter the following day, in which he agreed with Richardson's 
description.  He added only that "[t]he point again of the 
whole meeting was if an individual is not interested in talking 
with you about union activities, you should respect their 
wishes and avoid such discussions."  Letter from Rod Kas-
chner to Karen Richardson (May 8, 1998).  The Union filed 
an unfair labor practice charge with the Board alleging that 
East Tawas management had discriminatorily applied the 
plant's worktime no-solicitation policy to union solicitations in 
violation of Section 8(a)(1) of the NLRA.

     Relying on the above letters as well as testimony from 
Richardson that she suffered no punishment and had re-
sumed union solicitation on the floor after a mere seven days, 
the ALJ found that "the Act was [not] violated because 
management was essentially telling Richardson not to bother 
her fellow employees ... and I see at most a de minimus or 
insignificant infringement on Karen Richardson's Section 7 
rights."  Board Decision, at 5.  The Board disagreed.

     The Board acknowledged that ITT's no-solicitation rule was 
valid on its face, inasmuch as it prohibited all solicitations of 
any kind by any employee during worktime.  Id. at 1 (quoting 
ITTA Northern Plants Fluid Handling Employee Handbook 
31).  In practice, however, the Board found that East Tawas 
management did not enforce the rule, letting employees and 
managers talk about a variety of subjects and engage in a 
number of solicitation activities at their work stations.  Ac-
cording to the Board, Kaschner's and Binder's May 7 admoni-
tion "not to engage in any discussion of the Union with any 
employee on the production floor" constituted impermissible 
disparate treatment.  Board Decision, at 2.  The Board 
rejected the suggestion that the violation was somehow de 

minimus and ordered management to post notice that it 
would cease disparate enforcement of the neutral no-
solicitation policy.  Id.

     This petition for review of both s 8(a)(1) violations fol-
lowed.

                           II. Analysis

     Section 7 of the NLRA guarantees employees "the right to 
self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations."  
29 U.S.C. s 157 (1994).  Section 8(a)(1) makes it an "unfair 
labor practice" for an employer "to interfere with, restrain, or 
coerce employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in 
[Section 7]."  29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1).

A.   Parking Lot Access of Off-Site Employees

     For nearly fifty years, it has been black-letter labor law 
that the Board cannot order employers to grant nonemployee 
union organizers access to company property absent a show-
ing that on-site employees are otherwise inaccessible through 
reasonable efforts.  NLRB v. Babcock & Wilcox Co., 351 U.S. 
105, 112 (1956);  see also Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 
527, 534 (1992);  Lucile Salter Packard Children's Hosp. at 
Stanford v. NLRB, 97 F.3d 583, 587 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  It is 
likewise well-established that the Board has the authority, 
under Section 8(a)(1) of the NLRA, to prevent employers 
from posting parking lots against off-duty employees unless 
the employer presents valid business justifications for the 
restriction.  See Tri-County, 222 N.L.R.B. at 1089 (setting 
forth test);  see also NLRB v. S. Md. Hosp. Ctr., 916 F.2d 
932, 939-40 (4th Cir. 1990) (relying on Tri-County test to 
affirm Board's determination that no-access policy constituted 
unfair labor practice because "limited neither to nonemploy-
ees nor to the interior of the hospital");  NLRB v. Ohio 
Masonic Home, 892 F.2d 449, 453 (6th Cir. 1989) (affirming 
Board's application of Tri-County test to invalidate no-access 
policy applied to off-duty employees);  NLRB v. Pizza Crust 
Co. of Pa., 862 F.2d 49, 52-55 (3d Cir. 1988) (same).  ITT 
maintains that the Board overstepped its bounds by applying 
the Tri-County test off-the-rack to off-site employees, who, it 

argues, possess no greater s 7 access rights than are afford-
ed nonemployee union organizers under the Babcock doctrine.

     "Like other administrative agencies, the NLRB is entitled 
to judicial deference when it interprets an ambiguous provi-
sion of a statute that it administers."  Lechmere, 502 U.S. at 
536 (1992) (citing Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. 
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984)).  Section 7 does 
not itself speak of access rights, much less the access rights 
of off-site employees.  Such statutory silence would generally 
counsel Chevron deference.  However, once courts have set-
tled on a statute's clear meaning, " 'we adhere to that deter-
mination under the doctrine of stare decisis, and we judge an 
agency's later interpretation of the statute against [the] prior 
determination of the statute's meaning.' "  Lechmere, 502 
U.S. at 536-37 (quoting Maislin Indus., U.S., Inc. v. Primary 
Steel, Inc., 497 U.S. 116, 131 (1990)).  With this principle in 
mind, we turn to prior judicial interpretation of s 7 access 
rights.

     No court has decided the specific question we face here, 
i.e., the scope of the Board's authority under ss 7 and 8(a)(1) 
to prevent employers from prohibiting parking lot access to 
off-site employees who are seeking to engage in organization-
al activities that would be lawful if pursued by on-site employ-
ees.  ITT asserts, however, that the Supreme Court's s 7 
access cases compel application of the Babcock test, rather 
than the Tri-County test, in such situations.  Despite the fact 
that Babcock, and more recently Lechmere, speak formally of 
the differing access rights guaranteed "employees" versus 
"nonemployees," ITT maintains that the two cases in actuality 
establish a functional distinction between the access rights 
guaranteed "invitees" versus "trespassers."  In other words, 
ITT contends that, because "nonemployee" in the Babcock 
formulation is merely a proxy for "trespasser," the Board's 
application of the Tri-County test to trespassing off-site 
employees runs afoul of Chevron step one.  We do not agree 
that the Court's decisions are so clear.

     Babcock was itself a response to the Board's then-policy of 
assessing all parking-lot no-access rules under the same 

balancing test, regardless of whether the rule barred access 
of employees or nonemployee union organizers.  Though the 
Court acknowledged the deference normally owed the Board, 
it nonetheless faulted the Board for "fail[ing] to make a 
distinction between rules of law applicable to employees and 
those applicable to nonemployees."  Babcock, 351 U.S. at 112 
(emphasis added).  Calling the distinction "one of substance," 
the Court held:

     No restriction may be placed on the employees' right to 
     discuss self-organization among themselves, unless the 
     employer can demonstrate that a restriction is necessary 
     to maintain production or discipline.  But no such obli-
     gation is owed nonemployee organizers.  Their access to 
     company property is governed by a different consider-
     ation.  The right of self-organization depends in some 
     measure on the ability of employees to learn the advan-
     tages of self-organization from others.  Consequently, if 
     the location of a plant and the living quarters of the 
     employees place the employees beyond the reach of 
     reasonable union efforts to communicate with them, the 
     employer must allow the union to approach his employ-
     ees on his property.
     
Id. at 113 (citations omitted).  In other words, nonemployees' 
access rights are merely derivative of on-site employees' 
organizational rights;  nonemployees enjoy no independent, 
free-standing s 7 right of access.  See Sears, Roebuck & Co. 
v. San Diego County Dist. Council of Carpenters, 436 U.S. 
180, 206 n.42 (1978).  Though the Court did not explicitly 
contemplate the problem of the trespassing off-site employee, 
it did note that "[o]rganization rights are granted to workers 
by the same authority, the National Government, that pre-
serves property rights.  Accommodation between the two 
must be obtained with as little destruction of one as is 
consistent with the maintenance of the other."  Babcock, 351 
U.S. at 112.

     The Court revisited Babcock twenty years later in Hudgens 
v. NLRB, 424 U.S. 507 (1976).  Union member warehouse 
employees of Butler Shoe Company had gone on strike.  In 
addition to picketing the warehouse where they actually 

worked, the strikers targeted Butler's nine Atlanta-area retail 
stores, including one inside the North DeKalb Shopping 
Center.  The general manager of the shopping center threat-
ened arrest for trespass, after which the union filed unfair 
labor practice charges.  The Board agreed with the union, 
and the Fifth Circuit affirmed because the mall's interior no-
picketing policy violated the First Amendment.

     The Court reversed on the First Amendment ground, 
holding instead that "the rights and liabilities of the parties in 
this case are dependent exclusively upon the National Labor 
Relations Act."  Id. at 521.  Though the Court ordered 
remand to allow the Board to decide the s 7 question in the 
first instance, it described the task facing the Board as 
follows:

     The Babcock & Wilcox opinion established the basic 
     objective under the Act:  accommodation of s 7 rights 
     and private property rights "with as little destruction of 
     one as is consistent with the maintenance of the other."  
     The locus of that accommodation, however, may fall at 
     differing points along the spectrum depending on the 
     nature and strength of the respective s 7 rights and 
     private property rights asserted in any given context.  
     In each generic situation, the primary responsibility for 
     making this accommodation must rest with the Board in 
     the first instance.
     
Id. at 522 (quoting Babcock, 351 U.S. at 112) (emphasis added 
and citations omitted).

     The Court equivocated on the proper scope of off-site 
employee s 7 access rights.  Describing the Board's task on 
remand from Hudgens, the Court acknowledged that the 
underlying facts differed from those in Babcock "in several 
respects which may or may not be relevant in striking the 
proper balance," including that the alleged trespass "was 
carried on by Butler's employees (albeit not employees of its 
shopping center store), not by outsiders."  Hudgens, 424 U.S. 
at 522.  On the other hand, the Court hinted that access 
rights might depend on one's status as a trespasser or invitee.  
Distinguishing Babcock from Republic Aviation Corp. v. 

NLRB, 324 U.S. 793 (1945), an earlier case in which the Court 
had affirmed a Board ruling that an employer may not 
prohibit distribution of organizational literature by employees 
in nonworking areas during nonwork time absent a showing 
that the ban was necessary to maintain plant discipline or 
production, the Court remarked:  "A wholly different balance 
was struck when the organizational activity was carried on by 
employees already rightfully on the employer's property, 
since the employer's management interests rather than his 
property interests were there involved."  Hudgens, 424 U.S. 
at 521-22 n.10.

     In Eastex, Inc. v. NLRB, 437 U.S. 556 (1978), the Court 
again addressed the invitee/trespasser distinction.  The un-
derlying facts in Eastex resembled those of Republic Avia-
tion-the employer had prohibited employees from distribut-
ing a union newsletter in nonworking areas during nonwork 
time.  The Board ruled that the prohibition constituted an 
unfair labor practice, because the employer had failed to 
demonstrate sufficiently special circumstances to justify the 
ban.  The Fifth Circuit affirmed.  In upholding the Board's 
decision, the Court explained the underlying concerns driving 
the different outcomes in Babcock and Republic Aviation:

     In Babcock & Wilcox, ... nonemployees sought to enter 
     an employer's property to distribute union organizational 
     literature.  The Board applied the rule of Republic Avia-
     tion in this situation, but the Court held that there is a 
     distinction "of substance" between "rules of law applica-
     ble to employees and those applicable to nonemployees."  
     The difference was that the nonemployees in Babcock & 
     Wilcox sought to trespass on the employer's property, 
     whereas the employees in Republic Aviation did not.  
     Striking a balance between s 7 organizational rights and 
     an employer's right to keep strangers from entering on 
     its property, the Court held that the employer in Bab-
     cock & Wilcox was entitled to prevent "nonemployee 
     distribution of union literature [on its property] if reason-
     able efforts by the union through other available chan-
     
     nels of communication will enable it to reach the employ-
     ees with its message."
     
Eastex, 437 U.S. at 571 (quoting Babcock, 351 U.S. at 112, 
113) (emphasis added and citations omitted).

     Following Eastex and seizing on the Court's balancing 
language from Hudgens, the Board in 1988 reformulated its 
approach to no-access policies, once again adopting a single 
balancing test for assessing the validity of no-access policies 
generally, whether enforced against employees or nonemploy-
ees.  See Jean Country, 291 N.L.R.B. 11, 14 (1988) ("[I]n all 
access cases our essential concern will be the degree of 
impairment of the Section 7 right if access should be denied, 
as it balances against the degree of impairment of the private 
property right if access should be granted.  We view the 
consideration of the availability of reasonably effective alter-
native means as especially significant in this balancing pro-
cess.").  When the Board applied this test to strike down an 
employer's application of its parking-lot no-access policy to 
nonemployee union organizers, the Court in Lechmere inter-
vened.

     Noting that "[b]y its plain terms, ... the NLRA confers 
rights only on employees, not on unions or their nonemployee 
organizers," Lechmere, 502 U.S. at 532, the Court recast 
Babcock in Chevron terms:

     In Babcock, ... we held that the Act drew a distinction 
     "of substance" between the union activities of employees 
     and nonemployees.  In cases involving employee activi-
     ties, we noted with approval, the Board "balanced the 
     conflicting interests of employees to receive information 
     on self-organization on the company's property from 
     fellow employees during nonworking time, with the em-
     ployer's right to control the use of his property."  In 
     cases involving nonemployee activities (like those at issue 
     in Babcock itself), however, the Board was not permitted 
     to engage in that same balancing (and we reversed the 
     Board for having done so).  By reversing the Board's 
     interpretation of the statute for failing to distinguish 
     between the organizing activities of employees and non-
     employees, we were saying, in Chevron terms, that s 7 
     
     speaks to the issue of nonemployee access to an employ-
     er's property.  Babcock's teaching is straightforward:  
     s 7 simply does not protect nonemployee union organiz-
     ers except in the rare case where "the inaccessibility of 
     employees makes ineffective the reasonable attempts by 
     nonemployees to communicate with them through the 
     usual channels."
     
Id. at 537 (quoting Babcock, 351 U.S. at 109-10, 112, 113) 
(citations omitted).  The Court thus reaffirmed Babcock's 
central thesis that s 7 extends only derivative access rights to 
nonemployee union organizers.  The union itself, untethered 
to a threshold claim that s 7 employee organizational rights 
had been infringed, could not claim protection.

     Lechmere and the Court's cases leading up to it simply do 
not answer the question before us.  The Court never has 
professed to define the scope of the term "employee" in 
Babcock, Hudgens, Republic Aviation, Eastex, or Lechmere.  
And these cases certainly do not stand for the proposition 
that all trespassers, whether they be nonemployee union 
organizers or off-site employees, possess only derivative s 7 
access rights.  Because the Court's cases do not bespeak a 
clear answer, and because the statute is silent on the point, 
we must defer to the Board's interpretation if reasonable.

     Before assessing the reasonableness of the Board's inter-
pretation, we pause to consider the significance of the Elev-
enth Circuit's decision in Southern Services, Inc. v. NLRB, 
954 F.2d 700 (11th Cir. 1992).  There, Coca-Cola had en-
forced a no-access policy against an employee of a janitorial 
subcontractor who serviced Coca-Cola's secured industrial 
complex in Atlanta.  The complex was "the only common 
workplace of the approximately 165 [subcontractor] employ-
ees who provide janitorial services to Coca-Cola under sub-
contract."  Id. at 701.  The Board ruled against Coca-Cola, 
despite the fact that the subcontractor's employees were 
technically "nonemployees" vis-A-vis Coca-Cola.  The Elev-
enth Circuit affirmed, reasoning that:

     Babcock & Wilcox suggests two different routes for 
     analyzing employer rights, which now diverge under this 
     
     case's facts.  Babcock & Wilcox implied that employers 
     may restrict distribution by nonemployee organizers for 
     the reason that those organizers are trespassers.  Yet 
     the holding addressed the section 7 rights of nonemploy-
     ees-a category of persons who are not necessarily tres-
     passers on the employer's premises.  But dicta in the 
     Supreme Court's post-Babcock & Wilcox cases indicate 
     that it is the organizer's status as a trespasser or strang-
     er to the employee's property, rather than the nonem-
     ployee status, that invokes the employer's property right 
     to restrict premises distribution by the organizer.
     
Id. at 703 (citations omitted).

     Of course that decision as the opinion of another circuit is 
not binding here.  Moreover, Southern Services issued only 
one month after Lechmere and contains no reference to the 
Supreme Court's decision.  The Eleventh Circuit's opinion 
thus has limited persuasive value-it does not account for 
Lechmere's express reaffirmation of the employee/nonemploy-
ee distinction, particularly its reliance on statutory mention of 
the term "employee."  In any event, nothing in Southern 
Services is dispositive of the issue before us in this case.

     When it is unclear under established law whether a catego-
ry of workers enjoys free-standing, nonderivative access 
rights, then a court is obliged to defer to reasonable judg-
ments of the Board in its resolution of cases that have not as 
yet been resolved by the Supreme Court.  We have no doubt 
that the Board could attempt a justification within the bounds 
of Babcock, Hudgens, and Lechmere for why s 7 guarantees 
on-site subcontractor employees-like the SSI janitors at Coca 
Cola-nonderivative access rights similar to those enjoyed by 
on-site employees of the firm owning the site.  Obviously, this 
is not a question before us.  We make the point only to say 
that the Board, in the first instance under Chevron step two, 
must be allowed to define the limits of the NLRA in assessing 
the legality of no-access, no-solicitation rules not yet consid-
ered by the Supreme Court.

     Although the Court's access cases do not foreclose the 
possibility that off-site employees might enjoy some measure 

of free-standing, nonderivative access rights, they do make 
clear that the reasonableness of such an interpretation de-
pends in large part on the Board's considered justifications 
for extending greater access rights to trespassing employees 
than trespassing nonemployee union organizers.  "In deter-
mining whether an agency's interpretation represents a rea-
sonable accommodation of conflicting statutory purposes, a 
reviewing court must determine both whether the interpreta-
tion is arguably consistent with the underlying statutory 
scheme in a substantive sense and whether 'the agency 
considered the matter in a detailed and reasoned fashion.' "  
Rettig v. Pension Benefit Guar. Corp., 744 F.2d 133, 151 
(D.C. Cir. 1984) (quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 865).  With 
this principle in mind, we simply cannot assess the reason-
ableness of the Board's decision to apply the Tri-County test 
to off-site employees in the present case.

     First, the Board failed even to acknowledge that the ques-
tion of off-site employee access rights was an open one, i.e., 
that, in Chevron terms, s 7 and the Court's cases are silent 
on the issue.  Rather, the Board decided sub silentio that s 7 
guarantees all off-site employees, whether members of the 
same bargaining unit or not, some measure of free-standing, 
nonderivative access rights.  See Board Decision, at 4 
("[E]mployees of the employer who work at one plant are still 
considered employees of the employer if they handbill at 
another of the employer's plants.").  Indeed, by applying the 
Tri-County balancing test, the Board decided without analy-
sis that trespassing off-site employees possess access rights 
equivalent to those enjoyed by on-site employee invitees.  
Because it is by no means obvious that s 7 extends nonderi-
vative access rights to off-site employees, particularly given 
the considerations set forth in the Court's access cases, the 
Board was obliged to engage in considered analysis and 
explain its chosen interpretation.

     At oral argument, Government counsel insisted that the 
Board had already provided such an explanation in its prior 
off-site employee access cases and should not be required to 
repeat its justifications here.  See Eagle-Picher Industries, 
Inc., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 14 (May 19, 2000);  S. Cal. Gas Co., 

321 N.L.R.B. 551 (1996);  U.S. Postal Serv., 318 N.L.R.B. 466 
(1995).  The Government is certainly correct that the Board 
is not obligated to justify its interpretation anew with every 
application if it has done so adequately in a previous decision.  
None of the Board's previous cases, however, take any ac-
count of the Court's different access decisions or the trespass 
considerations articulated therein.  Indeed, the most exten-
sive treatment of the interpretive question can be found in 
United States Postal Service, 318 N.L.R.B. at 467.  Rejecting 
arguments that the Babcock test rather than the Tri-County 
test should apply to off-site employees, the Board stated only:

     No case has been cited which would warrant the distinc-
     tion which Respondent proposes.  In the instant case 
     Respondent's employees enjoy the same benefits and 
     working conditions regardless of the facility at which 
     they work.  For example, vacation benefits accrue in the 
     same manner and rate regardless of an employee's as-
     signed facility.  Years of employment are counted toward 
     an employee's pension from the day the employee is 
     hired to the day he or she retires, regardless of which 
     facility he or she is assigned to.  In addition, an employ-
     ee who is involuntarily transferred from one postal facili-
     ty to another maintains his or her seniority regardless of 
     the change of facility.  In Nashville Plastic Products, 
     supra, the Board recognized that "the rule enunciated in 
     Lechmere does not apply to employees."  No distinction 
     was made as to whether an employee worked at any 
     particular facility.  In addition, in Tri-County, supra, the 
     Board prohibited a rule which denied off-duty employees 
     entry to parking lots, gates, and other outside nonwork-
     ing areas.  Again, no distinction was made as to whether 
     the off-duty employee worked at any particular facility.  
     Accordingly, I believe that the rule enunciated in Tri-
     County Medical Center, supra, is controlling in the in-
     stant proceeding.
     
Id.  Noticeably absent from this discussion is any mention of 
the employer's property rights or the different interpretive 
considerations presented by trespassing employees.  There is 

certainly no consideration of the degree to which extending 
nonderivative access rights to off-site employees might in-
trude upon state trespass laws.  See Sears, Roebuck & Co., 
436 U.S. at 205 (holding that NLRA, as interpreted in Bab-
cock, did not preempt state trespass laws in part because 
"permitting state courts to evaluate the merits of an argu-
ment that certain trespassory activity is protected does not 
create an unacceptable risk of interference with conduct 
which the Board, and a court reviewing the Board's decision, 
would find protected.  For while there are unquestionably 
examples of trespassory union activity in which the question 
whether it is protected is fairly debatable, experience under 
the Act teaches that such situations are rare and that a 
trespass is far more likely to be unprotected than protected").  
Moreover, many of the organizational considerations cited by 
the Board are situation-specific and would not justify the 
general rule adopted here.  We therefore vacate the Board's 
decision and remand for the Board to consider and craft its 
interpretation in light of these concerns.

     Second, even were we here to find reasonable the Board's 
decision to read into s 7 some measure of free-standing, 
nonderivative access rights for off-site employees, the Board 
nevertheless failed to explain why the scope of such rights 
should be defined by the same Tri-County balancing test 
used to delineate the scope of on-site employee access rights.  
Lechmere makes clear that, even as to on-site employees, the 
Board must balance the conflicting interests of employees to 
receive information on self-organization on the company's 
property from fellow employees during nonwork time with 
the employer's right to control the use of his property.  See 
Lechmere, 502 U.S. at 534.

     It is obvious that the interests of employees located on a 
single employer site do not always coincide with the collective 
interests of employees located on several different sites.  
Indeed, this may be so even when employees on different 
sites are part of a single representational unit.  The "bal-
ance" of conflicting interests may change dramatically when 
"employees" are widely dispersed at different employer loca-
tions, both because the employees' interests and working 

arrangements may be dissimilar and also because the employ-
er's right to control the disputed premises likely implicates 
security, traffic control, personnel, and like issues that do not 
arise when only on-site employee access is involved.  If, on 
remand, the Board determines that s 7 indeed extends non-
derivative access rights to off-site employees, it must then 
adopt a balancing test that takes proper account of an em-
ployer's predictably heightened property concerns.

B.   Disparate Application of No-Solicitation Rule

     We need not pause long over the Board's determination 
that East Tawas management committed an unfair labor 
practice in reprimanding Karen Richardson.  "Even if the 
court might have reached a different conclusion had the court 
considered the issue de novo, the court will uphold the 
Board's decision if it is supported by substantial evidence in 
the record."  Frazier Indus. Co. v. NLRB, 213 F.3d 750, 756 
(D.C. Cir. 2000).

     Petitioner argues that, in reprimanding Richardson, man-
agement was simply applying a facially neutral no-solicitation 
policy.  That is beside the point.  Though facially neutral 
restrictions on worktime solicitations in work areas are pre-
sumptively valid, an employer commits an unfair labor prac-
tice when it applies the rule in non-neutral fashion to union 
activities.  See Restaurant Corp. of Am. v. NLRB, 827 F.2d 
799, 804-05 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  The Board found that East 
Tawas management had not traditionally enforced the rule, 
allowing "employees and managers to talk about various 
subjects while at their work stations as long as it did not 
interfere with production and to engage in a variety of 
solicitation activities, usually for some charitable cause."  
Board Decision, at 1.  Substantial evidence supports this 
finding.  See Transcript of ALJ Hearing ("Tr.") at 115-18 
(testimony of Karen Richardson) (testifying as to various 
charitable solicitation drives conducted during worktime);  Tr. 
at 100-02 (testimony of Karen Richardson) (testifying that 
supervisors often talk about nonwork-related issues with em-
ployees on the floor).

     Conceding that the evidence might support a finding that 
East Tawas management generally tolerates worktime solici-
tations, petitioner argues that management has never main-
tained a policy of allowing harassing solicitations, such as 
that attributed to Richardson.  We agree that substantial 
evidence would not support a finding that management gener-
ally tolerates solicitations in the face of harassment com-
plaints.  Indeed, Richardson herself testified that, despite 
often talking about the Union on the floor with fellow employ-
ees, this was the only time she had ever been reprimanded 
for doing so.  See Tr. at 123-24.

     Petitioner's argument nonetheless misses the crucial point.  
The Board took issue with the fact that "Kaschner and 
Binder responded [to the complaints] by warning Richardson 
on May 7 not to engage in any discussion of the Union with 
any employee on the production floor."  Board Decision, at 2.  
In other words, the warning was both impermissibly over-
broad, in that it required her to cease Union discussion with 
other employees altogether rather than simply those express-
ing discomfort, and impermissibly underbroad, in that it 
required her to cease Union-related discussions only.  Rich-
ardson's uncontroverted letter, the correctness of which Kas-
chner conceded in his response of the following day, constitut-
ed substantial evidence in support of the Board's finding of 
discriminatory over- and underbreadth.  See Letter from 
Karen Richardson to Rod Kaschner.

                            Conclusion

     We deny ITT's petition for review of the s 8(a)(1) violation 
pertaining to the disparate application of the disputed no-
solicitation rule.  However, we vacate the Board's determina-
tion that ITT committed an unfair labor practice by applying 
its no-access policy to off-site handbilling employees and 
remand to the Board for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion.

                                                                           So ordered.

                                                             