                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 14, 2002     Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 01-1305

                  Keokuk Junction Railway Co., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Surface Transportation Board and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

        Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway Company, 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                   Surface Transportation Board

     William A. Mullins argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioner.

     Theodore K. Kalick, Attorney, Surface Transportation 
Board, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 

brief were Ellen D. Hanson, General Counsel, Craig M. 
Keats, Deputy General Counsel, John P. Fonte and Robert B. 
Nicholson, Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Michael E. Roper and Robert M. Jenkins III were on the 
brief for intervenor.  Richard E. Weicher entered an appear-
ance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  After the Keokuk Junction Railway 
Company terminated the long-standing agreement whereby 
trains of the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway 
Company crossed its track, the BNSF convinced the Surface 
Transportation Board to order that the crossing be allowed.  
The KJRY now petitions this court for review.  We grant the 
petition because the BNSF has not received from the Board 
the certificate without which the Board lacks authority to 
order a crossing.

                          I. Background

     In 1881 the predecessor of the Burlington Northern and 
Santa Fe Railway Company contracted with the predecessor 
of the Keokuk Junction Railway Company to cross the latter's 
track at Keokuk, Iowa, just west of Bloody Run Creek, a 
tributary of the Mississippi River.  The BNSF's main line 
runs parallel to and south of the KJRY's main line, but the 
BNSF also owns a line of track (the Mooar Line) to the north 
of the KJRY's main line.  The BNSF's trains therefore must 
cross the KJRY's track to get from the Mooar Line to the 
BNSF's main line.

     From 1881 until 1993, the BNSF crossed the KJRY via a 
"crossing diamond" whereby the BNSF track directly over-
lapped that of the KJRY, forming a large "X" at the intersec-
tion.  After a significant flood in 1993, one of the BNSF's 
customers requested that the BNSF access the Mooar Line 
at a location east of Bloody Run Creek to avoid future 
problems and damage from flooding.  Under this plan, the 

BNSF's trains would use a quarter mile of the KJRY's track 
in order to travel from the BNSF main line to the Mooar 
Line.  The two companies entered into a "Crossing Agree-
ment" with respect to this plan in 1996.

     In 1998 the KJRY tried to buy the Mooar Line from the 
BNSF.  When the BNSF declined to sell, the KJRY in-
formed the BNSF of its intention to terminate the crossing 
agreement.  Soon thereafter, the BNSF petitioned the Board 
for a declaratory order requiring the KJRY to let its trains 
cross the KJRY's track.  The Board granted the order, of 
which the KJRY now petitions for review.

                           II. Analysis

     The Interstate Commerce Act, as amended, provides that 
no rail carrier may "construct an extension to any of its 
railroad lines" unless the Surface Transportation Board "is-
sues a certificate authorizing such activity."  49 U.S.C. 
s 10901(a).  The statute goes on to provide, at s 10901(d)(1):

     When a certificate has been issued by the Board under 
     this section authorizing the construction or extension of a 
     railroad line, no other rail carrier may block any con-
     struction or extension authorized by such certificate by 
     refusing to permit the carrier to cross its property.
     
By its terms, therefore, s 10901(d)(1) prohibits a rail carrier 
from blocking a crossing only "[w]hen a certificate has been 
issued by the Board."

     The Board has not issued the BNSF a certificate for 
construction or operation of the track that runs north and 
south across the KJRY's line.  Why?  The original track was 
constructed in 1881, before the enactment of the certificate 
requirement;  and when the BNSF relocated the crossing 
after the flooding in 1993 by laying new track, it did not 
obtain a certificate because it was merely rebuilding track 
that had been lawfully constructed without one.  The KJRY 

now argues that because the statute authorizes the Board to 
order a crossing only upon its issuance of a certificate, and 
the Board has not issued one, it erred in ordering the KJRY 
to allow the BNSF's trains to cross the KJRY's line.

     The Board in its decision did not explain why, despite not 
having issued a certificate, it considered itself authorized to 
issue the order.  Instead, it merely referred to the issuance 
of a certificate as "a formality that, in a case such as this one, 
we do not believe is necessary."  The Board in its brief gives 
similarly short shrift to the KJRY's argument, writing only 
that "even requiring the issuance of a certificate for an 
existing line constructed prior to the advent of regulation 
would be a needless formality, elevating form over sub-
stance."  The BNSF's brief does no better, acknowledging 
that s 10901(d)(1) on its face requires the Board to issue a 
certificate before it orders a crossing;  maintaining that "[t]he 
Board could issue, or re-issue, a construction certificate in a 
[sic] face of a dispute regarding an existing crossing";  and 
resisting that course on the ground that it "would be an 
empty formality."  We take the view, however, that the 
issuance of a certificate, formality or not, is the condition 
precedent the Congress prescribed.

     Indeed, in this case the issuance of a certificate may not be 
a mere formality -- if there is merit in any of the several 
grounds upon which the KJRY opposes it.  The KJRY argues 
that (1) the Board may not lawfully issue a certificate for 
track built before the enactment of s 10901;  (2) because the 
track at issue is switching track, it is exempt from the 
Board's authority to impose a crossing right, see 49 U.S.C. 
s 10906 ("Notwithstanding section 10901 ..., [t]he Board 
does not have authority under this chapter over ... switch-
ing, or side tracks");  and (3) the BNSF's trains operate over 
rather than "cross" the KJRY's track.  We will not have 
occasion to deal with these arguments, however, unless and 
until the Board issues the BNSF a certificate following a 
proceeding in which the KJRY presents its objections anew.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is grant-
ed and the order of the Board is

                                                              Vacated.

     