                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                       Filed June 11, 2002

                           No. 99-1507

                 Town of Stratford, Connecticut, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Federal Aviation Administration and 
                 Jane F. Garvey, Administrator, 
                           Respondents

                    On Petitioner's Petition for Rehearing

                            ---------

     Before:  Rogers and Garland, Circuit Judges and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  The Town of Stratford 
petitions for rehearing, raising three concerns.  The first 
appears to relate to the timing of our decision.  When the 
case was originally argued in October 2000 we were taken 
aback to learn that part of the property subject to the FAA's 

challenged approval of the Airport Master Plan was under 
the Army's control and the Army had not yet taken actions to 
dispose of the property.  It seemed to us, accordingly, that 
considerations of prudential ripeness suggested that we with-
hold our decision and opinion unless and until the Army 
finally decided to release its portion of the property to be 
used for the airport improvement.  On October 10, 2000, we 
issued an order holding the case in abeyance until such an 
occurrence.  The Army issued its decision on October 25, 
2001, and, pursuant to our October 10 order, the parties 
submitted supplemental briefs on ripeness as well as petition-
er's standing, which also troubled us.

     On April 5, 2002 (four months after the supplemental briefs 
were submitted), we received a letter from a line attorney in 
the Justice Department, presumably representing both the 
Transportation and Defense Departments, enclosing a terse 
memorandum from a Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army 
indicating he was withdrawing the October 25, 2001 decision 
for reevaluation.  The Justice Department attorney suggest-
ed that, in accordance with our earlier concerns, we might 
think the case no longer ripe and we might "place the case on 
hold" until the Army issued another decision.  Or, we could 
dismiss the petition without prejudice, allowing Stratford to 
refile if and when the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the 
Army made up his mind and issued a new decision.

     When we received this latest extraordinary letter from the 
government's counsel the opinion was already in galleys--
scheduled to issue on April 9.  We decided that prudential 
concerns suggested that we ignore the latest twist in this 
saga and simply let the opinion issue.

     Now comes petitioner, who argued all along that the case 
was ripe and who still maintains the case is ripe, to argue 
that the case is ripe not for the reason we gave but for 
another reason.  We are utterly baffled;  we cannot imagine 
why anyone would petition the court for en banc review of an 
issue decided in its favor;  indeed, a party typically lacks 
standing to challenge the reasoning of a tribunal that decides 
in its favor.  See, e.g., OXY U.S.A., Inc. v. FERC, 64 F.3d 679, 

689 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (citing Showtime Networks, Inc. v. FCC, 
932 F.2d 1, 4 (D.C. Cir. 1991)).  Be that as it may, since our 
ripeness concern was a prudential one--we did not wish to 
devote judicial resources when it might not be necessary--it, 
obviously, was obviated once we had prepared our opinion.

     Petitioner's second concern is our holding that it lacked 
prudential standing to assert the FAA's alleged violation of 
NEPA.  Our opinion noted that petitioner did not assert any 
environmental injury--such as traffic congestion leading to 
increased pollution--that might give them standing.  Peti-
tioner insists that in its original brief it did refer generally to 
"damage to surrounding wetlands."  But it never explained 
what it meant and in its supplemental brief the following 
year, in which we had specifically directed the parties to 
address issues of standing and ripeness, it never mentioned 
an environmental injury.  It is simply too late now to attempt 
to supply that which petitioner explicitly was asked to show in 
the fall of 2001.

     Finally, and perhaps most surprising, petitioner asserts 
that we erred in applying Chevron deference to the FAA's 
interpretation of 49 U.S.C. s 47106(c).  See Chevron U.S.A. 
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 
(1984).  That statutory section requires the Secretary of 
Transportation to obtain a certification from the Governor of 
an affected state that "an airport development projection 
involving the location of an airport or runway or a major 
runway extension" will meet applicable air and water quality 
standards.  Furthermore, the Secretary himself, if he finds 
that the project will have a significant adverse affect on the 
environment, may approve the application only if there is no 
possible and prudent alternative.

     The government, claiming Chevron deference, interpreted 
"location" of a runway not to apply to a minor runway shift 
that kept the same compass bearing and produced no addi-
tional noise impacts.  Paradoxically, petitioner also contended 
in its reply brief that Chevron governed, but argued that the 
FAA's interpretation failed Chevron step one.  We concluded 
that the word location was ambiguous and deferred to the 

Department's interpretation.  Petitioner now points out, for 
the first time, that the government's interpretation was 
adopted, not by regulation or through adjudication, but in 
litigation (although inferentially based on its Airport Environ-
mental Handbook).  Therefore, under Christensen v. Harris 
County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000), and United States v. Mead 
Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 221, 226-27 (2001), that interpretation is 
only entitled to Skidmore "deference" not Chevron.  See 
Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 132 (1944). Christensen had 
been decided when petitioner's brief was filed, yet petitioner 
ignored the case, and neither party ever called our attention 
in a 28(j) letter to the intervening Mead decision's potential 
impact on the case.  (For that matter, the petition for rehear-
ing does not acknowledge that petitioner not only neglected 
to challenge Chevron's applicability before, but in fact relied 
on it.)

     We think it is too late--at the petition for rehearing 
stage--for a party to raise a new question as to the proper 
scope of judicial review.  In any event, even granting more 
limited Skidmore deference to the FAA, we think its inter-
pretation of location is the better one.

     Accordingly, the petition for rehearing is denied.

                                          