                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                        Filed July 3, 2001

                           No. 00-5116

                   In re:  Sealed Case 00-5116

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-5302

                           -----------

On Appellants' Motion for Attorneys' Fees

                           -----------

     Before Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Henderson, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  In In re Sealed Case, we held 
that the Federal Election Commission (FEC) unquestionably 
violated its authorizing statute and its own regulations by 
placing information about an ongoing investigation in the 
public record as part of a subpoena enforcement action.  237 
F.3d 657, 667 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  Now, Appellants in that case 
apply for fees and expenses under the Equal Access to 
Justice Act (EAJA), 28 U.S.C. s 2412.  Appellants argue that 
they are entitled to attorney fees exceeding the $125 per hour 
typically provided under the Act.  Appellants suggest that 

the higher fees are justified by special factors that limited the 
pool of available counsel.  See id. s 2412(d)(2)(A).  Specifical-
ly, they contend the pool was limited because the case re-
quired attorneys who specialize in federal election law, are 
experienced in federal litigation, and were familiar with the 
sealed administrative record.  Appellants further suggest 
that the FEC's strident insistence on placing the information 
on the public record with less than 24 hours notice precluded 
them from looking for other counsel.  Because these limita-
tions are not the type of "special factors" contemplated by the 
Act, see F.J. Vollmer Co. v. Magaw, 102 F.3d 591, 598 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996), we award Appellants the expenses for which they 
have applied and fees calculated at the standard EAJA rate.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     The FEC is investigating allegations that Appellants violat-
ed the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA), 2 U.S.C. 
s 413 et seq.  As part of the investigation, the FEC issued a 
subpoena to a third-party witness.  When the third party did 
not comply with the subpoena, the FEC petitioned the dis-
trict court to enforce it.  The petition was filed on the public 
record and contained information about the ongoing investiga-
tion.

     Appellants immediately filed an emergency motion to seal 
the case.  In the motion, Appellants argued that the FEC's 
petition violates the broad confidentiality afforded to the 
subjects of FEC investigations under FECA.  The district 
court denied Appellants' motion to seal, treating it "sort of as 
a TRO request."  Transcript of Emergency Hearing at 12, In 
re Sealed Case, No. MISC. 00-162 (D.D.C. Mar. 17, 2000).

     On appeal, we recognized that 2 U.S.C. s 437g(a)(12)(A) 
and 11 C.F.R. s 111.21(a) plainly state that "the Commission 
shall not place information about an ongoing investigation in 
the public record when it seeks to enforce a subpoena."  
Sealed Case, 237 F.3d at 667.  We held that by publicly filing 
its petition and the accompanying exhibits, "the Commission 
unquestionably violate[d] Congress's mandate and its own 
regulations."  Id. Accordingly, we reversed the district 

court's ruling.  Appellants now apply for fees and expenses 
related to their effort to seal the FEC's subpoena enforce-
ment action.

                           II. ANALYSIS

     Under the EAJA, we "award to a prevailing party" of 
qualifying size fees and expenses incurred by the party as 
part of an action against the United States unless "the 
position of the United States was substantially justified or ... 
special circumstances make an award unjust."  28 U.S.C. 
s 2412(d)(1)(A).

     The Commission concedes that Appellants are "prevailing 
parties."  See id. s 2412(d)(1)(A), (2)(B).  The Commission 
also wisely concedes that its position in the underlying case 
was not substantially justified.  It could not have asserted 
otherwise with a straight face.  Our earlier opinion highlight-
ed the "weakness" of the Commission's position, a weakness 
that "invite[d] the suspicion that its actions [were] externally 
motivated."  Sealed Case, 237 F.3d at 668.

     The EAJA provides that "attorney fees shall not be award-
ed in excess of $125 per hour unless the court determines that 
... a special factor, such as the limited availability of quali-
fied attorneys for the proceedings involved, justifies a higher 
fee."  28 U.S.C. s 2412(d)(2)(A).  Appellants apply for fees 
for the three attorneys who represented them in their effort 
to seal the subpoena enforcement action.  Each of the attor-
neys charges a different hourly rate, all of which exceed the 
$125 rate provided for in the statute.  Appellants ask us to 
award the higher fees charged by counsel in light of several 
special factors that combined to narrow the pool of available 
counsel in this case.  Specifically, they contend that the case 
required attorneys who specialize in federal election law, who 
have experience in federal litigation (particularly with respect 
to emergency remedies), and who were familiar with the 
administrative record in the ongoing FEC investigation.  Ad-
ditionally, Appellants claim that the higher fees are justified 
by the FEC's ham-handed insistence on making a public filing 
with little notice and its obstinate refusal to temporarily 

preserve Appellants' confidentiality.  According to Appel-
lants, the FEC's handling of this matter precluded any realis-
tic chance to retain other counsel.

     In Pierce v. Underwood, the Supreme Court explained that 
the EAJA's "limited availability" provision "must refer to 
attorneys 'qualified for the proceedings' in some specialized 
sense, rather than just in their general legal competence."  
487 U.S. 552, 572 (1988).  The Court held that the provision 
requires attorneys to possess "some distinctive knowledge or 
specialized skill needful for the litigation in question."  Id. 
According to the Court, examples of this criterion are "an 
identifiable practice specialty such as patent law, or knowl-
edge of foreign law or language."  Id.  Fee awards exceeding 
the statutory cap are permitted only "[w]here such qualifica-
tions are necessary and can be obtained only at rates in 
excess of the [$125] cap."  Id.  The Underwood Court empha-
sized that "the other 'special factors' envisioned by the excep-
tion must be such as are not of broad and general applica-
tion."  Id. at 573.

     Following Underwood, we noted that a higher fee would be 
appropriate for specialties "requiring technical or other edu-
cation outside the field of American law."  Waterman S.S. 
Corp. v. Mar. Subsidy Bd., 901 F.2d 1119, 1124 (D.C. Cir. 
1990).  In F.J. Vollmer Co. v. Magaw, we held that specializa-
tion in firearms law was not a special factor justifying higher 
fees under the EAJA.  102 F.3d 591, 598 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  In 
that case, we stated that "lawyers practicing administrative 
law typically develop expertise in a particular regulated in-
dustry," but this expertise comes from experience, not from 
specialized training.  Id.  "If expertise acquired through 
practice justified higher reimbursement rates, then all law-
yers practicing administrative law in technical fields would be 
entitled to fee enhancements."  Id.  As we explained in 
Vollmer, nothing in the EAJA suggests this entitlement.  See 
id.  A number of our sister circuits have adopted a similar 
approach, refusing to award higher fees based on counsel's 
expertise in a particular subject.  See, e.g., Estate of Cervin v. 
Commissioner, 200 F.3d 351, 354 (5th Cir. 2000);  Raines v. 
Shalala, 44 F.3d 1355, 1361 (7th Cir. 1995);  Stockton v. 

Shalala, 36 F.3d 49, 50 (8th Cir. 1994);  Chynoweth v. Sulli-
van, 920 F.2d 648, 650 (10th Cir. 1990).  But see Love v. 
Reilly, 924 F.2d 1492, 1496 (9th Cir. 1991).

     In light of Vollmer, we cannot award Appellants fees 
exceeding $125 simply because they wanted to hire attorneys 
who specialize in federal election law, have experience in 
federal litigation, and were familiar with the administrative 
record.  Although federal election law "involves a complex 
statutory and regulatory framework, the field is not beyond 
the grasp of a competent practicing attorney with access to a 
law library and the other accoutrements of modern legal 
practice."  Chynoweth, 920 F.2d at 650.  Likewise, in all 
federal cases, clients presumably want to be represented by 
an attorney with experience in federal litigation and who is 
familiar with the record at issue.  These are not special 
factors unique to this case.  Rather, even in combination they 
broadly and generally apply to countless cases litigated in the 
federal courts.  See Underwood, 487 U.S. at 573.

     Appellants suggest that this case is set apart from the 
typical one by the "artificial emergency" created by the FEC.  
Appellants contend that the FEC's actions placed unneces-
sary time constraints on them that effectively limited the 
availability of qualified attorneys who could handle this mat-
ter.  As we recounted in our earlier opinion, on March 16, 
2000, the FEC gave Appellants less than 24 hours notice that 
it planned to file a petition seeking to enforce a subpoena 
against a third-party witness and that the petition would 
include exhibits detailing information about the FEC's ongo-
ing investigation of Appellants.  See Sealed Case, 237 F.3d at 
662.  We neglected to note in that opinion, however, that the 
FEC provided this notice "just before close of business."  
While the FEC considered this a "courtesy" (presumably 
because no regulation required such notice), its etiquette only 
extended as far as informing Appellants that their statutorily 
protected confidentiality would be violated the next afternoon.  
Because of the Commission's manners, Appellants were 
forced to act immediately.

     Within seconds of the FEC filing its petition, Appellants 
filed an emergency motion to seal the district court proceed-
ings.  A few hours later, Appellants' counsel advocated that 
motion before the district court at a hastily arranged hear-
ing--a hearing that was held on a Friday at 5 pm.  By the 
time the district court denied Appellants' motion, the work 
week was over.  Fearing that confidential information would 
be revealed when the district court clerk's office reopened the 
following week, Appellants scrambled to appeal the district 
court's decision by Monday afternoon.

     Undoubtedly, the FEC's actions forced Appellants into an 
atrocious position.  To shield themselves from the very agen-
cy Congress requires to protect their confidentiality, Appel-
lants essentially had no choice other than to turn to the 
attorneys on whom they had relied during the FEC's investi-
gation. There simply appears to have been no time to re-
search or retain other counsel.  Still, this difficulty is not the 
type of "special factor" or "limited availability" contemplated 
by the EAJA.

     Because the Act is a waiver of sovereign immunity, we 
must construe it "strictly in favor of the sovereign."  Mason-
ry Masters, Inc. v. Nelson, 105 F.3d 708, 712 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  
Under the EAJA, we award attorney fees if "the position of 
the United States" was not "substantially justified."  28 
U.S.C. s 2412(d)(1)(A).  The Act mandates that those fees 
"shall not be awarded in excess of $125 per hour unless ... a 
special factor ... justifies a higher fee."  Id. s 2412(d)(2)(A).  
The special factor inquiry is separate from the inquiry into 
whether the United States' position was justified.  Appel-
lants' proposed reading conflates the two by asking for higher 
fees in light of the FEC's actions and how those actions 
impacted them.  For a party to receive any fee award under 
the Act, the government's position must not be substantially 
justified--it does not matter how unjustified that position is.  
Congress has not devised a system to penalize the United 
States for the degree of its unjustified position or how that 
unjustified position has impacted a prevailing party.  Rather, 
its waiver of sovereign immunity assumes that the United 
States has taken an unreasonable position.

     We agree with the FEC's concession that its position in 
this case was not substantially justified.  Its contentious 
refusal to file its petition under seal was based on a surreal 
reading of FECA, references to opaque shards of legislative 
history, and an absurdist approach to its own regulations.  
See Sealed Case, 237 F.3d at 668-70.  Indeed, the Commis-
sion seemed to have completely overlooked the bedrock prin-
ciple that "[a]gencies are not empowered to carve out excep-
tions to statutory limits on their authority," an authority that 
flows directly from explicit congressional delegations.  Id. at 
669-70.  To say that the Commission's position was not 
substantially justified is an understatement.  It was not justi-
fied at all.  See id. at 668.  Nevertheless, this simply reflects 
the threshold inquiry required for Appellants to receive any 
fee award, not a reason to increase that award beyond the 
otherwise applicable $125 rate.  It does not matter that the 
Commission's wholly unjustified actions may have forced Ap-
pellants to retain counsel who charge more than the statutori-
ly provided fee.  Instead, because the Commission's position 
was wholly unjustified, the EAJA's waiver of sovereign immu-
nity authorizes us to award Appellants attorney fees based on 
a rate of $125 per hour.  Accordingly, this rate forms the 
basis of Appellants' award.

     Appellants ask us to award fees based on the time their 
counsel spent preparing supplemental and reply briefs for 
their fee application.  These briefs were primarily devoted to 
arguing that Appellants should receive higher fees based on 
their interpretation of the EAJA's "special factor" provision.  
We do not award fees for Appellants' preparation of these 
briefs.  As we discussed above, Appellants' argument for 
higher fees flies in the face of the clear precedent of this 
Court.  The United States is not required to pay "for work 
that could have been avoided."  Action on Smoking & Health 
v. Civil Aeronautics Bd., 724 F.2d 211, 224 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  
Additionally, Appellants did not prevail on this question.  See 
Cooper v. United States R.R. Retirement Bd., 24 F.3d 1414, 
1417 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

     The Commission raises several arguments concerning spe-
cific entries and costs in Appellants' application.  We have 
considered these arguments and find them meritless.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     According to Appellants' application, their attorneys spent 
231.5 hours working on this case (excluding time spent on the 
supplemental and reply briefs in this proceeding), and they 
incurred $3,920.80 in expenses (the $4,095.33 listed in the 
initial petition, less the amounts conceded in the reply brief).  
Based on the EAJA's $125 per hour rate, Appellants are 
entitled to $32,858.30 in fees and expenses.

                                                                 So ordered.

                      