                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 20, 2000     Decided May 12, 2000 

                           No. 99-5097

            Branch Ministries and Dan Little, Pastor, 
                            Appellants

                                v.

               Charles O. Rossotti, Commissioner, 
                    Internal Revenue Service, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 95cv00724)

     Mark N. Troobnick, with whom Jay Alan Sekulow and 
Colby M. May were on the briefs, argued the cause for 
appellants.

     Thomas J. Sawyer, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
with whom Loretta C. Argrett, Assistant Attorney General, 
and Kenneth L. Greene, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-

tice, and Wilma A. Lewis, United States Attorney, were on 
the brief, argued the cause for appellee.

     Richard P. Hutchison, Mark R. Levin and Janet LaRue 
were on the brief for amici curiae Landmark Legal Founda-
tion and Family Research Council

     Ayesha N. Khan, Elliot M. Mincberg and Alma C. 
Henderson were on the brief for amici curiae Americans 
United for Separation of Church and State and People for the 
American Way Foundation.

     Before Silberman and Henderson, Circuit Judges, and 
Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the court filed by Senior Judge Buckley.

     Buckley, Senior Judge:  Four days before the 1992 presi-
dential election, Branch Ministries, a tax-exempt church, 
placed full-page advertisements in two newspapers in which it 
urged Christians not to vote for then-presidential candidate 
Bill Clinton because of his positions on certain moral issues.  
The Internal Revenue Service concluded that the placement 
of the advertisements violated the statutory restrictions on 
organizations exempt from taxation and, for the first time in 
its history, it revoked a bona fide church's tax-exempt status 
because of its involvement in politics.  Branch Ministries and 
its pastor, Dan Little, challenge the revocation on the 
grounds that (1) the Service acted beyond its statutory au-
thority, (2) the revocation violated its right to the free exer-
cise of religion guaranteed by the First Amendment and the 
Religious Freedom Restoration Act, and (3) it was the victim 
of selective prosecution in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  
Because these objections are without merit, we affirm the 
district court's grant of summary judgment to the Service.

                          I. Background

A.   Taxation of Churches

     The Internal Revenue Code ("Code") exempts certain orga-
nizations from taxation, including those organized and operat-
ed for religious purposes, provided that they do not engage in 
certain activities, including involvement in "any political cam-

paign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for 
public office."  26 U.S.C. s 501(a), (c)(3) (1994).  Contribu-
tions to such organizations are also deductible from the 
donating taxpayer's taxable income.  Id. s 170(a).  Although 
most organizations seeking tax-exempt status are required to 
apply to the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS" or "Service") 
for an advance determination that they meet the require-
ments of section 501(c)(3), id. s 508(a), a church may simply 
hold itself out as tax exempt and receive the benefits of that 
status without applying for advance recognition from the IRS.  
Id. s 508(c)(1)(A).

     The IRS maintains a periodically updated "Publication No. 
78," in which it lists all organizations that have received a 
ruling or determination letter confirming the deductibility of 
contributions made to them.  See Rev. Proc. 82-39, 1982-1 
C.B. 759, ss 2.01, 2.03.  Thus, a listing in that publication will 
provide donors with advance assurance that their contribu-
tions will be deductible under section 170(a).  If a listed 
organization has subsequently had its tax-exempt status re-
voked, contributions that are made to it by a donor who is 
unaware of the change in status will generally be treated as 
deductible if made on or before the date that the revocation is 
publicly announced.  Id. s 3.01.  Donors to a church that has 
not received an advance determination of its tax-exempt 
status may also deduct their contributions;  but in the event 
of an audit, the taxpayer will bear the burden of establishing 
that the church meets the requirements of section 501(c)(3).  
See generally id. s 3.04;  Rev. Proc. 80-24, 1980-1 C.B. 658, 
s 6 (discussing taxpayers' obligations in seeking a ruling or 
determination letter).

     The unique treatment churches receive in the Internal 
Revenue Code is further reflected in special restrictions on 
the IRS's ability to investigate the tax status of a church.  
The Church Audit Procedures Act ("CAPA") sets out the 
circumstances under which the IRS may initiate an investiga-
tion of a church and the procedures it is required to follow in 
such an investigation.  26 U.S.C. s 7611.  Upon a "reason-
able belief" by a high-level Treasury official that a church 
may not be exempt from taxation under section 501, the IRS 

may begin a "church tax inquiry."  Id. s 7611(a).  A church 
tax inquiry is defined, rather circularly, as

     any inquiry to a church (other than an examination) to 
     serve as a basis for determining whether a church-
     
          (A) is exempt from tax under section 501(a) by reason 
     of its status as a church, or
     
          (B) is ... engaged in activities which may be subject 
     to taxation....
     
Id. s 7611(h)(2).  If the IRS is not able to resolve its con-
cerns through a church tax inquiry, it may proceed to the 
second level of investigation:  a "church tax examination."  In 
such an examination, the IRS may obtain and review the 
church's records or examine its activities "to determine 
whether [the] organization claiming to be a church is a church 
for any period."  Id. s 7611(b)(1)(A), (B).

B.   Factual and Procedural History

     Branch Ministries, Inc. operates the Church at Pierce 
Creek ("Church"), a Christian church located in Binghamton, 
New York.  In 1983, the Church requested and received a 
letter from the IRS recognizing its tax-exempt status.  On 
October 30, 1992, four days before the presidential election, 
the Church placed full-page advertisements in USA Today 
and the Washington Times.  Each bore the headline "Chris-
tians Beware" and asserted that then-Governor Clinton's 
positions concerning abortion, homosexuality, and the distri-
bution of condoms to teenagers in schools violated Biblical 
precepts.  The following appeared at the bottom of each 
advertisement:

     This advertisement was co-sponsored by the Church at 
     Pierce Creek, Daniel J. Little, Senior Pastor, and by 
     churches and concerned Christians nationwide.  Tax-
     deductible donations for this advertisement gladly ac-
     cepted.  Make donations to:  The Church at Pierce 
     Creek.  [mailing address].
Appendix ("App.") at Tab 5, Ex. E.

     The advertisements did not go unnoticed.  They produced 
hundreds of contributions to the Church from across the 

country and were mentioned in a New York Times article and 
an Anthony Lewis column which stated that the sponsors of 
the advertisement had almost certainly violated the Internal 
Revenue Code.  Peter Applebome, Religious Right Intensi-
fies Campaign for Bush, N.Y. Times, Oct. 31, 1992, at A1;  
Anthony Lewis, Tax Exempt Politics?, N.Y. Times, Dec. 1, 
1992, at A15.

     The advertisements also came to the attention of the 
Regional Commissioner of the IRS, who notified the Church 
on November 20, 1992 that he had authorized a church tax 
inquiry based on "a reasonable belief ... that you may not be 
tax-exempt or that you may be liable for tax" due to political 
activities and expenditures.  Letter from Cornelius J. Cole-
man, IRS Regional Commissioner, to The Church at Pierce 
Creek (Nov. 20, 1992), reprinted in App. at Tab 5, Ex. F.  
The Church denied that it had engaged in any prohibited 
political activity and declined to provide the IRS with certain 
information the Service had requested.  On February 11, 
1993, the IRS informed the Church that it was beginning a 
church tax examination.  Following two unproductive meet-
ings between the parties, the IRS revoked the Church's 
section 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status on January 19, 1995, citing 
the newspaper advertisements as prohibited intervention in a 
political campaign.

     The Church and Pastor Little (collectively, "Church") com-
menced this lawsuit soon thereafter.  This had the effect of 
suspending the revocation of the Church's tax exemption until 
the district court entered its judgment in this case.  See 26 
U.S.C. s 7428(c).  The Church challenged the revocation of 
its tax-exempt status, alleging that the IRS had no authority 
to revoke its tax exemption, that the revocation violated its 
right to free speech and to freely exercise its religion under 
the First Amendment and the Religious Freedom Restoration 
Act of 1993, 42 U.S.C. s 2000bb (1994) ("RFRA"), and that 
the IRS engaged in selective prosecution in violation of the 
Equal Protection Clause of the Fifth Amendment.  After 
allowing discovery on the Church's selective prosecution 
claim, Branch Ministries, Inc. v. Richardson, 970 F. Supp. 11 
(D.D.C. 1997), the district court granted summary judgment 

in favor of the IRS.  Branch Ministries, Inc. v. Rossotti, 40 
F. Supp. 2d 15 (D.D.C. 1999).

     The Church filed a timely appeal, and we have jurisdiction 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 1291.  We review summary judg-
ment decisions de novo, see Everett v. United States, 158 F.3d 
1364, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 526 U.S. 1132 (1999), 
and will affirm only if there is no genuine issue as to any 
material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as 
a matter of law.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c).

                           II. Analysis

     The Church advances a number of arguments in support of 
its challenges to the revocation.  We examine only those that 
warrant analysis.

A.   The Statutory Authority of the IRS

     The Church argues that, under the Internal Revenue Code, 
the IRS does not have the statutory authority to revoke the 
tax-exempt status of a bona fide church.  It reasons as 
follows:  section 501(c)(3) refers to tax-exempt status for 
religious organizations, not churches;  section 508, on the 
other hand, specifically exempts "churches" from the require-
ment of applying for advance recognition of tax-exempt sta-
tus, id. s 508(c)(1)(A);  therefore, according to the Church, its 
tax-exempt status is derived not from section 501(c)(3), but 
from the lack of any provision in the Code for the taxation of 
churches.  The Church concludes from this that it is not 
subject to taxation and that the IRS is therefore powerless to 
place conditions upon or to remove its tax-exempt status as a 
church.

     We find this argument more creative than persuasive.  The 
simple answer, of course, is that whereas not every religious 
organization is a church, every church is a religious organiza-
tion.  More to the point, irrespective of whether it was 
required to do so, the Church applied to the IRS for an 
advance determination of its tax-exempt status.  The IRS 
granted that recognition and now seeks to withdraw it.  
CAPA gives the IRS this power.

     That statute, which pertains exclusively to churches, pro-
vides authority for revocation of the tax-exempt status of a 
church through its references to other sections of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code.  The section of CAPA entitled "Limita-
tions on revocation of tax-exempt status, etc." provides that 
the Secretary [of the Treasury] may "determine that an orga-
nization is not a church which [ ] (i) is exempt from taxation 
by reason of section 501(a), or (ii) is described in section 
170(c)."  26 U.S.C. s 7611(d)(1)(A)(i), (ii).  Both of these 
sections condition tax-exempt status on non-intervention in 
political campaigns.  Section 501(a) states that "[a]n organiza-
tion described in subsection (c) ... shall be exempt from tax-
ation...."  Id. s 501(a).  Those described in subsection (c) 
include

     corporations ... organized and operated exclusively for 
     religious ... purposes ... which do[ ] not participate in, 
     or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing 
     of statements), any political campaign on behalf of (or in 
     opposition to) any candidate for public office.
     
Id. s 501(c)(3).  Similarly, section 170(c) allows taxpayers to 
deduct from their taxable income donations made to a corpo-
ration

     organized and operated exclusively for religious ... pur-
     poses ... which is not disqualified for tax exemption 
     under section 501(c)(3) by reason of attempting to ... 
     intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of 
     statements), any political campaign on behalf of (or in 
     opposition to) any candidate for public office.
     
Id. s 170(c)(2)(B), (D).

     The Code, in short, specifically states that organizations 
that fail to comply with the restrictions set forth in section 
501(c) are not qualified to receive the tax exemption that it 
provides.  Having satisfied ourselves that the IRS had the 
statutory authority to revoke the Church's tax-exempt status, 
we now turn to the free exercise challenges.

B.   First Amendment Claims and the RFRA

     The Church claims that the revocation of its exemption 
violated its right to freely exercise its religion under both the 
First Amendment and the RFRA.  To sustain its claim under 
either the Constitution or the statute, the Church must first 
establish that its free exercise right has been substantially 
burdened.  See Jimmy Swaggart Ministries v. Board of 
Equalization, 493 U.S. 378, 384-85 (1990) ("Our cases have 
established that the free exercise inquiry asks whether gov-
ernment has placed a substantial burden on the observation 
of a central religious belief or practice and, if so, whether a 
compelling governmental interest justifies the burden.") (in-
ternal quotation marks and brackets omitted);  42 U.S.C. 
s 2000bb-1(a), (b) ("Government shall not substantially bur-
den a person's exercise of religion" in the absence of a 
compelling government interest that is furthered by the least 
restrictive means.).  We conclude that the Church has failed 
to meet this test.

     The Church asserts, first, that a revocation would threaten 
its existence.  See Affidavit of Dan Little dated July 31, 1995 
at p 22, reprinted in App. at Tab 8 ("The Church at Pierce 
Creek will have to close due to the revocation of its tax 
exempt status, and the inability of congregants to deduct 
their contributions from their taxes.").  The Church main-
tains that a loss of its tax-exempt status will not only make its 
members reluctant to contribute the funds essential to its 
survival, but may obligate the Church itself to pay taxes.

     The Church appears to assume that the withdrawal of a 
conditional privilege for failure to meet the condition is in 
itself an unconstitutional burden on its free exercise right.  
This is true, however, only if the receipt of the privilege (in 
this case the tax exemption) is conditioned

     upon conduct proscribed by a religious faith, or ... 
     denie[d] ... because of conduct mandated by religious 
     belief, thereby putting substantial pressure on an adher-
     ent to modify his behavior and to violate his beliefs.
     
Jimmy Swaggart Ministries, 493 U.S. at 391-92 (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).  Although its adver-
tisements reflected its religious convictions on certain ques-
tions of morality, the Church does not maintain that a with-
drawal from electoral politics would violate its beliefs.  The 
sole effect of the loss of the tax exemption will be to decrease 
the amount of money available to the Church for its religious 
practices.  The Supreme Court has declared, however, that 
such a burden "is not constitutionally significant."  Id. at 391;  
see also Hernandez v. Commissioner, 490 U.S. 680, 700 (1989) 
(the "contention that an incrementally larger tax burden 
interferes with [ ] religious activities ... knows no limita-
tion").

     In actual fact, even this burden is overstated.  Because of 
the unique treatment churches receive under the Internal 
Revenue Code, the impact of the revocation is likely to be 
more symbolic than substantial.  As the IRS confirmed at 
oral argument, if the Church does not intervene in future 
political campaigns, it may hold itself out as a 501(c)(3) 
organization and receive all the benefits of that status.  All 
that will have been lost, in that event, is the advance assur-
ance of deductibility in the event a donor should be audited.  
See 26 U.S.C. s 508(c)(1)(A);  Rev. Proc. 82-39 s 2.03.  Con-
tributions will remain tax deductible as long as donors are 
able to establish that the Church meets the requirements of 
section 501(c)(3).

     Nor does the revocation necessarily make the Church liable 
for the payment of taxes.  As the IRS explicitly represented 
in its brief and reiterated at oral argument, the revocation of 
the exemption does not convert bona fide donations into 
income taxable to the Church.  See 26 U.S.C. s 102 ("Gross 
income does not include the value of property acquired by 
gift....").  Furthermore, we know of no authority, and coun-
sel provided none, to prevent the Church from reapplying for 
a prospective determination of its tax-exempt status and 
regaining the advance assurance of deductibility--provided, 
of course, that it renounces future involvement in political 
campaigns.

     We also reject the Church's argument that it is substantial-
ly burdened because it has no alternate means by which to 
communicate its sentiments about candidates for public office.  
In Regan v. Taxation With Representation, 461 U.S. 540, 
552-53 (1983) (Blackmun, J., concurring), three members of 
the Supreme Court stated that the availability of such an 
alternate means of communication is essential to the constitu-
tionality of section 501(c)(3)'s restrictions on lobbying.  The 
Court subsequently confirmed that this was an accurate 
description of its holding.  See FCC v. League of Women 
Voters, 468 U.S. 364, 400 (1984).  In Regan, the concurring 
justices noted that "TWR may use its present s 501(c)(3) 
organization for its nonlobbying activities and may create a 
s 501(c)(4) affiliate to pursue its charitable goals through 
lobbying."  461 U.S. at 552.

     The Church has such an avenue available to it.  As was the 
case with TWR, the Church may form a related organization 
under section 501(c)(4) of the Code.  See 26 U.S.C. s 501(c)(4) 
(tax exemption for "[c]ivic leagues or organizations not orga-
nized for profit but operated exclusively for the promotion of 
social welfare").  Such organizations are exempt from taxa-
tion;  but unlike their section 501(c)(3) counterparts, contribu-
tions to them are not deductible.  See 26 U.S.C. s 170(c);  see 
also Regan, 461 U.S. at 543, 552-53.  Although a section 
501(c)(4) organization is also subject to the ban on intervening 
in political campaigns, see 26 C.F.R. s 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(ii) 
(1999), it may form a political action committee ("PAC") that 
would be free to participate in political campaigns.  Id. 
s 1.527-6(f), (g) ("[A]n organization described in section 
501(c) that is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) may, 
[if it is not a section 501(c)(3) organization], establish and 
maintain such a separate segregated fund to receive contribu-
tions and make expenditures in a political campaign.").

     At oral argument, counsel for the Church doggedly main-
tained that there can be no "Church at Pierce Creek PAC."  
True, it may not itself create a PAC;  but as we have pointed 
out, the Church can initiate a series of steps that will provide 
an alternate means of political communication that will satisfy 
the standards set by the concurring justices in Regan.  

Should the Church proceed to do so, however, it must under-
stand that the related 501(c)(4) organization must be sepa-
rately incorporated;  and it must maintain records that will 
demonstrate that tax-deductible contributions to the Church 
have not been used to support the political activities conduct-
ed by the 501(c)(4) organization's political action arm.  See 26 
U.S.C. s 527(f)(3);  26 C.F.R. s 1.527-6(e), (f).

     That the Church cannot use its tax-free dollars to fund such 
a PAC unquestionably passes constitutional muster.  The 
Supreme Court has consistently held that, absent invidious 
discrimination, "Congress has not violated [an organization's] 
First Amendment rights by declining to subsidize its First 
Amendment activities."  Regan, 461 U.S. at 548;  see also 
Cammarano v. United States, 358 U.S. 498, 513 (1959) ("Peti-
tioners are not being denied a tax deduction because they 
engage in constitutionally protected activities, but are simply 
being required to pay for those activities entirely out of their 
own pockets, as everyone else engaging in similar activities is 
required to do under the provisions of the Internal Revenue 
Code.").

     Because the Church has failed to demonstrate that its free 
exercise rights have been substantially burdened, we do not 
reach its arguments that section 501(c)(3) does not serve a 
compelling government interest or, if it is indeed compelling, 
that revocation of its tax exemption was not the least restric-
tive means of furthering that interest.

     Nor does the Church succeed in its claim that the IRS has 
violated its First Amendment free speech rights by engaging 
in viewpoint discrimination.  The restrictions imposed by 
section 501(c)(3) are viewpoint neutral;  they prohibit inter-
vention in favor of all candidates for public office by all tax-
exempt organizations, regardless of candidate, party, or view-
point.  Cf. Regan, 461 U.S. at 550-51 (upholding denial of tax 
deduction for lobbying activities, in spite of allowance of such 
deduction for veteran's groups).

C.   Selective Prosecution (Fifth Amendment)

     The Church alleges that the IRS violated the Equal Protec-
tion Clause of the Fifth Amendment by engaging in selective 

prosecution.  In support of its claim, the Church has submit-
ted several hundred pages of newspaper excerpts reporting 
political campaign activities in, or by the pastors of, other 
churches that have retained their tax-exempt status.  These 
include reports of explicit endorsements of Democratic candi-
dates by clergymen as well as many instances in which 
favored candidates have been invited to address congrega-
tions from the pulpit.  The Church complains that despite 
this widespread and widely reported involvement by other 
churches in political campaigns, it is the only one to have ever 
had its tax-exempt status revoked for engaging in political 
activity.  It attributes this alleged discrimination to the Ser-
vice's political bias.

     To establish selective prosecution, the Church must "prove 
that (1) [it] was singled out for prosecution from among 
others similarly situated and (2) that [the] prosecution was 
improperly motivated, i.e., based on race, religion or another 
arbitrary classification."  United States v. Washington, 705 
F.2d 489, 494 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  This burden is a demanding 
one because "in the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, 
courts presume that [government prosecutors] have properly 
discharged their official duties."  United States v. Armstrong, 
517 U.S. 456, 464 (1996) (internal quotation marks and cita-
tion omitted).

     At oral argument, counsel for the IRS conceded that if 
some of the church-sponsored political activities cited by the 
Church were accurately reported, they were in violation of 
section 501(c)(3) and could have resulted in the revocation of 
those churches' tax-exempt status.  But even if the Service 
could have revoked their tax exemptions, the Church has 
failed to establish selective prosecution because it has failed 
to demonstrate that it was similarly situated to any of those 
other churches.  None of the reported activities involved the 
placement of advertisements in newspapers with nationwide 
circulations opposing a candidate and soliciting tax deductible 
contributions to defray their cost.  As we have stated,

     [i]f ... there was no one to whom defendant could be 
     compared in order to resolve the question of [prosecuto-
     
     rial] selection, then it follows that defendant has failed to 
     make out one of the elements of its case.  Discrimination 
     cannot exist in a vacuum;  it can be found only in the 
     unequal treatment of people in similar circumstances.
     
Attorney Gen. v. Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 928, 946 (D.C. 
Cir. 1982);  see also United States v. Hastings, 126 F.3d 310, 
315 (4th Cir. 1997) ("[D]efendants are similarly situated when 
their circumstances present no distinguishable legitimate 
prosecutorial factors that might justify making different pros-
ecutorial decisions with respect to them.") (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted).

     Because the Church has failed to establish that it was 
singled out for prosecution from among others who were 
similarly situated, we need not examine whether the IRS was 
improperly motivated in undertaking this prosecution.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we find that the revocation of 
the Church's tax-exempt status neither violated the Constitu-
tion nor exceeded the IRS's statutory authority.  The judg-
ment of the district court is therefore

                                                        Affirmed.

                                                             