                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 1, 2002    Decided January 31, 2003 

                           No. 01-3070

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Darrel A. Goodwin, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00122-01)

     Beverly G. Dyer, Assistant Federal Public Defender, ar-
gued the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. 
J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Thomas S. Rees, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. Howard, 
Jr., U.S. Attorney, and John R. Fisher, Mary-Patrice Brown, 
and Kenneth F. Whitted, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  In early 1999 Darrel 
Goodwin was arrested by agents from the Drug Enforcement 
Administration ("DEA") who had just sold him cocaine.  Al-
though testimony suggested that at the time the market price 
for a single kilogram of cocaine was above $27,000, Goodwin 
had made a deal to buy three kilograms at a unit price of 
$20,000 each.  On the day of his arrest, Goodwin paid about 
$20,000 in cash and $1,500 worth of heroin toward the pur-
chase of the first two kilograms, with the balance to be paid 
on the second kilogram once he had sold the drugs.  In 
addition, Goodwin agreed to come back the following day to 
pay for and collect the third kilogram.

     Goodwin argues that his case squarely fits the language of 
Application Note 141 to s 2D1.1 of the United States Sentenc-
ing Guidelines ("U.S.S.G."), which under some circumstances 
allows (but doesn't require) a departure in a "reverse sting" 
(a drug sale by government agents to the defendant).  Specif-
ically, the Note authorizes departure where the agent "set a 
price ... that was substantially below the market value ...," 
leading the defendant to purchase a "significantly greater 
quantity" than he otherwise could have.  At sentencing the 
district court rejected the argument as unsupported by the 
evidence.  We cannot say that the district court erred in 
denying the departure, and accordingly affirm.

                              * * *

     In January 1999 DEA agents began working with a confi-
dential informant who introduced them to Goodwin.  On three 
occasions Goodwin sold the informant and DEA Special Agent 
Kenneth Abrams small amounts of heroin (totaling 56.8 
grams), "fronting" Abrams and the informant on two occa-

__________
     1  As renumbered effective November 1, 2002 from the former 
but identically worded Application Note 15.

sions.  During one of these transactions, Goodwin sold $3,500 
worth of heroin for only $2,450, with the remainder to be paid 
later, and another time he sold $2,620 worth, requiring only 
$1,500 up front.

     At some point during these transactions Abrams and Good-
win began discussing the possibility of working together to 
buy cocaine.  At first, they discussed a transaction in which 
they would split one kilo, toward which Goodwin would con-
tribute $10,000. Abrams told Goodwin he had a source that 
could sell cocaine for about $24,000 per kilogram and that the 
source could supply larger volumes as well.  Goodwin said 
that he--along with an unnamed partner--could come up 
with $37,000 toward a deal.

     In early February Abrams brought Goodwin to meet Spe-
cial Agent Robert Valentine, who was posing as the source of 
the cocaine.  Valentine explained that he could sell Abrams 
and Goodwin five kilos for $100,000.  In Goodwin's presence, 
Agent Abrams gave Valentine $10,000 as a fake down pay-
ment;  the record is obscure on the role of this payment, and 
Goodwin makes no claim that it was a part of the payment 
made for his drugs in the offense of conviction.  Goodwin told 
the agents that he could come up with about $15,000 and "his 
people" could come up with about $24,000.

     A few days later, Goodwin met with Agents Abrams and 
Valentine at a hotel.  Goodwin said that he only had about 
$20,000 but that he was still interested in buying the cocaine.  
Valentine asked Goodwin if he had any heroin to trade for 
cocaine.  Goodwin produced 14 grams of heroin, worth about 
$1,500.

     After sampling the cocaine and approving its quality, Good-
win agreed to purchase three kilos for $20,000 each.  He paid 
$19,870 for the first kilogram, and gave the $1,500 worth of 
heroin as a down payment on the second, with further pay-
ment to come from street sales of the purchased cocaine.  
Goodwin was to return for the third kilogram the following 
day.  But as he left the room with the first two kilos, officers 
arrested him.

     Goodwin pled guilty to possession of 500 grams or more of 
cocaine with the intent to distribute, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 
ss 841(a)(1) and 841(b)(1)(B)(ii).  At Goodwin's sentencing 
hearing, Agent Abrams testified that the price of cocaine at 
that time was $26,000 or $27,000 per kilo in New York or 
Miami, and that prices in Washington, D.C. were higher than 
in New York or Miami.  Abrams testified that the $20,000 per 
kilo price agreed to by Goodwin reflected a negotiated bulk 
discount.  Goodwin argued that the court should use its 
discretion to grant a downward departure because the agents 
had induced his purchase with a price that was "substantially 
below the market value."  U.S.S.G. s 2D1.1, Application Note 
14.

     Although the terms in which the district court judge dis-
posed of Goodwin's Application Note 14 theory are not crystal 
clear, a fair reading is that he rejected both the claim that the 
sale was on terms substantially below market and the claim 
that any below-market pricing induced a purchase of higher 
volume--both of which are necessary for a Note 14 depar-
ture.  On the first element, for example, he said that he could 
not "find that either the second or third kilograms should be 
unattributable to Mr. Goodwin," emphasizing the "substantial 
down payment" and noting that Goodwin "was expected, 
obviously, to pay the rest.  He wasn't given these drugs for 
free."  The latter phrase ("for free") strikes us as simply a 
hyperbolic way of expressing the idea that Goodwin had not 
shown the terms to be markedly more favorable than could be 
expected in the market.  In addition, the district court found 
that the deal "was not induced by" the price.

     For sentencing purposes the district court assigned Good-
win a base offense level of 28, which covers the range from 2 
to 3.5 kilograms of cocaine (or its equivalent under the 
Guidelines' drug equivalency table).  U.S.S.G. s 2D1.1(c) & 
Application Note 10.  It attributed the entire three kilograms 
of cocaine to Goodwin, and may also have included the 70.8 
grams of heroin he sold the agents.  But as the 70.8 grams of 
heroin converts to only .354 kilos of cocaine, it did not affect 
the offense level even if included.

     Goodwin presents two arguments for reversal.  First, he 
argues that the court erred because the price for the first 
kilogram of cocaine--about $20,000 rather than upwards of 
$27,000--was artificially low and triggered the court's power 
to depart.  Second, he says that the credit terms for the 
second kilogram were overly generous, because the agents 
didn't have enough knowledge of Goodwin's ability to profit-
ably distribute large amounts of cocaine, not to mention his 
reliability;  the credit terms were thus the equivalent of lower 
prices, and therefore permit departure.

     Finding no clear error in the finding that Goodwin failed to 
show that the terms were substantially more favorable than 
in the market generally, we affirm.

                              * * *

     Congress has devised a "trichotomy" for review of district 
court resolution of Guidelines issues:  "[P]urely legal ques-
tions are reviewed de novo;  factual findings are to be af-
firmed unless 'clearly erroneous';  and we are to give 'due 
deference' to the district court's application of the guidelines 
to facts."  United States v. Kim, 23 F.3d 513, 517 (D.C. Cir. 
1994) (citing 18 U.S.C. s 3742(e));  see also Buford v. United 
States, 532 U.S. 59 (2001);  United States v. Sammoury, 74 
F.3d 1341, 1343-44 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  There is some ambigui-
ty whether the district court's decision not to apply Note 14 
involved a finding of fact (and thus should be reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard) or an "application of the 
guidelines to the facts" (and thus should be reviewed under 
the intermediate "due deference" standard).  Certainly the 
line between the two can be unclear.  Compare, e.g., United 
States v. Brooke, 308 F.3d 17, 20-21 & n.4 (D.C. Cir. 2002) 
(using clear error standard to review whether home confine-
ment would be "equally efficient as" incarceration), with Kim, 
23 F.3d at 517 (using due deference standard to review 
whether defendant's actions constituted "more than minimal 
planning").  Here, however, both parties assume that the 
standard is one of clear error.  We accordingly apply that 
standard, though noting that we would reach the same out-

come if we used "due deference."  The defendant bears the 
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that he 
is eligible for a downward departure.  See, e.g., United States 
v. Sachdev, 279 F.3d 25, 28 (1st Cir. 2002).
     
   Application Note 14 states:

     If, in a reverse sting (an operation in which a govern-
     ment agent sells or negotiates to sell a controlled sub-
     stance to a defendant), the court finds that the govern-
     ment agent set a price for the controlled substance that 
     was substantially below the market value of the con-
     trolled substance, thereby leading to the defendant's 
     purchase of a significantly greater quantity of the con-
     trolled substance than his available resources would have 
     allowed him to purchase except for the artificially low 
     price set by the government agent, a downward depar-
     ture may be warranted.
     
U.S.S.G. s 2D1.1, Application Note 14.  The sentencing 
court's discretion to grant a departure therefore requires a 
price that both is "substantially below the market value" and 
induces the defendant to purchase a "significantly greater 
quantity" than he otherwise could.  See id.

     We pause to observe three ambiguities in the Note.  First, 
it appears to see a low price as an inducement only in the 
sense that it might enable a potential buyer to stretch his 
resources farther, i.e., it would increase the quantity that a 
buyer is able to buy.  Thus it seems to overlook the conven-
tional notion of price elasticity--the effect on the quantity 
that a buyer, even one with ample resources, would be willing 
to buy.  After all, a person who is willing to buy only ten 
units of a good at a unit price of $100, even though he has the 
resources to buy many more, might well up his purchase if 
the goods were offered at a unit price of $50.  The Guidelines 
seem to offer no protection to the buyer whose willingness to 
buy is drastically affected by a discount, so long as the drugs 
would have been within his ability to pay even if offered at 
market rates.

     Second, the Note's focus on how much a buyer's "available 
resources" would allow him to purchase could be read to skew 
the role of credit.  Credit transactions allow a buyer to 
purchase more drugs than if he were required to pay cash up 
front;  if one read "available resources" to encompass only 
assets available for immediate transfer, a broad array of 
transactions at market terms would qualify for the departure.  
We do not read the term "available resources" so narrowly.  
Rather, we assume that access to credit on terms prevailing 
in the market, is, like cash, one of a buyer's "available 
resources."  Thus a defendant cannot simply assert that any 
quantity purchased on credit should be counted as more than 
his "available resources" would allow.

     Third, the Note says nothing explicit on how a court is to 
determine whether a purchase increment induced by discount 
pricing is "significant[ ]." While we would not hazard a com-
plete definition of "significant" in this context, it must at least 
foreclose the use of Note 14 where the increase due to 
favorable terms had no effect on sentencing at all--a matter 
that turns largely on the Guidelines' "brackets" for drug 
quantities.  (A judge whose sentencing within a bracket is 
influenced by intra-bracket variations of course needs no 
special authorization to make adjustments for any effect of 
discounts.)  Here the most relevant divide is at two kilograms 
of cocaine (or its equivalent).  At or above two kilos (all the 
way up to 3.5), Goodwin would be at Level 28, which the 
district court used.  Below two kilos (even by a hair, all the 
way down to 500 grams), he would be at Level 26.  See 
U.S.S.G. s 2D1.1(c).  Thus it makes no difference whether he 
purchased two kilograms or three;  relief would be proper 
only if the alleged discount played a role in luring him up to 
two (or its equivalent).

     The district court reviewed the evidence and determined 
that Goodwin had received a discounted bulk-rate price of 
$20,000 per kilogram.  Abrams had testified that the price 
reflected a quantity discount.  While Goodwin's counsel ques-
tioned Abrams about the price of individual kilograms, he did 
not elicit any testimony from him (or offer any other evi-
dence) to suggest that $20,000 per kilo was not within the 

normal market range for a two-or three-kilo delivery.  A brief 
review of appellate decisions in narcotics cases suggests that 
volume discounts are indeed available in the drug world, 
much as in lawful markets.  See, e.g., United States v. 
Thomas, 284 F.3d 746, 754 (7th Cir. 2002);  United States v. 
Pressler, 256 F.3d 144, 151 (3d Cir. 2001);  United States v. 
Wilson, 244 F.3d 1208, 1211 (10th Cir. 2001).  While the 
government did not offer affirmative evidence that the bulk 
discount here--roughly 25% off the per-kilo price for a single 
kilo--conformed to market realities for a two-or three-
kilogram deal, it was Goodwin who bore the burden of 
showing that Note 14 applied.  See Sachdev, 279 F.3d at 28.

     Nor can we say that the credit terms--allowing Goodwin to 
walk away with $40,000 worth of cocaine while paying only 
$19,870 in cash and $1,500 in heroin--change this analysis.  
We agree with Goodwin that overly generous credit terms can 
be the equivalent of a reduction in a cash price for purposes 
of Note 14.  But we see no clear error here.  "Fronting," i.e., 
a sale on credit with the balance expected to be repaid from 
street sale revenues, appears, like volume discounts, to be a 
common practice in the drug market.  See, e.g., United 
States v. Ramsey, 165 F.3d 980, 982 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  United 
States v. Tarantino, 846 F.2d 1384, 1395 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  
Indeed, Goodwin himself fronted drugs to Agent Abrams on 
at least two occasions, despite knowing little about him.

     Thus the question is only whether the relationship between 
Goodwin and the agents here was such that credit on this 
scale would not have been available to Goodwin in the actual 
drug market.  He asserts it would not:

     The agents had no knowledge of Goodwin's circum-
     stances, contacts, drug distribution network, or his expe-
     rience dealing cocaine, and they did not require Goodwin 
     to confirm when he would be able to repay them the 
     remaining $18,500.  No experienced drug seller would 
     have fronted a first-time buyer a kilogram of cocaine in 
     exchange for such a small amount of heroin without such 
     knowledge.  Most large scale drug sellers would require 
     
     cash, not heroin, in payment.  The agents were also 
     likely aware of Goodwin's heroin addiction, and no expe-
     rienced seller of drugs would have engaged in this trans-
     action with a heroin addict.  For these reasons, the 
     agents extended credit terms for the second kilogram 
     that never would have been available in an actual drug 
     market.
     
Appellant's Br. at 13.

     Perhaps this is true.  But the paragraph notably fails to 
cite any supporting evidence for its view of market behavior.  
Moreover, the only case cited by Goodwin as manifesting such 
a view of the drug market, United States v. Panduro, 152 
F.Supp. 2d 398, 407 (S.D.N.Y. 2001), involved a dealer front-
ing more than 15 times the amount of cocaine fronted in this 
case, and noted that the question of overly generous credit 
terms was a "fact intensive inquiry."  Id. at 407.

     Furthermore, counsel rather clouds the facts with his de-
piction of the agents' virtually throwing drugs at an unknown 
purchaser.  First, while the agents had had no cocaine deal-
ings with Goodwin, they had had two successful frontings of 
heroin (although, to be sure, on a smaller scale and with 
Goodwin the one who extended credit).  And while Goodwin 
says that the agents were aware of his heroin addiction (and 
suggests that seasoned sellers would not deal with such an 
addict), he promised them he would turn up with tens of 
thousands in cash and he came through with nearly $20,000.  
This is hardly behavior consonant with Goodwin's self-
depiction as a person unfitted by addiction for serious drug 
dealing.  In addition, he certainly presented himself as an 
experienced cocaine dealer, telling the informant that he was 
"continuing" to sell crack cocaine but was unhappy with the 
prices he was paying in light of the quantities he was pur-
chasing.  And before the delivery was final, he sampled the 
cocaine and commented on its quality, which was a sign of 
experience (real or feigned).  Of course here we encounter a 
general difficulty with Application Note 14:  if the terms 
offered are "substantially" below market levels, one might 
expect the buyer--unless a real neophyte--to smell a rat.  

But we do not rely on that problem.  Here Goodwin has 
simply failed to offer adequate proof of a material deviation 
from market terms.

     We thus find no clear error in the district court's conclusion 
that Goodwin failed to prove that the agents set a price 
(credit terms included) that was "substantially below the 
market value" of the drugs.

     The judgment of the district court is

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                              