                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 20, 2001      Decided July 3, 2001 

                           No. 00-1246

              National Public Radio, Inc., et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

           Cornerstone Community Radio, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-1255

On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
Federal Communications Commission

     Patrick F. Philbin argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
him on the briefs were John F. Wood, Ernest Thomas 

Sanchez, Susan M. Jenkins, Neal A. Jackson, Marilyn 
Mohrman-Gillis and Robert M. Winteringham.

     Dennis J. Kelly, Lauren A. Colby and John G. Bentley 
were on the brief for intervenors Lay Catholic Broadcasting 
Network, Spring Arbor College and Cornerstone Community 
Radio, Inc.

     Cheryl A. Leanza, Andrew Jay Schwartzman and Harold 
J. Feld were on the brief for amicus curiae National Federa-
tion of Community Broadcasters.

     C. Grey Pash, Jr., Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Jane E. Mago, Acting General Counsel, Daniel M. 
Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, John M. Nannes, 
Acting Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, Robert B. Nicholson and Christopher Sprigman, Attor-
neys.  Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, Federal Com-
munications Commission, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The Federal Communications Com-
mission exempts noncommercial educational entities from 
participating in auctions for broadcast licenses when they 
apply for channels within the portion of the spectrum re-
served for them, but not when they apply for channels in the 
unreserved spectrum.  In this case, noncommercial edu-
cational broadcasters challenge the Commission's policy, ar-
guing that the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 requires the 
Commission to exempt them from participating in auctions 
for any channel, reserved or unreserved, and that the Com-
mission's adoption of this policy was arbitrary and capricious.  
Finding the Commission's refusal to exempt such broadcast-
ers from auctions for unreserved channels contrary to the 

Act's plain language, we vacate the offending portions of the 
Commission's order.

                                I

     For more than fifty years, the Federal Communications 
Commission has reserved part of the FM radio spectrum and 
several television channels exclusively for noncommercial edu-
cational use.  In re Applications of WQED Pittsburgh & 
Cornerstone Television, Inc., 15 FCC Rcd 202 p 16 (1999), 
vacated in part by 15 FCC Rcd 2534 (2000). The Commission 
has done this because of the "high quality type of program-
ming which would be available in such stations--program-
ming of an entirely different character from that available on 
most commercial stations."  Id. (internal quotations omitted).  
Not restricted to this spectrum, however, noncommercial 
educational broadcasters (NCEs) may also apply for licenses 
in the unreserved spectrum, known as "commercial" licenses.

     Historically, the Commission allocated licenses for both 
reserved and unreserved channels through evidentiary hear-
ings.  Seeking to lessen reliance on these time-consuming 
hearings, Congress, acting through the Balanced Budget Act 
of 1997, amended Communications Act section 309(j)(1) to 
provide that if "mutually exclusive applications are accepted 
for any initial license or construction permit, then, except as 
provided in paragraph (2), the Commission shall grant the 
license or permit to a qualified applicant through a system of 
competitive bidding."  Balanced Budget Act of 1997 
s 3002(a)(1)(A), 47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(1).  Section 309(j)(2) states 
that this competitive bidding authority "shall not apply to 
licenses or construction permits issued by the Commission" 
for, among other things, NCEs.  47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(2)(C) 
(cross-referencing id. s 397(6)).

     In an effort to implement the Balanced Budget Act, the 
Commission proposed holding auctions for all licenses for 
commercial channels, but not for channels reserved for 
NCEs.  In re Implementation of Section 309(j) of the Com-
munications Act--Competitive Bidding for Commercial 
Broad. & Instructional Television Fixed Serv. Licenses, 12 

FCC Rcd 22363 p 50 (proposed Nov. 26, 1997).  The Commis-
sion would continue allocating the latter through evidentiary 
hearings.  Although NCEs applying for licenses to operate 
stations on the part of the spectrum reserved for them would 
thus not have to participate in auctions, those applying for 
commercial licenses would.  Because commenters disagreed 
about whether this approach was consistent with section 
309(j)(2), and because the Commission "did not focus on the 
complicated nature of this issue in [its] Notice in this proceed-
ing," the Commission solicited a further round of comment.  
In re Implementation of Section 309(j) of the Communica-
tions Act--Competitive Bidding for Commercial Broad. & 
Instructional Television Fixed Serv. Licenses, 13 FCC Rcd 
15920 p 25 (1998).  In doing so, the Commission recognized 
that if section 309(j)(2) barred it from requiring NCEs to 
participate in auctions for commercial licenses, several alter-
natives existed:  establishing a special track for processing 
NCE applications;  adopting a hybrid approach when NCEs 
apply (for instance, evaluating applicants initially on a point 
system and, if the NCE is thereby eliminated, proceeding to 
an auction);  or even making NCEs ineligible to apply for 
commercial licenses altogether.  In re Reexamination of the 
Comparative Standards for Noncommercial Educ. Appli-
cants, 13 FCC Rcd 21167 p p 39-44 (1998).

     In the resulting Report and Order challenged here, the 
Commission answered what it called "[p]erhaps the most 
difficult question posed in this proceeding"--how to interpret 
section 309(j)(2)--by adopting its initial proposal and exempt-
ing NCEs from competing in auctions only when they apply 
for licenses to operate channels in the reserved spectrum.  
See In re Reexamination of the Comparative Standards for 
Noncommercial Educ. Applicants, 15 FCC Rcd 7386 p 101 
(2000);  see also id. at p p 101-111.  Petitioners--National 
Public Radio, the Association of America's Public Television 
Stations, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and the 
State of Oregon (acting on behalf of Southern Oregon Univer-
sity)--seek review of this decision, arguing that it conflicts 
with the 1997 Act's NCE exemption and that it is arbitrary 
and capricious.

                                II

     In evaluating petitioners' argument that the Commission's 
action violates the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, we proceed 
under the familiar two-part test of Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. 
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  
If "Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at 
issue ... that is the end of the matter;  for the court, as well 
as the agency, must give effect to the unambiguously ex-
pressed intent of Congress." Id. at 842-43.  Only if the 
statute is silent or ambiguous do we defer to the agency's 
interpretation, asking "whether [it] is based on a permissible 
construction of the statute."  Id. at 843.

     Arguing that the Commission's action fails step one, peti-
tioners claim that the Act unambiguously forbids the Com-
mission from requiring NCEs to participate in auctions to 
obtain licenses for any channel, reserved or unreserved.  We 
agree.  While section 309(j)'s first paragraph directs the 
Commission to award licenses through a system of competi-
tive bidding, it only does so subject to limitations set forth in 
the second paragraph, one of which expressly denies the 
Commission authority to hold auctions for "licenses ... is-
sued ... for [NCEs]."  47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(2).  Because this 
paragraph's denial of authority is based on the nature of the 
station that ultimately receives the license, not on the part of 
the spectrum in which the station operates, nothing in the Act 
authorizes the Commission to hold auctions for licenses issued 
to NCEs to operate in the unreserved spectrum.

     This is not to say that the Act's language is perfectly 
crafted.  For instance, because the exemption refers to the 
ultimate recipient of the license, not to applicants for the 
license, the Commission apparently has authority to require 
an NCE applicant to participate in an auction so long as it 
does not ultimately receive a license.  But as petitioners 
noted at oral argument, to ensure that an NCE never has to 
participate in an auction for a license that it ultimately 
receives, the Commission must exempt all NCE applicants 
from such auctions.  Inartful drafting is not the same as 
ambiguity.  Cf. Meredith v. Fed. Mine Safety & Health 

Review Comm., 177 F.3d 1042, 1053 (D.C. Cir. 1999) ("[T]he 
presence of a difficult question of statutory construction does 
not necessarily render that provision ambiguous for purposes 
of Chevron.").  Here, the fact remains that under the Act's 
plain language the Commission must exempt NCEs from 
participating in all auctions.  In any event, the Commission 
has not argued that the statute is ambiguous for this reason.

     Our concurring colleague, advancing another argument not 
made by the Commission, believes that the statute is ambigu-
ous for a different reason:  the word "issued" in section 
309(j)(2) may mean that the section applies only to licenses 
already issued, that is, to renewals of existing licenses.  But 
this is not a plausible reading of the statute:  section 
309(j)(1)'s grant of bidding authority for licenses is expressly 
limited to "initial licenses," not to renewals.  47 U.S.C. 
s 309(j)(1).  Reading 309(j)(2) as exempting only NCE re-
newals from this authority would thus render the section 
meaningless.

     The Commission argues not that the statute is ambiguous 
for any of these reasons, but rather that it is silent on the 
specific question before us, thus requiring us to defer to the 
Commission's interpretation under Chevron step two.  
"[N]othing in the text of the provision," the Commission 
argues, "evinces unambiguous Congressional intent on the 
narrow question of competing applications filed by [NCEs] 
for a non-reserved channel."  Respondent's Br. at 16;  see 
also In re Reexamination of the Comparative Standards for 
Noncommercial Educ. Applicants, 15 FCC Rcd p 106.  By 
failing to distinguish between reserved and unreserved chan-
nels, however, section 309(j)(2) exempts NCEs that apply for 
commercial licenses from participating in auctions.  True, 
nothing in the Act's text specifically says that NCEs applying 
for commercial licences are exempt from auctions.  But gen-
eral rules need not list everything they cover:  no one would 
argue, for instance, that the statutory requirement that the 
Commission award licenses to serve "public convenience, 
interest, or necessity" does not apply to licenses for AM 
stations because the Act does not expressly mention AM 
licenses.  47 U.S.C. s 307(a).  For the same reason, section 

309(j)(2)'s NCE exemption from all auctions means that 
NCEs are exempt from auctions for commercial as well as 
reserved licenses.

     Because statutory language represents the clearest indica-
tion of Congressional intent, cf. Qi-Zhuo v. Meissner, 70 F.3d 
136, 140 (D.C. Cir. 1995) ("Where ... the plain language of 
the statute is clear, the court generally will not inquire 
further into its meaning."), and because the Act's general 
language covers all auctions, we must presume that Congress 
meant precisely what it said.  Extremely strong, this pre-
sumption is rebuttable only in the "rare cases [in which] the 
literal application of a statute will produce a result demon-
strably at odds with the intentions of its drafters."  United 
States v. Ron Pair Enterp., Inc., 489 U.S. 235, 242 (1989) 
(internal quotation omitted).  The Commission's burden in 
rebutting the presumption created by clear language is oner-
ous:  the Commission must "show either that, as a matter of 
historical fact, Congress did not mean what it appears to have 
said, or that, as a matter of logic and statutory structure, it 
almost surely could not have meant it."  Engine Mfrs. Ass'n 
v. EPA, 88 F.3d 1075, 1089 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  see also Griffin 
v. Oceanic Contractors, Inc., 458 U.S. 564, 571 (1982) (courts 
may ignore plain language in a narrow category of cases 
where "the literal application of a statute will produce a result 
demonstrably at odds with the intentions of its drafters.").  
The Commission here has fallen short of this high standard.

     The Commission claims that section 309(j)(2) conflicts with 
another section of the Act--section 309(j)(1).  Cf. Engine 
Mfrs., 88 F.3d at 1089 ("The [agency's] strongest arguments 
arise from an apparent tension between two aspects of the 
authorization regime.").  According to the Commission, the 
latter directs it to award licenses through competitive bid-
ding, while the former prohibits it from doing so.  But we do 
not understand how a general rule (section 309(j)(1)) can 
conflict with its own exception (section 309(j)(2)).  Nor do we 
agree with the Commission that following section 309(j)(2)'s 
plain language would frustrate the Act's purposes.  Cf. Envtl. 
Def. Fund, Inc. v. EPA, 82 F.3d 451, 469 (D.C. Cir. 1996) 

("Because [a] literal reading of the statute would actually 
frustrate the congressional intent supporting it, we look to 
the [agency] for an interpretation of the statute more true to 
the Congress's purpose.").  According to the Commission, 
exempting NCEs from auctions for commercial licenses would 
undermine Congress's desire to "recover[ ] ... a portion of 
the value of the [commercial] spectrum" through auctions.  47 
U.S.C. s 309(j)(3)(C).  But because the Commission would be 
required to use auctions when NCEs have not applied, follow-
ing the plain language of section 309(j)(2) would still increase 
the amount of money the Commission recovers.  Most impor-
tant, notwithstanding Congress's desire to increase revenue, 
it expressly exempted NCEs from participating in auctions, 
thus demonstrating that it understood that pursuit of this 
goal would be limited by the NCE exemption.  "Deciding 
what competing values will or will not be sacrificed to the 
achievement of a particular objective is the very essence of 
legislative choice--and it frustrates rather than effectuates 
legislative intent simplistically to assume that whatever fur-
thers the statute's primary objective must be the law."  Rod-
riguez v. United States, 480 U.S. 522, 526 (1987).

     Nor, finally, do we find anything in the legislative history to 
support the Commission's interpretation of the statute.  In 
fact, what little relevant legislative history exists reinforces 
section 309(j)(2)'s plain language.  The original House and 
Senate bills expressly limited the auction exemption to appli-
cations for "channels reserved for noncommercial use." 
S. 947, 105th Cong. s 3001(a)(1) (1997);  H.R. 2015, 105th 
Cong. s 3301(a)(1) (1997).  The House-Senate conference 
abandoned this restriction, adopting the exemption as it now 
stands.  H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 105-217, at 9 (1997).  As 
petitioners point out, "[w]here Congress includes limiting 
language in an earlier version of a bill but deletes it prior to 
enactment, it may be presumed that the limitation was not 
intended."  Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23-24 
(1983).  The Commission offers an alternative explanation for 
the deletion:  the restriction was originally used as part of an 
attempt to define "NCE" and was removed when the confer-
ence substituted a reference to the proper statutory defini-

tion.  We need not resolve this debate, for even if the 
Commission's account is correct, the legislative history falls 
far short of demonstrating that "Congress did not mean what 
it appears to have said."  Engine Mfrs., 88 F.3d at 1089.  We 
thus have no reason to believe that Congress meant anything 
other than that the Commission may not require NCEs to 
participate in auctions, regardless of the type of license they 
seek.

                               III

     Because the Commission's order conflicts with Communica-
tions Act section 309(j)(2), we have no need to consider 
petitioners' arbitrary and capricious challenge.  The petition 
for review is granted and the portions of the Commission's 
Report and Order requiring NCEs that apply for licenses on 
the unreserved spectrum to participate in competitive auc-
tions are vacated.

                                   So ordered.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, concurring:  One of the interest-
ing features of a circle is that if you start traveling in one 
direction along its rim you will eventually wind up exactly 
where you began. The majority opinion starts by declaring 
the language of statute "plain." Maj. op. at 2, 6.  Why is it 
"plain"?  Because it is "presumed" that Congress meant what 
it said.  Id. at 7.  What did Congress say?  Whatever the 
language of the statute makes plain.

     The opinion also observes, rather curiously, that although 
the statute has a plain meaning, it is not "perfectly crafted" 
and represents "inartful [inartistic?]  drafting."  Maj. op. at 
5.  Notice the argument assuming its conclusion.  The statute 
is not perfectly crafted, indeed is grammatically incoherent, if 
and only if the majority's reading of it is correct, which of 
course is the issue.  If the majority is mistaken, as I think it 
is, the language of the statute simply conveys what its 
authors intended.  There is no flaw in its drafting.

     Let us now examine the language of 47 U.S.C. 
s 309(j)(2)(C) in the context of the entire subsection:

     (j) Use of competitive bidding
               (1) General authority
     
          If, consistent with the obligations described in 
     paragraph (6)(E), mutually exclusive applications are 
     accepted for any initial license or construction per-
     mit, then, except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
     Commission shall grant the license or permit to a 
     qualified applicant through a system of competitive 
     bidding that meets the requirements of this subsec-
     tion.
     
          (2) Exemptions
     
          The competitive bidding authority granted by this 
     subsection shall not apply to licenses or construction 
     permits issued by the Commission--
     
          (A) for public safety radio services, including pri-
     vate internal radio services used by State and 
     local governments and non-government entities 
     and including emergency road services provided 
     by not-for-profit organizations, that--

          (i) are used to protect the safety of life, health, 
     or property;  and
     
          (ii) are not made commercially available to the 
     public;
     
          (B) for initial licenses or construction permits for 
     digital television service given to existing terrestrial 
     broadcast licensees to replace their analog television 
     service licenses;  or
     
          (C) for stations described in section 397(6) of this 
     title.
     
Section 397(6) defines "noncommercial educational broadcast 
station" or, NCE.

     Attention must be paid to the word "issued" in 
s 309(j)(2)--competitive bidding does not apply to "licenses 
or construction permits issued by the Commission" for NCEs.  
Now if we read this to mean what it says the exemption from 
competitive bidding for licenses would apply only to licenses 
already "issued."  How can that make sense?  One answer is 
that the auction exemption is limited to renewals of licenses 
issued to NCEs in the non-reserved spectrum.  In other 
words, Congress intended that new licenses may be auctioned 
off even if an NCE is vying for the license, but the Commis-
sion should not refuse to renew "licenses [already] ... is-
sued" to stations merely because NCEs cannot compete with 
commercial applicants in an auction.

     What does the majority offer in response?  That "issued" 
cannot possibly mean what it means, maj. op. at 5-6--an 
answer that refutes the majority's next point that "Congress 
meant precisely what it said."  Id. at 7.  I do not deny the 
feasibility of the majority's interpretation of s 309(j)(2)(C) 
nor do I deny the possibility of the Commission (not the 
court) interpreting the statute in that manner, although it 
would be a bit of a stretch.  But to claim that the majority's 
reading derives from the "plain meaning" of the provision 
crosses the boggle threshold.

     We ought to just face up to the obvious--this subsection is 
a mess. The problem is not just with s 309(j)(2)(C).  Look at 

s 309(j)(2)(B)--the "competitive bidding authority granted by 
this subsection shall not apply to licenses ... for initial 
licenses ... for digital television service...."  47 U.S.C. 
s 309(j)(2)(B).  To what does "licenses for initial licenses" 
refer?  When asked at oral argument the Commission was as 
baffled as we were.

     The Commission, at least, did not fall into the trap of 
treating the statute as clear when it clearly is not.  See maj. 
op. at 8-9;  In re Reexamination of the Comparative Stan-
dards for Noncommercial Educational Applicants, 15 
F.C.C.R. 7386 p 106 (2000).  The Commission relied instead 
on the idea that some conflict existed between the general 
rule embodied in s 309(j)(1), requiring auctions, and the 
exception in s 309(j)(2).  I agree with the majority that this 
rationale cannot be sustained.  See maj. op. at 8;  In re 
Reexamination of the Comparative Standards for Noncom-
mercial Educational Applicants, 15 F.C.C.R. 7386 p 106 
(2000). Section 306(j)(2) is an exception;  an exception deviates 
from a general rule, it does not "conflict" with it.  Because 
the Commission's explanation for its decision is erroneous, we 
must remand under SEC v. Chenery, 318 U.S. 80, 88, 95 
(1943).

     I therefore concur that the Commission's order must be set 
aside and the case remanded to the agency.  I do not agree 
that on remand the Commission must adopt the majority's 
interpretation of s 309(j)(2)(C).

                                                                               