                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 4, 2000       Decided July 7, 2000 

                           No. 98-1599

           Detroit Typographical Union No. 18, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

                   Detroit News, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                99-1111, 99-1112, 99-1163, 99-1180

       On Petitions for Review and Cross Applications For 
                  Enforcement of Orders of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     James B. Coppess argued the cause for the Union petition-
ers.  With him on the briefs were Samuel C. McKnight, 
Duane F. Ice, John G. Adam, and Richard Rosenblatt.

     Jeremy P. Sherman argued the cause for the Employer 
petitioners.  With him on the briefs was Joshua L. Ditelberg.

     Sharon I. Block, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, 
Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy 
Associate General Counsel, and Charles Donnelly, Superviso-
ry Attorney.  John D. Burgoyne, Deputy Associate General 
Counsel, entered an appearance.

     James B. Coppess argued the cause for the Union interve-
nors.  With him on the brief were Samuel C. McKnight, 
Duane F. Ice, John G. Adam, and Barbara Camens.

     Jeremy P. Sherman and Joshua L. Ditelberg filed the brief 
for the Employer intervenors.

     Before:  Silberman and Sentelle, Circuit Judges, and 
Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Silberman, Circuit Judge:  Two groups of petitioners chal-
lenge National Labor Relations Board orders arising out of a 
strike against the Detroit newspapers.  The employers chal-
lenge those portions of the Board's orders determining that 
they committed unfair labor practices, see Detroit Newspaper 
Agency, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 (1998) (Detroit I), on reconsid-
eration, 327 N.L.R.B. No. 146 (1999) (Detroit III), and that 
the strikers were unfair labor practice strikers, see Detroit 
Newspaper Agency, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 65 (1998) (Detroit II), 
while the unions object to the Board's determination that one 
employer's unilateral implementation of a change in work-
assignment rules was lawful.  The employers' petition for 
review is granted;  the unions' is denied.

                                I.

     From July 1995 through February 1997, employees went 
on strike against Detroit's two major newspapers--petition-

ers The Detroit News, Inc. (the News) and The Detroit Free 
Press, Inc. (Free Press)--and a joint endeavor created by the 
papers under a partnership agreement signed in 1986, peti-
tioner Detroit News Agency (DNA).  Each paper is responsi-
ble for its news and editorial operations, but many other 
functions, such as circulation, marketing and some labor 
relations, are handled by DNA.  The employees of these 
three companies are represented by 12 unions each repre-
senting a separate bargaining unit of the papers or DNA;  
petitioners are six of these unions which compose the Metro-
politan Council of Newspaper Unions (the Council).  Two of 
the unions in the Council are particularly important to this 
case:  the Detroit Typographical Union No. 18 (DTU), repre-
senting composing room employees of DNA, and the Newspa-
per Guild of Detroit, representing editorial employees at the 
News.1

     Each newspaper and DNA is responsible for its own labor 
negotiations.  During bargaining in 1992, noneconomic issues 
were negotiated between DNA and each individual union, but 
economic issues were handled by DNA and the Council.  
Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 34.  When the 1992 
agreements were about to expire (on April 30, 1995) and the 
parties began to discuss the next round of collective bargain-
ing, DNA initially declined to accept the joint bargaining 
format, insisting instead on bargaining with each union sepa-
rately.  Agreements were eventually concluded with the 
skilled-trades unions, but negotiations on a unit basis with 
members of the Council ran past the 1992 agreements' expi-
ration date, resulting in those agreements being extended 
day-by-day.  See id. at 2, 34.

     To expedite matters DNA tentatively agreed to engage in 
joint economic bargaining if progress could be made on 
noneconomic issues (the "two-stage bargaining agreement").  
DNA continued to discuss economic issues with the individual 
unions, however, and as negotiations lagged DNA set June 30 
as a deadline for their conclusion. (DNA frequently referred 

__________
     1 The Guild also represents DNA's janitorial employees and the 
Free Press's editorial employees.

to its June 30 deadline in subsequent communications with 
the Council and its member unions.)  The Council then 
requested that DNA formally agree in writing to two-stage 
bargaining;  DNA declined to do so but again expressed its 
tentative agreement if individual negotiations over non-
economics could be finished by June 30.  Negotiations be-
tween DNA and individual unions went past this deadline and 
were halted by the strike on July 13.  See id. at 2.

     The News initially provided the Guild with a list of propos-
als for its editorial employee unit including Proposal 7, "News 
Department employees who qualify as professionals within 
the meaning of Federal wage and hour laws may, at their 
option, apply annually to be salaried and exempt from over-
time," Proposal 8, allowing the News to assign employees to 
radio and television projects, and Proposal 11, which stated 
"All future pay increases to bargaining unit employees will be 
on the basis of merit utilizing the Company's performance 
appraisal system."  See id. at 60-61 (the "overtime exemp-
tion," "radio/tv," and "merit pay" proposals, respectively).  
The radio/tv proposal came with some baggage.  In Novem-
ber 1994 the News implemented a similar proposal following a 
purported impasse with the Guild;  an unfair labor practice 
charge was filed with the NLRB, which ruled in the union's 
favor on July 14, 1995.  In the meantime, the News had 
introduced proposal 8.

     At early bargaining sessions Guild negotiators expressed 
their opinion that the overtime exemption proposal was a 
subject upon which it was illegal to bargain and illegal to 
agree upon according to the Guild's legal advice, and until the 
News's unilateral implementation of this proposal on July 5 
no counterproposal was ever made.  Id. at 61.  The Guild also 
stated with respect to merit pay that the performance ap-
praisal system was a waste of time that it wanted to get rid 
of, and that it was concerned that merit pay decisions would 
be corrupted by race or gender discrimination.  The News, 
on the other hand, was anxious to introduce merit pay and 
viewed it as a central issue.  See id.

     On April 25, the News provided the Guild with a more 
detailed merit pay proposal:  unit members making the con-
tract's minimum salary would receive at least a one percent 
salary increase, but a merit component would increase their 
pay by an average of four percent from the minimum.  Salary 
increases for those making more than the minimum would be 
based solely on merit.  At this meeting Guild negotiators 
asked numerous questions, but News negotiators admitted 
that specific details had yet to be considered.  See id. at 62.

     Two days later, the News faxed the Guild a new, more 
detailed proposal:

     All employees of The Detroit News editorial department 
     will receive a pay increase effective on the date of 
     ratification of the new collective bargaining agreement.  
     No pay increase will be less than one (1) percent.  The 
     average of all pay increases will be four (4) percent.  
     Increases above one (1) percent will be based on the 
     employees [sic] most recent evaluation unless the em-
     ployee or his/her manager requests that another evalua-
     tion be done because the employee's performance has 
     changed since the last evaluation.  Irrespective of any 
     delay caused by such re-evaluation, all raises will be 
     retroactive to the date of ratification.
     
     Raises for the second and third years of the contract will 
     be handled under the above procedure and will be effec-
     tive May 1, 1996 and May 1, 1997, respectively.  The only 
     change is that the minimum each year will be one (1) 
     percent and the average will be three (3) percent.
     
     Each year all contract minimums will increase by one (1) 
     percent.
     
     Employees of the union may grieve, but not arbitrate, 
     the employee's evaluation or the timing or amount of the 
     employee's pay increase.
     
     News negotiators offered to meet to explain the proposal.  
The Guild negotiators claimed to understand it, although the 

ALJ found that they were uncertain whether the merit 
increases were to be based on the contractual minimum 
salaries or employees' actual salaries (typically higher).  See 
Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 63.  At a meeting a week 
later, without inquiring into whether the new proposal was 
based on actual salaries or contract minimums, Guild negoti-
ators reported that unit members were not at all interested in 
the merit proposal.  The News rejected a Guild proposal of 
an across-the-board 15% pay increase.  On several occasions 
after this meeting, the News characterized the Guild's treat-
ment of the merit pay proposal that day as a rejection of the 
proposal.  See id. at 62-63.  At this meeting the Guild also 
reiterated its view that the overtime exemption proposal was 
illegal.  See id. at 63.

     In a flurry of letters at the end of May and beginning of 
June, the News informed the Guild that it thought negotia-
tions over merit pay were deadlocked, and the Guild respond-
ed that it disagreed;  when the News asked if the Guild were 
prepared to offer counterproposals, the Guild stated that it 
would be prepared to respond to all the issues on the table, 
and a meeting was scheduled for June 14.  At this time the 
News also sought to set a firm deadline of June 30 for the 
completion of negotiations.  See id.

     At the June 14 session the News clarified for the Guild that 
merit payments would be based on actual salaries.  The 
Guild's negotiator again rejected the News's suggestion that 
negotiations over merit pay were deadlocked, claiming to 
have come to the meeting to make counterproposals.  Howev-
er, although he asked questions about the News's proposal, 
no counterproposals were made, and he stated that the unit 
members were adamantly opposed to merit pay.  See id. at 
63-64.  Negotiations over the overtime exemption proposal 
also went no further.  The Guild again expressed its view that 
the proposal was illegal, though its negotiators asked ques-
tions about how exactly the proposal would work, and re-
quested a list of employees eligible under the proposal.  They 
also suggested that instead of the News determining whether 
individual employees qualified under the proposal, such deter-
minations be made by the Department of Labor.  The News 

replied that it did not have a list of employees and was unable 
to compile one because eligibility could only be determined at 
the time of each employee's application.  In response to post-
implementation information requests, however, it supplied the 
Guild with a list of categories of employees who might be 
eligible.  The union's proposal that the Labor Department 
become involved in the application process was rejected as 
merely retaliatory.  See id. at 63.

     Following the June 14 meeting, the Guild on June 16 asked 
for negotiations to be delayed until some time in early July, 
after its national convention in Boston which would run from 
June 17 through June 24, with the Guild negotiators re-
turning on June 26.  The News's negotiator responded on 
June 20 by writing that he saw no reason to delay negotia-
tions, and also wrote:

     I understood prior to the last meeting that you intended 
     to bargain on pay and overtime.  However, you made no 
     proposals on these key subjects and I have never re-
     ceived any indication that you intend to bargain over 
     them.  Unless you can assure me that you intend to 
     modify your position on those issues, we will have no 
     choice but to implement our last offer to you.
     
Id. at 64.  No further meetings took place before the News's 
unilateral implementation of its proposals on July 5.

     On June 28 the News released to its employees a memo 
providing details about the merit pay proposal, specifically 
that those employees who received an evaluation of "out-
standing" or "commendable" would qualify, and some 90% of 
employees could expect to receive merit pay.  The memo also 
accused the Guild of being unwilling to meet.  On June 29 the 
Guild repeated its earlier request for a meeting, and stated a 
willingness to discuss overtime exemption.  In response, at 
eight o'clock in the evening of June 30, a Friday, the News 
faxed the Guild an offer to negotiate the following Monday, 
July 3, at ten in the morning.  The Guild's negotiators did not 
see this offer until late Monday afternoon, and when the 
News's negotiators met the Guild's earlier that day on an 

unrelated matter, the proposed meeting was not mentioned.  
See id. at 64-65.

     Two days later, July 5, the News unilaterally implemented 
its proposals.  In announcing implementation to employees 
the News stated that Guild negotiators had failed to appear at 
meetings and had refused to bargain.  See id. at 65.  At a 
post-implementation bargaining session on July 10 the Guild 
continued to ask questions about the proposals, making an-
other request for a list of overtime-exemption eligible employ-
ees (a request repeated on August 4).  It also asked that the 
overtime-exemption provision contain a clause specifying that 
employees working on an overtime basis would not be dis-
criminated against on assignments, proposed a flat increase in 
salaries for all employees, and again raised the possibility of 
having the Labor Department issue "advisory opinions" on 
the eligibility of employees for salaried status.  Over this and 
the following day, the News answered some but not all of the 
Guild's questions about its proposals, and rejected all of the 
Guild's proposals.

     The Council and its constituent unions began to plan a 
strike prior to the News's declaration of impasse.  For in-
stance, DNA's decision not to engage in joint bargaining, 
despite its tentative agreement to do so, was mentioned 
throughout June as a causus belli.  Individual unions also 
held meetings in which they obtained strike authorization 
from their membership.  See id. at 75.  On July 6, following 
the News's declaration of impasse, the Council met and 
agreed to set a strike deadline of July 13.  On July 12 the 
Council met once more and agreed to the following resolution:

     Whereas the DNA/Detroit Newspapers (including the 
     News and Free Press) has engaged in anti-union con-
     duct, negotiated in bad faith and reneged on its promise 
     to bargain jointly on economics, the undersigned Unions 
     hereby resolve their members employed at the DNA/ 
     Detroit Newspapers each will strike and honor each 
     other's strike in protest of the DNA/Detroit Newspapers 
     [sic] (including the News and Free Press) anti-union 
     conduct and unfair labor practices.
     
Id. at 76.  Testimony credited by the ALJ established that 
the unfair labor practices referred to in the resolution were 
the modification of DTU's jurisdiction (discussed next), imple-
mentation of the merit pay proposal, and the decision by 
DNA not to engage in joint bargaining.  See id.

     The next day the unions began a strike which would last 
until February 1997 when the unions made an unconditional 
offer to return to work.  The employers, however, refused to 
discharge replacement workers to make room for the re-
turning strikers, treating the strike as an economic strike.  
Instead, returning strikers were placed onto a preferential 
hiring list.  See Detroit II, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 65 at 2-3.

                            *  *  *  *

     The unions' petition involves negotiations between DTU 
and DNA.  Petitioner DTU's relationship with the newspa-
pers and DNA is generally governed by collective bargaining 
agreements.  In 1975, however, negotiations between the 
individual newspapers, on the one hand, and DTU on the 
other led to the parties entering into Memoranda of Agree-
ment in addition to collective bargaining agreements;  when 
DNA came into existence, it agreed to adopt the obligations 
those memoranda placed upon the newspapers.  One Memo-
randum of Agreement guaranteed essentially lifetime employ-
ment to certain workers, and in exchange the unit was to be 
governed by a Section 10(a), entitled "work arrangements."  
In relevant part, Section 10(a) states "This section will de-
scribe the work arrangements of the [DTU] employee involv-
ing the use of scanners and VDT terminals when such 
equipment is performing composing room work within the 
jurisdiction of the Union."  See Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 
64 at 47 (emphasis added).  The section then goes on to 
describe under what circumstances only unit employees may 
use such equipment, and when non-unit employees may do so.  
See id. at 47-48.

     The collective bargaining agreement between DNA and 
DTU for the 1992-1995 term, meanwhile, had sections titled 
"Jurisdiction," "Equipment Jurisdiction," and "Computer Jur-

isdiction," explaining, inter alia, that "all composing room 
work" was within the Union's jurisdiction.  During negotia-
tions over a successor bargaining agreement DNA proposed 
modifying these jurisdictional provisions by including in the 
new agreement language specifying that this jurisdiction 
would be non-exclusive:  "Employees of other departments of 
[DNA] as well as employees of the Detroit News and Detroit 
Free Press may perform such work as is necessary."  DTU, 
claiming that the ongoing Memorandum of Agreement--not 
the expiring collective bargaining agreement--defined its jur-
isdiction, considered DNA's proposal an attempt to modify an 
existing agreement, and therefore only a permissive subject 
of bargaining.  It refused to bargain, and on May 11 DNA 
declared impasse and implemented the proposal.

                            *  *  *  *

     The unions filed unfair labor practice charges with the 
NLRB alleging that DNA and the newspapers had violated 
Sections 8(a)(5) and (1) of the National Labor Relations Act 
by breaching the two-stage bargaining agreement;  by imple-
menting the merit wage proposal and the radio/tv proposal;  
by abrogating DTU's jurisdiction;  and by failing to provide a 
list of employees who would be eligible for overtime exemp-
tion.

     The ALJ agreed with the unions on all but the DTU issue. 
The Board generally affirmed the ALJ's opinion;  however, on 
the issue of the joint bargaining agreement it found that 
DNA had never clearly and unequivocally agreed to joint, 
two-stage bargaining, and therefore concluded it was not an 
unfair labor practice for DNA to insist on bargaining with 
individual unions. See generally Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 
64.  The Board went on to observe, sua sponte, that while 
negotiating rules are only a permissive subject of bargaining 
and the Unions had struck in part to force agreement on such 
rules, "We do not suggest that the Union's insistence on 
adherence to the two-stage bargaining procedure was unlaw-
ful here."  See id. at 5.  The Board adopted the ALJ's 

reasoning with respect to merit pay, concluding that the 
News had bargained in bad faith, preventing a good-faith 
impasse on this proposal.  It then reasoned that even if the 
News had bargained in good faith, its merit pay proposal was 
standardless, and therefore, under the Board's rule an-
nounced in McClatchy Newspapers Inc., 321 N.L.R.B. 1386 
(1996), enforced, 131 F.3d 1026 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (McClatchy 
II), it could not be implemented even at impasse because it 
would be destructive of employees' collective bargaining 
rights.

     An ALJ, meanwhile, had found that the employers unlaw-
fully refused to rehire returning unfair labor practice strik-
ers, relying on the earlier ALJ opinion as evidence of unfair 
labor practices.  On the same day the underlying unfair labor 
practice findings were affirmed by the Board in Detroit I, it 
also affirmed the second ALJ opinion and ordered the rehir-
ing of returning strikers.  See generally Detroit II, 326 
N.L.R.B. No. 65.

                               II.

     The employers challenge the unfair labor practice findings 
as well as the determination that the alleged unfair labor 
practices caused the strike.  The thrust of their latter argu-
ment is that the unions struck not over the purported unfair 
labor practices, but to enforce the joint bargaining agree-
ment.  Indeed, they claim, the strike was unprotected be-
cause the unions unlawfully sought to force adherence to the 
joint bargaining agreement, a permissive subject of bargain-
ing.  Moreover, according to the employers, the Board's 
determination that the employers committed unfair labor 
practices is not supported by substantial evidence.  The 
Board's examples of the News's bad faith were unsubstantiat-
ed or trivial, and the Board ignored the unions' refusal to 
bargain over key issues. They distinguish this case from 
McClatchy by emphasizing the details in the News's merit 
pay proposal not provided in the McClatchy proposal.  DTU's 
petition claims that the News committed an unfair labor 

practice by making a unilateral midterm change to the ongo-
ing Memorandum of Agreement.

     A.   Lawfulness of the Strike
          
     The employers' primary argument, which was the focus of 
the Board's reconsideration order, is that the strike was 
unprotected because it (unlawfully) sought to force DNA's 
adherence to the two-stage bargaining agreement, which was 
only a permissive subject of bargaining.  As the Board ex-
plained in Detroit III,

     There are certain situations in which the Board has 
     found that a strike or other economic action in support of 
     a proposal on a nonmandatory bargaining subject is 
     unlawful....  These situations have involved ... a strike 
     in furtherance of the unlawful condition that further 
     bargaining depends on acquiescence to a demand on a 
     nonmandatory subject.
     
327 N.L.R.B. No. 146 at 95;  see also United Food & Com-
mercial Workers Int'l Union v. NLRB, 880 F.2d 1422, 1428 
(D.C. Cir. 1989)("[C]ategorizing a matter a mandatory subject 
will ... authorize the union to use the economic weapons at 
its disposal to back up its demands at the negotiating table.").  
Two-stage bargaining, contend the employers, was the "para-
mount" reason for the strike.  See Detroit III, 327 N.L.R.B. 
No. 164 at 95 ("[A]nalysis of the legality of conduct vis-a-vis a 
nonmandatory subject requires examination of the impact of 
such conduct on negotiations for mandatory subjects.")

     We think the Board permissibly ruled, however, that the 
employers waived this argument by failing to raise it in a 
timely fashion before the ALJ.  Though the employers' argu-
ment was presented in their exceptions from the ALJ's 
decision and motion for reconsideration, the Board in Detroit 
III determined it had been waived, as "[a] contention raised 
for the first time in exceptions to the Board is ordinarily 
untimely raised and, thus, deemed waived."  327 N.L.R.B. 
No. 146 at 1 (quoting Yorkaire, Inc., 297 N.L.R.B. 401 (1989), 

enforced 922 F.2d 832 (3d Cir. 1990)).  The employers do not 
generally challenge this procedural policy.

     The employers do claim that the Board is, in effect, es-
topped from applying its policy because it decided sua sponte 
the lawfulness issue in Detroit I, by saying "We do not 
suggest that the Union's insistence on adherence to the two-
stage bargaining procedure was unlawful here."  326 
N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 5.  That is an apparent mischaracteriza-
tion of the Board's statement.  The Board did not actually 
decide the lawfulness issue in Detroit I.  Even if the Board 
had analyzed the issue more extensively, that still would not 
be sufficient to prevent the Board from applying its waiver 
policy.  Cf. Local 900 Int'l Union of Elec., Radio and Mach. 
Workers v. NLRB, 727 F.2d 1184, 1191 (D.C.Cir. 1984) (dis-
cussion of an issue by the NLRB did not necessarily prove 
compliance with s 10(e) of the NLRA requiring that issues be 
raised before the Board in order to obtain judicial review of 
such).  Nor does the Board's resolution of the merits of the 
employers' argument on reconsideration in Detroit III under-
mine its position;  the merits discussion was merely an alter-
native holding to its determination that the argument had 
been waived.  Cf. Burkhart v. WMATA, 112 F.3d 1207, 1215 
(D.C.Cir. 1997) (district court's discussion of an alternative 
ground for its decision did not undercut its ruling that 
appellant's claim was untimely raised).2

     B.   Merit Pay
          
     We begin our discussion of this subject with the Board's 
determination that the News's implementation of its merit 
pay proposal runs afoul of McClatchy because we think that 
legal issue pervades the Board's analysis of the parties' merit 
pay negotiations.  In McClatchy the Board confronted the 
implementation of an employer's merit pay proposal which 
would have set salaries strictly on the basis of "merit" as 
determined by the employer;  no objective procedures or 
standards at all were proposed--there was nothing but a 

__________
     2 The employer's counsel at oral argument came perilously close 
to insisting that it would have to prevail on this issue to win the 
case.

"discretionary cloud."  See McClatchy II, 131 F.3d at 1032.  
Under such circumstances, we noted on review, the employer 
had essentially "de-collectivized" bargaining and prevented 
the union from knowing what it would be bargaining against 
in the future;  we therefore held this justified a Board-created 
exemption to the general rule that employers may implement 
their last, best offer following impasse.  See id. at 1032-33.

     Although we had previously in NLRB v. McClatchy News-
papers, Inc, 964 F.2d 1153 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (McClatchy I), 
remanded for a fuller explanation of the contours of the 
Board's McClatchy doctrine, in McClatchy II we recognized 
the Board could legitimately proceed case-by-case to develop 
the boundaries of the doctrine.  See 131 F.2d at 1035.  That 
did not mean, however, that the Board could simply brandish 
McClatchy, without any real explanation, to prevent an em-
ployer from ever implementing a merit pay proposal after 
impasse.  After all, as we recognized in McClatchy I, the 
Supreme Court has squarely held that merit pay is a manda-
tory subject of bargaining, see McClatchy I, 964 F.2d at 1162, 
citing NLRB v. Katz, 369 U.S. 736, 745 (1962), and if the 
Board is to treat it differently from other such subjects with 
respect to post-impasse implementation it must carefully jus-
tify its course.

     Instead, the Board treated this case as if it were on all 
fours with McClatchy.  See Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 
7.  We think that was quite unreasonable (arbitrary and 
capricious).  McClatchy presented an unusual situation where 
an employer provided no details at all of its merit pay plan.  
Here, on the other hand, the News's proposal stated that 
raises would average four percent in the first year of the 
contract, and three percent in the second and third years.  
Merit pay determinations would be based on the annual 
employee evaluation process (the evaluation forms for which 
consumed over 100 pages in the joint appendix) and would be 
effective on fixed dates.  Employees would also be permitted 
to contest the size of their raises using grievance procedures.  
To be sure, the employer's proposal carried a good deal of 
discretion.  It did not foreclose the possibility that an employ-
ee would get a merit pay increase without achieving the top 

performance rating.3  But any merit pay system inherently 
carries much employer discretion which, of course, is why 
unions resist them.  In sum, we reject the Board's blithe 
extension of McClatchy to this case as unreasoned and unrea-
sonable.4

     Purportedly without regard to McClatchy, the Board found 
that the News had bargained in bad faith regarding its merit 
pay proposal (and its overtime proposal discussed infra), and 
therefore it never reached a valid impasse justifying imposi-
tion of its overall proposal.  This is a difficult question on 
review only because the Board's finding of bad faith negotia-
tion is, like any question of fact (really a mixed question), 
entitled to a good deal of deference.  See NLRB v. Cau- 
thorne, 691 F.2d 1023, 1026 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  We con-
clude, nevertheless, that the Board's finding cannot stand 
because it is infected with the legal error we have just 
discussed, and it is otherwise not supported by substantial 
evidence on the record as a whole.

     The Guild was initially presented with the News's final 
merit pay proposal on April 27.  The extant bargaining 
agreements expired on April 30, yet negotiations continued 
for an additional two months.  The Guild made no counter-
proposals at the negotiation session on June 14, nor did it 
send anything to the News in the three week interim between 
this meeting and the July 5 implementation,5 although it had 

__________
     3 The intervenor unions stressed at oral argument post-impasse 
statements by the News that various unspecified factors, such as 
the need to retain particular employees, could enter into merit pay 
determinations.  See, e.g., Detroit I, 326 NLRB No. 64 at 68.  This 
possibility was not foreclosed by the News's proposal--it was part 
of its retained discretion.

     4 As in McClatchy the Board throws in the phrase drawn from 
Great Dane that implementing the merit pay proposal after impasse 
was "inherently destructive" of collective bargaining.  See NLRB v. 
Great Dane Trailers, Inc., 388 U.S. 26, 34 (1967).  If that is meant 
to provide an alternative rationale for the holding it will not do.

     5 It should be noted that the Guild's convention occupied only one 
week of this period.

been told that June 30 was the News's bargaining deadline.  
With the exception of a proposal for an across-the-board pay 
increase made on May 3 the Guild does not appear to have 
done anything at these negotiation sessions but ask questions.  
The truth of the matter, which the record clearly reveals, is 
that the Guild's unit was unalterably opposed to the merit pay 
proposal from the outset and continuing up to the employer's 
implementation--not to the details but to the very concept.  
There was no evidence that the Guild was prepared to engage 
in real negotiations on the employer's proposals.

     The Board found that the News had "repeatedly obfuscated 
and withheld details about its merit pay proposal, which 
details were relevant and necessary to the Guild's under-
standing of the proposal and to the formulation of a bargain-
ing response."  Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 7.  And the 
ALJ whose recommended findings the Board accepted deter-
mined that the Guild could not gain an understanding of the 
merit pay proposal's "cost, timing, criteria and procedures," 
and therefore could not "bargain intelligently" about the 
proposal.  See id. at 71-72.  But the essence of discretion--
the News at one point characterized its merit pay determina-
tions as "not rote," see id. at 66--implies that the employer 
will not be pinned down ex ante as to precisely how its 
discretion will be exercised.  Management's decision to pro-
pose a discretionary merit pay system--and to insist on 
retaining legitimate bounds of discretion--cannot (except for 
the limited McClatchy exception) be treated differently than 
other mandatory subjects of bargaining;  it cannot be "ve-
toed" by the Board.  See NLRB v. Insurance Agents' Int'l 
Union, 361 U.S. 477, 487 (1960).  The union's questions as to 
these criteria and procedures were obviously designed to 
narrow the zone of discretion the employer wished to pre-
serve.  That answers satisfactory to the union or the Board 
were not forthcoming is simply another way to say that the 
proposal carried insufficient details to pass the McClatchy 
test, and we have already rejected the Board's reasoning in 
that respect.

     The Board fixed upon the News's failure to make clear 
early on that salary increases, under the merit plan, would be 
based on actual, not nominal, contract minimum salaries.  

This seems to us to be a wholly insignificant bit of evidence.  
Once the News had sent its final merit pay proposal to the 
Guild its negotiator offered to meet with his Guild counter-
part to explain it.  The Guild negotiator responded, however, 
that he already understood it.  Similarly, when the negoti-
ators met a week later no clarification was sought on this 
point.  The problem, according to the Guild, was that the 
News did not "understand" the employees' dislike of the very 
concept.  The Guild was informed that actual salaries would 
be used at the June 14 meeting, a full three weeks before 
impasse was declared.  We cannot see how this sequence of 
events hints at the News's bad faith, nor how the Guild's not 
knowing this particular detail until three weeks before im-
passe hindered its ability to negotiate.

     The Board also relied on the News's failure to provide the 
Guild with other crucial information and provision of such 
information directly to unit employees.  It found the News 
"refused to provide the Guild with information as to how 
much money it proposed putting in the merit pay pool."  See 
Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 7.  This is simply wrong;  
the News responded to the Guild's negotiator's June 14 
inquiry by telling him to apply the 4% average raise to 
payroll information in the Guild's possession.  The Board also 
thought a series of memoranda given unit employees immedi-
ately before and after implementation, which stated that 
merit increases would be given to those receiving an evalua-
tion of "outstanding" or "commendable," and that 80 to 90% 
of employees would or had received merit pay, was evidence 
of bad faith, because such information had not previously 
been furnished to the Guild.  But the News's proposal stated 
that merit pay would be based on the evaluations, and the 
evaluation forms state "A[n employee] whose overall perfor-
mance rating is outstanding or commendable is eligible for a 
merit increase."  The Guild had copies of these forms, and 
knowledge of how unit employees had been rated.6

__________
     6 The Board regarded the News's statements to employees claim-
ing that the Guild had refused to negotiate as evidence of bad faith.  

     The Board also regarded the News's proposed scheduling 
of bargaining sessions on dates in June when it purportedly 
knew the Guild to be unavailable because of a convention as 
showing bad faith.  We think that inference is unsupportable.  
The Guild on June 16 requested a delay in negotiations 
because of unstated "prior commitments."  The News's nego-
tiator responded "I cannot imagine what 'prior commitments' 
you have that are more important than these negotiations," 
and requested a meeting "for the next few days," which would 
be during the convention.  See Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 
at 64.  The ALJ found that the News must have known that 
the prior commitment was the convention because postings on 
a bulletin board at the News had announced it, and because a 
News memo sent the following week to employees criticized 
Guild negotiators for attending the convention instead of 
negotiating.  See id.  What the News knew a week later is 
not powerful evidence of what it knew a week earlier--it may 
have discovered, in response to its request for a meeting, that 
the Guild's negotiators were all out of town.7  Even if the 
News's negotiator had known that which the union negoti-
ators were apparently unwilling to say--the latter wished to 
attend the convention--the worst interpretation that could be 
placed on the employer's gambit is that it was seeking to 
pressure the union negotiators to either admit the reasons for 
wanting a delay or to offer an early negotiating session.

     As we noted after the convention the News, in response to 
a subsequent Guild request for a meeting, faxed a proposal on 
a Friday night for a meeting the following Monday morning--
one day before a national holiday and two days before the 

__________

See Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 7.  Neither its order nor the 
ALJ's recommendation explain why and the employer complains 
that the Board was improperly restricting its free speech.  Before 
us the Board apparently abandoned that line of analysis and instead 
claimed that the employers were communicating to the employees 
that which it refused to tell the union.  We simply do not under-
stand this attempted transformation and therefore decline to pay 
any attention to this point.

     7 Nor was there any evidence that the News's negotiator had 
actually seen the bulletin board posting.

declaration of impasse and unilateral implementation.  The 
ALJ's opinion emphasizes this event as infecting the entire 
negotiating process:  the News, according to the ALJ, essen-
tially prevented the Guild from meeting to engage in negotia-
tions which might have broken the deadlock that seemingly 
developed at the June 14 meeting, after which the Guild's 
negotiators signaled their desire to engage in further negotia-
tions.  Again, we think this inference is unsupportable.  It is 
obvious that lawyers on both sides were maneuvering and the 
News was delivering the Guild a last clear chance.  But 
convention or not, holiday or not, if the Guild really had 
wished to bargain on merit pay they had plenty of time to 
indicate that to the News.  Asking questions was not enough.  
Cf. Serramonte Oldsmobile, Inc. v. NLRB, 86 F.3d 227, 233 
(D.C. Cir. 1996) (concluding impasse was valid where "not a 
single one of the Union's statements ... actually committed 
the Union to a new position or contained any specific propos-
als").

     The Board nevertheless asserts that the parties had not 
reached a good-faith impasse for another reason.  The ALJ 
found that the unremedied unfair labor practice associated 
with the radio/tv proposal prevented the News from declaring 
impasse because it "necessarily tended to adversely affect the 
bargaining atmosphere and relationship between the parties," 
see Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 72 (emphasis added), 
and the Board adopted this conclusion.  See id. at 7 n. 17.  
Before us the Board apparently argues that only negotiations 
over the radio/tv proposal alone itself were affected, but that 
deadlock over this proposal was sufficient to prevent a good-
faith impasse.

     While it is sometimes true that unremedied unfair labor 
practices have this effect, see, e.g., Alwin Mfg. Co. v. NLRB, 
192 F.3d 133 (D.C. Cir. 1999), that is not necessarily the case.  
In Cauthorne, "we reject[ed] any presumption that an em-
ployer's unfair labor practice automatically precludes the 
possibility of meaningful negotiations and prevents the par-
ties from reaching a good faith impasse."  691 F.2d at 1025;  
see also Alwin Mfg., 192 F.3d at 137-38.  The ALJ and the 
Board, by failing to rely on any evidence demonstrating how 

the unfair labor practice affected negotiations in this case, 
seem to have applied such a presumption.  That is especially 
problematic here because the ALJ's account of negotiations 
suggests the radio/tv proposal was relatively unimportant 
compared to the merit pay and overtime exemption proposals;  
implementation of this proposal was not even mentioned by 
the ALJ in his discussion of strike causation.  See Detroit I, 
326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 77;  see also Teamsters Local Union 
No. 639 v. NLRB, 924 F.2d 1078, 1083 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (to 
determine whether there is a valid impasse the Board "con-
siders a number of factors, including ... the importance of 
the issue or issues as to which there is disagreement").  We 
therefore conclude there is not substantial evidence to sup-
port the Board's determination that the unremedied unfair 
labor practice prevented the News from declaring impasse.

     C. Overtime Exemption

     The Board's decision that the News committed an unfair 
labor practice by failing to respond to the Guild's overtime 
exemption information request rested on pure conjecture, and 
is therefore not supported by any--let alone substantial--
evidence.  Throughout negotiations the Guild repeatedly re-
quested a list of employees eligible to take salaried status 
under the overtime exemption proposal.  The News repeated-
ly responded that it could not compile such a list because it 
would not be able to determine eligibility until an employee 
actually applied.  Instead, in response to post-implementation 
information requests it provided the Guild with a list of 
categories of employees who might be eligible.

     Although it was never shown that a list of eligible employ-
ees existed--the General Counsel failed to subpoena the 
purported list, see Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 28-29 
(Members Brame and Hurtgen, dissenting in part)--the ALJ 
opined that "It is difficult to believe that the News entered 
negotiations without having formulated its own expectation of 
the scope and impact of its proposal...."  See id. at 73.  The 
Board agreed, noting that it shared

     the judge's doubts that [the News] would have made the 
     proposal, and bargained so ardently for it, without some 
     informed estimation of its effects.  Even if the News did 
     not possess a list of those employees whom it believed 
     would qualify for exemption, the Guild was entitled to 
     whatever information Respondent News did rely on.
     
Id. at 8.

     Such speculation is not evidence.  See, e.g., Arizona Pub. 
Serv. Co. v. United States, 742 F.2d 644, 649 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 
1984) ("[M]ere conjecture and abstract theorizing offered in a 
vacuum are inadequate to satisfy us that the agency has 
engaged in reasoned decisionmaking.").8

     D.   The Unions' Petition
          
     We agree with the NLRB that DNA did not commit an 
unfair labor practice by unilaterally implementing a change in 
its collective bargaining agreement with petitioner DTU.  
The Memorandum of Agreement only describes working ar-
rangements when equipment is "performing composing room 
work within the jurisdiction of the Union."  That jurisdiction 
was defined not in the Memorandum of Agreement, but in the 
collective bargaining agreement.  Since the collective bar-
gaining agreement had expired DNA could propose a modifi-
cation to DTU's jurisdiction, and  since DTU refused to 
bargain over the proposal DNA could declare impasse and 
unilaterally implement it.  This is exactly what happened, and 
it does not constitute an unfair labor practice.

                               III.

     The Board's discussion of strike causation was sparse, but 
the ALJ's opinion suggests the purported unfair labor prac-

__________
     8 The News argues that even had it compiled a list of eligible 
employees, it was under no obligation to divulge it because the 
Guild persisted in labeling the overtime exemption proposal as 
illegal and refused to bargain over it.  Because we do not think the 
Board had substantial evidence to support its finding that the News 
had a list of eligible employees, we need not reach this alternate 
argument.

tices which motivated the strike were DNA's decision not to 
engage in joint bargaining, its unilateral change of DTU's 
jurisdiction, and the News's unilateral implementation of mer-
it pay and its failure to comply with information requests.  
See Detroit I, 326 N.L.R.B. No. 64 at 77;  see also Detroit III, 
327 N.L.R.B. No. 146 at 1. Having determined that the 
Board's conclusion that the News committed unfair labor 
practices is legally erroneous and unsupported by substantial 
evidence, we, of course, reverse its subsequent order holding 
the strikers to be unfair labor practice strikers.  See Alwin, 
192 F.3d at 141 (A strike is an unfair labor practice strike "if 
the employer's violations of the labor laws are a contributing 
cause of the strike.") (internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted).

                            *  *  *  *

     The employers' petition for review is granted;  the union's 
petition for review is denied.

                                                      So ordered.

                  