                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 18, 2002   Decided February 22, 2002 

                           No. 00-1541

                         Scepter, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Ronald G. Ingham argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was James P. Daniel.

     Anne Marie Lofaso, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
briefs were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 

Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Julie B. Broido, 
Supervisory Attorney.

     David A. Rosenfeld was on the brief for amicus curiae 
International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental 
Iron Workers, AFL-CIO, Shopmen's Local Union #733, in 
support of respondent.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner Scepter, Inc. ("Scep-
ter") seeks review of two orders of the National Labor 
Relations Board ("NLRB" or "Board").  The primary order 
under review finds that Scepter violated the National Labor 
Relations Act ("NLRA") and directs Scepter to bargain with 
a duly elected union.  See Scepter Ingot Castings, Inc., 331 
N.L.R.B. No. 153 (Aug. 28, 2000) ("Order").  Because the 
Order is supported by substantial evidence in the record, we 
deny Scepter's petition for review and enforce the Order.

                          I. Background

     Our review of the facts is based on the Board's findings 
when they are supported by substantial evidence on the 
record as a whole.  See Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 
340 U.S. 474, 488 (1951).  Scepter is an aluminum recycling 
company.  Following an election, the NLRB certified Shop-
man's Local Union No. 733 of the International Association of 
Bridge, Structural, and Ornamental Iron Workers, AFL-CIO 
("the Union") as the exclusive collective bargaining represen-
tative of employees at Scepter's New Johnsonville, Tennessee 
facility.  Bargaining commenced on July 22, 1993 and contin-
ued for about two years.  The process began productively 
enough and eventually ground to a near standstill.  Begin-
ning in mid-1994, Union bargaining committee member Pen-
ney Hensley became frustrated and told Scepter managers 
that negotiations had reached a stalemate, that she felt the 
Union had no standing, and that she felt the employees no 
longer wanted the Union to represent them.  See Transcript 

of Administrative Law Judge Hearing at 314-18, 321-22, 
reprinted at Deferred Appendix ("App.") 281-85, 288-89.  
There is no other evidence, however, of other employees or 
Union agents expressing such sentiments to members of 
management at Scepter.

     The parties made little progress in bargaining in early 
1995.  However, some negotiations continued and the parties 
actually reached agreement on issues as late as their final 
meeting in May, 1995.  Counsel for Scepter, who was person-
ally involved in the bargaining process, blames the lead Union 
negotiator for refusing to address matters on which the two 
had tentatively agreed in a number of off-the-record meet-
ings.  The record does not substantiate this claim.  Rather, 
the record establishes that, following the final bargaining 
meeting, the parties exchanged messages about setting up 
another bargaining meeting.  In June, the Union representa-
tive sent a letter to Scepter regarding proposed meeting 
dates, and he followed up the letter with phone messages.  
See App. 339;  Order at 5.  The Union wrote to Scepter again 
in October to propose bargaining dates.  See App. 340.

     The Board found that by October 1, 1995, Scepter unilater-
ally withdrew its recognition of the Union as the employees' 
bargaining representative and unilaterally implemented 
changes to mandatory subjects of bargaining, including wages 
and health benefits.  The Board also found that Scepter 
instituted a new work rule - prohibiting the insertion of steel 
banding into Scepter's furnaces - without notifying the Union, 
in violation of NLRA s 8(a)(5).  Scepter also required em-
ployees to sign a statement acknowledging that anyone who 
violated the rule would be terminated.  Scepter discharged an 
employee for refusing to sign the statement.  The Board 
ordered Scepter to reinstate the employee and bargain with 
the Union.

                          II. Discussion

     A certified union enjoys an irrebuttable presumption of 
majority status for the first year, and a rebuttable presump-
tion thereafter.  See Sullivan Indus. v. NLRB, 957 F.2d 890, 

897 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  After the initial year, an employer may 
lawfully withdraw recognition of a union only if it can demon-
strate appropriate circumstances that justify a conclusion that 
the union has lost majority support.  Under the established 
legal regime, in order to justify its withdrawal of recognition 
of the Union, Scepter was required to demonstrate that it had 
a "genuine, reasonable uncertainty," grounded in objective 
considerations, as to whether the Union enjoyed the support 
of most unit employees.  Allentown Mack Sales & Serv., Inc. 
v. NLRB, 522 U.S. 359, 367 (1998).  This "good-faith uncer-
tainty" standard has since been revised by the Board.  See 
Levitz Furniture Co. of the Pacific, Inc., 333 N.L.R.B. No. 
105, at 1, 12 (Mar. 29, 2001) (revising the standard for future 
cases);  see also Willamette Indus., Inc. v. NLRB, 253 F.3d 
720, 723 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (recognizing that the traditional 
standard applies to cases that were pending when Levitz was 
decided).

     Scepter acknowledges that it withdrew recognition of the 
Union and unilaterally implemented changes with respect to 
mandatory subjects of bargaining.  Scepter claims that these 
actions were justified, however, because it possessed a genu-
ine, reasonable uncertainty as to whether the Union enjoyed 
the support of a majority of employees.  It contends that the 
Union abandoned the bargaining unit, a suggestion the Board 
correctly rejected.  The record indicates that the Union 
repeatedly attempted to continue negotiations and proposed 
dates for future meetings.  The Board also found that the 
Union agent's phone calls to Scepter officials were not re-
turned.  In other words, the record in no way indicates that 
the Union had abandoned the bargaining unit.

     Scepter's reliance on alleged employee comments to the 
effect that no one wanted the Union anymore is similarly 
unavailing.  Only employee Hensley ever made such a com-
ment to Scepter's managers.  The Board correctly concluded 
that the comments of a single employee, out of a unit of 
seventy, were insufficient objective evidence of a loss of 
majority support.  Cf. Allentown Mack, 522 U.S. at 369 
(noting that even 20% first-hand confirmed opposition to the 

Union would not alone be enough to require a conclusion of 
reasonable doubt).

     On this record, it is clear that Scepter violated NLRA 
ss 8(a)(5) and 8(d) when it declined to continue bargaining 
with the Union and then implemented unilateral changes to 
wages, benefits, and work rules.  See Litton Fin. Printing 
Div. v. NLRB, 501 U.S. 190, 198 (1991) (citing NLRB v. Katz, 
369 U.S. 736 (1962)).  Scepter argues that the Union waived 
its right to bargain over the changes by failing to protest 
them, but this argument fails because the Union did not 
receive notice of the changes "sufficiently in advance of" their 
actual implementation to allow for reasonable reaction and 
discussion.  ILGWU v. NLRB, 463 F.2d 907, 919 (D.C. Cir. 
1972).  Scepter further argues that its new absolute ban on 
inserting steel banding into the furnaces was not a substantial 
enough change to trigger its duty to bargain.  The new rule, 
however, converted a previously informal general policy into a 
hard and fast rule whose violation would subject an employee 
to summary discharge.  The rule also made signing the 
declaration a new condition of continued employment.  Thus, 
the Board correctly concluded that the change had a signifi-
cant effect on the conditions of employment and did not 
merely add a sanction to an existing rule.

     Scepter also challenges the Board's imposition of an affir-
mative bargaining order.  Because Scepter failed to raise a 
particularized challenge to the bargaining order before the 
Board, this court has no authority to address the issue.  See 
NLRA s 10(e), 29 U.S.C. s 160(e).  Scepter only excepted 
generally to the proposed order and to the finding that the 
charging parties were "entitled to any remedy."  We have 
repeatedly held that such a generalized exception to a reme-
dial order is insufficiently specific to preserve a particular 
objection for appeal.  See Prime Serv., Inc. v. NLRB, 266 
F.3d 1233, 1241 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  Quazite Div. of Morrison 
Molded Fiberglass Co. v. NLRB, 87 F.3d 493, 497 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  The Board also correctly rejected Scepter's untimely 
petition for reconsideration.  See Petition for Reconsideration 
of Order p p 4-8, reprinted at App. 56-59.

     Even if Scepter had raised its challenges to the bargaining 
order in an appropriate and timely fashion, those challenges 
would have failed.  The Board adequately justified the bar-
gaining order, applying the factors set forth by this court in 
Vincent Industrial Plastics, Inc. v. NLRB, 209 F.3d 727, 738-
39 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  See Order at 1-2.  Scepter argues that 
the Board should have granted its petition to reopen the 
record to consider evidence of employee turnover.  This 
argument ignores the fact that this case does not involve a 
contested union election and a Gissel bargaining order.  See 
NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 (1969).  Outside 
the traditional Gissel context, the simple fact of employee 
turnover since Scepter's withdrawal of recognition would not, 
without more, have been enough to require a different deci-
sion by the Board.  See NLRB v. Creative Food Design Ltd., 
852 F.2d 1295, 1300-02 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  Thus, the Board was 
not required to reopen the record to consider evidence of 
employee turnover.

                            *  *  *  *

     We are not unsympathetic to some of the concerns ex-
pressed by Scepter's counsel during oral argument.  Counsel 
claimed that he has never been more frustrated and per-
plexed by collective bargaining than he was during the negoti-
ations in this case.  He described a scenario that indeed 
sounded bedeviling, because, according to counsel, he could 
find no strategy to coax the Union agent to the bargaining 
table to bring the parties' negotiations to a mutually satisfac-
tory conclusion.  Counsel said that, at one point, he arranged 
for some off-the-record meetings with the Union agent, dur-
ing which they agreed on a number of substantive issues.  
Counsel represented that he even took the unusual step of 
agreeing to a union checkoff provision to facilitate a contract, 
but the Union negotiator still appeared unable to close the 
deal.  And, according to counsel, the purported telephone 
calls from the Union agent to company officials were not 
meaningful gestures to resume negotiations, because the Un-
ion agent never focused on substantive issues.  Thus, when it 
appeared that nothing fruitful was coming from the Union in 

the context of bargaining, company counsel and members of 
management apparently gave up.

     We have no reason to doubt counsel's characterization of 
what appeared to him to be pointless collective bargaining.  
The record in this case does not indicate that Scepter en-
gaged in a pattern of anti-union activities, thus suggesting 
that company officials may well have been willing to execute 
an agreement with the Union.  On the other hand, we also 
have no reason to accept counsel's characterization, as it is 
without support in the record.  In any event, the situation at 
Scepter - if it was as counsel says - would not have been the 
first time that collective bargaining failed due to inept inter-
actions between the parties.  Nor does counsel's belated 
explanation excuse the unfair labor practices found by the 
Board.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, Scepter's petition for review is 
denied and the Board's cross-application for enforcement of 
its Order is granted.

                    