                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 18, 1999   Decided January 11, 2000 

                           No. 99-5088

         The Iceland Steamship Company, Ltd.-Eimskip and 
                 Van Ommeren Shipping (USA) LLC, 
                            Appellees

                                v.

          The United States Department of the Army and 
              Louis Caldera, Secretary of the Army, 
                            Appellees

              Transatlantic Lines-Iceland ehf. and 
                  TransAtlantic Lines, L.L.C., 
                            Appellants

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02631)

     Michael Joseph argued the cause for appellants. With him 
on the briefs was Joseph O. Click.

     David L. Smith, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for the federal appellees.  With him on the brief were Wilma 
A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant 
U.S. Attorney.

     Joanne W. Young argued the cause for the non-federal 
appellees.  With her on the brief were David M. Kirstein, 
Lee T. Ellis, Jr., Richard A. Hibey, and Constantine G. 
Papavizas.

     George J. Mannina, Jr., was on the brief for amicus curiae 
The Government of the Republic of Iceland. With him on the 
brief was Gary C. Adler.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part filed by 
Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Appellants TransAtlantic Lines-
Iceland ehf. ("TLI") and TransAtlantic Lines, L.L.C. ("TLL") 
are affiliated corporations and awardees of military shipping 
contracts for shipping between the eastern United States and 
Iceland.  They appeal from an order of the district court 
allowing summary judgment in favor of appellees, Iceland 
Steamship Company, Ltd.-Eimskip ("Eimskip") and Van Om-
meren Shipping (USA) L.L.C. ("Van Ommeren"), and requir-
ing the U.S. Army to rebid the contracts.  The district court 
required rebidding on two grounds:  First, it held that a 1986 
treaty entered into between the United States and Iceland 
prohibited the award of the contracts to appellants because of 
their affiliation with each other.  Second, the district court 
held that the contracting officer's determinations of responsi-
bility for appellants were arbitrary and capricious in that she 
failed to follow relevant solicitation procedures.  Applying the 
deferential standard of review of executive branch decisions 

which govern in both these contexts, we reverse the district 
court and uphold the Army's award.

                             I. Facts

                           A. Overview

     While the interpretation of an international treaty is impli-
cated in this action, this is essentially a disappointed bidder 
case.  Cf. Elcon Enters., Inc. v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 977 F.2d 1472 (D.C. Cir. 1992);  CACI, Inc.-
Federal v. United States, 719 F.2d 1567 (Fed. Cir. 1983).  At 
stake are government contracts for shipping between the 
eastern United States and Iceland.  Appellants were awarded 
the contracts on September 18, 1998, by the United States 
Army's Joint Traffic Management Office of the Military Traf-
fic Management Command ("Army").  Appellees were losing 
bidders and the incumbent carriers on these contracts.  Dis-
appointed bidders may challenge a government contract 
award under the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), 
which empowers courts to set aside any agency action that is 
"arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not 
in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A) (1994);  see 
Scanwell Lab., Inc. v. Shaffer, 424 F.2d 859, 874 (D.C. Cir. 
1970).

                           B.  History

     This action is the latest in a series of disputes over the 
military shipping contracts for trade between the United 
States and Iceland.  We will briefly review the history of this 
trade and the earlier disputes to provide context for the 
current case.

     The United States has maintained formal arrangements for 
the use of military facilities in Iceland since at least 1951, 
when the two countries entered into a defense agreement.  
See Defense Agreement Pursuant to the North Atlantic Trea-
ty ("Defense Agreement"), May 5, 1951, U.S.-Ice., 2 U.S.T. 
1195.  Prior to 1984, Icelandic shippers traditionally serviced 
the U.S. military's Keflavik Air Base in Iceland.  In that 

year, Rainbow Navigation, a newly formed United States flag 
carrier, took over the trade by invoking the Cargo Preference 
Act of 1904, 10 U.S.C. s 2631 (1994).  That statute requires 
that American military supplies be carried by U.S. flagged 
vessels if available.  See Curran v. Laird, 420 F.2d 122, 127-
28, 133 (D.C. Cir. 1969).

     The government of Iceland asked that Icelandic shippers 
be given some accommodation in order to maintain Iceland's 
good defense relationship with the United States.  At first, 
the U.S. Navy tried to disqualify Rainbow by invoking an 
exception in the Cargo Preference Act for excessive rates, but 
this was rejected as based on insufficient evidence.  See 
Rainbow Navigation, Inc. v. Department of the Navy, 783 
F.2d 1072, 1073, 1080-81 (D.C. Cir. 1986).  The Navy then 
tried to "dispense with Rainbow's services by a diversion of 
the cargo ... to military aircraft," but the District Court 
rejected this tactic.  Rainbow Navigation, Inc. v. Depart-
ment of the Navy, 686 F. Supp. 354, 355 (D.D.C. 1988) 
(reviewing prior challenges).

     Realizing that the Cargo Preference Act was a formidable 
barrier, the United States (through the State Department) 
and Iceland negotiated a treaty and memorandum of under-
standing in 1986.  These documents are intended to ensure 
that the Iceland trade will be shared by United States flag 
carriers and Icelandic shippers.  Article I of the treaty 
provides:

     Transportation services for cargo transported by sea 
     between Iceland and the United States for purposes of 
     the Defense Agreement shall be provided by vessels of 
     the United States and vessels operated by Icelandic 
     shipping companies on the basis of competition between 
     United States flag carriers and Icelandic shipping compa-
     nies pursuant to this Article.  Any such competition shall 
     result in contract awards that ensure that both United 
     States flag carriers and Icelandic shipping companies are 
     able to maintain a viable presence in the trade.  To 
     ensure achievement of these objectives, the percentage of 
     cargo transported ... by Icelandic shipping companies 
     
     and vessels of the United States on the basis of such 
     competition shall be determined by agreement between 
     the United States and Iceland.
     
Treaty to Facilitate Defense Relationship ("Treaty"), Sept. 
24, 1986, U.S.-Ice., T.I.A.S. No. 11,098, at 3.  The memoran-
dum of understanding fleshes out how this competition should 
proceed:

     Transportation services for cargo transported by sea 
     between Iceland and the United States for purposes of 
     the Defense Agreement shall be provided by vessels of 
     the United States and vessels operated by Icelandic 
     shipping companies on the basis of periodic competitions 
     between United States flag carriers and Icelandic ship-
     ping companies.  Each competition shall result in con-
     tract awards to both an Icelandic shipping company and 
     a United States flag carrier such that not to exceed 65 
     percent of the cargo shall be carried by the lowest bidder 
     and the remainder shall be carried by the next lowest 
     bidder of the other country....
     
Memorandum of Understanding in Implementation of the 
Treaty to Facilitate Defense Relationship ("MOU"), Sept. 24, 
1986, U.S.-Ice., T.I.A.S. No. 11,098, at 2.  The MOU is to be 
reviewed yearly and may be amended upon mutual agree-
ment of the parties at any time.  See id. at 3.

     Upon ratification of the Treaty, Icelandic shippers were 
able to claim back some of Iceland trade.  In fact, the 
Icelandic shippers got back 65 percent of the trade.  Al-
though the MOU does not guarantee this allocation, Icelandic 
shipping companies have much lower costs than U.S. flag 
carriers, cf. Aeron Marine Shipping Co. v. United States, 695 
F.2d 567, 569 (D.C. Cir. 1982), and generally will be able to 
submit lower bids than their American competitors.  There-
fore, in light of this economic reality, the lowest bidder among 
Icelandic shipping companies will generally be awarded 65 
percent of the trade, and the lowest bid from a U.S. flag 
carrier will be awarded the remainder.

     We interpreted the Treaty and MOU in Rainbow Naviga-
tion, Inc. v. Department of the Navy, 911 F.2d 797 (D.C. Cir. 

1990).  Rainbow Navigation claimed that the Treaty and 
MOU, supplemented by legislative testimony on the ratifica-
tion of the Treaty, required a bidding process protecting 
Rainbow by including restrictive specifications to disqualify 
small domestic supply boats.  It also contended that the 
solicitation must include a provision ensuring it could recover 
the fixed costs of operating a vessel which could carry 65 
percent of the trade even if awarded only 35 percent.  See id. 
at 801.  We rejected the theory that Rainbow should be 
accorded any greater protection than other U.S. flag carriers, 
seeing nothing in the language of the Treaty or MOU requir-
ing such a result.  We summarized the requirements of the 
Treaty and MOU:

     By its terms, the Treaty and the MOU require only (1) 
     that the [government] award contracts by means of a 
     competition;  (2) in a manner that "ensure[s] that both 
     United States flag carriers and Icelandic shipping compa-
     nies are able to maintain a viable presence in the trade";  
     and (3) that the lowest U.S. bidder receive at least 35 
     percent of the cargo.
     
Id.

                     C.  Present Controversy

     This brings us to the present controversy.  On January 30, 
1998, the Army1 issued a solicitation for the Iceland trade, 
specifically stating that awards would be allocated "[p]ursuant 
to the Treaty and its implementing Memorandum of Under-
standing."  Of course, the solicitation stated numerous other 
requirements for bidders to meet.  Those we mention here 
are relevant to appellees' non-treaty related challenges.  The 
solicitation required the Contracting Officer to make an "af-
firmative determination" of offeror responsibility.  It cited to 
Federal Acquisition Regulation ("FAR"), Subpart 9.1 on Re-

__________
     1 Although the Navy handled the administration of the bidding 
process in the past, see, e.g., Rainbow, 911 F.2d at 799, this 
responsibility was transferred at some point to the Army, who 
administered this solicitation through the Joint Traffic Management 
Office of the Military Traffic Management Command.

sponsible Prospective Contractors, which mandates that an 
awardee "[h]ave adequate financial resources to perform the 
contract, or the ability to obtain them."  48 C.F.R. s 9.104-
1(a) (1998).  The solicitation also stated that each offer should 
"include sufficient evidence to establish control or irrevocable 
right to gain control of the necessary vessels in sufficient time 
to commence service on [the contract start date]."

     The solicitation stated that offers were due on March 5, 
1998, and the contracts had a proposed starting date of May 
1, 1998 because the prior contracts were set to expire on April 
30, 1998.  Due to delays in the bidding process, the proposed 
start date was moved back to November 1 and the incumbent 
carriers given a six month extension.

     TLI and TLL each submitted bids.2  TLI and TLL have 
substantially similar ownership and are principally managed 
by Gudmundur Kjaernested, who is a citizen of Iceland and 
United States resident.  At the time the original bids were 
submitted, Kjaernested and Brandon C. Rose, a United 
States citizen, were the primary owners of both companies.  
Despite this close relationship, TLI and TLL are separate 
corporate entities.  TLL is a limited liability company regis-
tered in Delaware, and TLI is an Icelandic company regis-
tered in Iceland.

     The Army announced the awards on September 18, 1998.  
TLI, the Icelandic company, was the lowest overall bidder 
and the Army awarded it a contract covering 65 percent of 
the trade.  The Army awarded TLL a contract for the 
remaining 35 percent because it was the lowest bid among 
U.S. flag carriers.

     The Contracting Officer also made the required determina-
tion that each company was a responsible contractor.  As to 
TLI, the Contracting Officer cited a bank letter tentatively 
approving a $1 million credit line to TLL.  This letter noted 
the bank's prior history with TLI and TLL stockholder 

__________
     2 We are referring to separate bids that TLI and TLL submitted.  
TLI and TLL also submitted two other bids which were rejected 
because they were in the nature of joint venture proposals.

Brandon Rose as being important in setting up the line of 
credit.  The Contracting Officer also had a letter from Kjaer-
nested stating that the credit line was available to both TLI 
and TLL.  As to TLL, the Contracting Officer's responsibili-
ty determination concluded that TLL had "the necessary 
equipment and facilities to perform this contract."  Before 
the officer were four letters from marine companies pledging 
vessels, with varying levels of specificity.

     Eimskip and Van Ommeren filed protests with the U.S. 
Government Accounting Office ("GAO").  Under the Compe-
tition in Contracting Act, this action automatically stayed the 
awards.  See 31 U.S.C. s 3553(b)-(d) (1994).  On October 23, 
1998, approval to override the stay was granted by the 
Assistant Secretary of the Army.  Eimskip then filed this suit 
in the district court causing the GAO to dismiss the bid 
protest.  See 4 C.F.R. s 21.11 (1997).  TLL, TLI, and Van 
Ommeren timely intervened.

     During this same period, the government of Iceland sent a 
diplomatic note to the U.S. Department of State protesting 
the awards.  Citing the Treaty and MOU, Iceland stated two 
problems it had with the awards to TLI and TLL:  (1) that as 
commonly owned companies, TLI and TLL could not be 
awardees, and (2) that TLI was not a true Icelandic shipping 
company.  Specifically, the note stated:

          The Government of Iceland has concluded, based on 
     available information, that [TLI and TLL] are affiliated 
     companies under common direction, ownership and/or 
     control of Icelandic citizens, and that [TLI] lacks the 
     necessary experience, technical capability, financial re-
     sponsibility, and material connection with Iceland.
     
          ....  
     
          ... [T]he Government of Iceland interprets the Treaty 
     and [MOU] to preclude awards by the [Army] of both the 
     Icelandic and United States portions of the trade subject 
     to the Treaty and [MOU] to affiliated companies under 
     common direction, ownership and/or control.
     
          ... [T]he Government of Iceland interprets the Treaty 
     and [MOU] to preclude any award of the Icelandic 
     
     portion of that trade to any company that lacks the 
     experience, technical capability, financial responsibility, 
     and material connection with Iceland that are necessary 
     to ensure ... maintenance of a viable presence of Icelan-
     dic shipping companies in that trade providing for the 
     security of Iceland and the equitable participation of 
     Iceland in the benefits of the Defense Agreement....
     
Iceland Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Diplomatic Note to the 
Department of State of the United States of America (Sept. 
28, 1998), Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 124, 126 ("Iceland Diplo-
matic Note").

     The U.S. State Department issued a diplomatic note on 
December 30, 1998 in response to Iceland's position:

     The Government of the United States considers its ac-
     tions in the recent competition and award of the Icelan-
     dic military cargo contract are fully consistent with the 
     Treaty and MOU.
     
          ....
     
          ... Until the recent contract competition, the Govern-
     ment of Iceland has not expressed any views regarding 
     the qualifications of particular Icelandic companies nor 
     informed the Government of the United States that it 
     held views that appear to the United States to go beyond 
     the plain meaning of the words themselves.
     
          ....
     
          ... The Government of the United States notes that 
     none of [the] four criteria cited by the Government of 
     Iceland to render [TLI] a non-Icelandic shipping compa-
     ny appears in the text of the Treaty or MOU.
               ....
     
          It is the position of the Government of the United 
     States that none of the terms in the Treaty or MOU 
     require recourse to supplementary means of interpreta-
     tion when the terms of the treaty are plain and unambig-
     uous....  Iceland, consistent with its obligations under 
     international law, is of course free to enact specific 
     statutory or regulatory criteria for "Icelandic shipping 
     
     companies" should it wish to do so (just as the internal 
     law of the United States provides specific criteria for 
     "U.S. flag vessels").
     
          ....
     
          ... [T]he Government of Iceland [has] expressed its 
     concern that there had been no effective competition 
     because of the relationship between two of the bidders.  
     The Government of the United States, however, followed 
     its own contracting processes in this procurement and 
     believes that the goal of competition was indeed met....
     
          ... [T]here is no evidence of an attempt to eliminate 
     competition from other bidders....  [T]he two compa-
     nies ... were not competing to fill the same contract 
     requirement.  Rather, the Iceland company submitted a 
     proposal for the 65% share while the U.S.-flag company 
     submitted one for the 35% share....
     
          Since the portion of the cargo trade which would be 
     reserved for Icelandic interests was determined on the 
     basis of competition between offers submitted by entities 
     from each country, it is the view of the United States 
     that any relationship between Icelandic companies and 
     companies operating U.S.-flag vessels was and is irrele-
     vant to the fact that there was full, vigorous, and open 
     competition in full compliance with the Treaty and MOU.
     
U.S. Department of State, Diplomatic Note to the Embassy of 
the Republic of Iceland (Dec. 30, 1998), J.A. 128, 128-35 
("U.S. Diplomatic Note").

     Meanwhile, appellees' district court action was proceeding.  
Appellees challenged the award on two primary grounds 
which are before us on appeal.  First, they claim that the 
Treaty and MOU prohibited awards to TLI and TLL for the 
same reasons cited by the Iceland Diplomatic Note:  (1) 
because the common ownership of TLI and TLL made the 
bidding process something other than a competition and (2) 
because TLI is not a true "Icelandic shipping company."  
Appellees also make two challenges to the Contracting Offi-
cer's responsibility findings:  (1) that TLI was a financially 

responsible contractor, and (2) that TLL was responsible in 
that it had a vessel ready to perform.

     After initially denying a motion for a preliminary injunc-
tion, the district court granted appellees' motions for sum-
mary judgment on February 3, 1999, and ordered the Army 
to cancel the contracts and rebid.  The court first ruled that 
the ownership status of TLL and TLI defeated the MOU's 
requirement of a single competition for the Icelandic trade.  
The court also found that the Army's decisions under the 
solicitation procedures were arbitrary and capricious on both 
counts.  The district court was not yet aware of the recently-
issued U.S. Diplomatic Note addressing the treaty issues.

     TLL, TLI, and the Army appealed the judgment of the 
district court.  We granted a stay pending appeal.  The 
Government of Iceland submitted an amicus brief on behalf of 
the losing bidders.  The Army originally dismissed its appeal, 
but has asked leave to file a brief which addresses only the 
treaty issues.3

     Addressing the treaty issues first, we conclude that the 
Army's contract awards to TLL and TLI do not violate the 
plain language of the Treaty and MOU.  As to the responsi-
bility determinations of the Contracting Officer, the context 
of which requires an especially deferential version of arbi-
trary and capricious review, we determine that the Army's 
actions were permissible.

                        II. Treaty Issues

                      A.  Standard of Review

     When interpreting a treaty or memorandum of understand-
ing, we are guided by principles similar to those governing 
statutory interpretation.  We "must, of course, begin with the 
language of the Treaty itself."  Sumitomo Shoji Am., Inc. v. 
Avagliano, 457 U.S. 176, 180 (1982).  At this level, "[t]he 

__________
     3 The Army's brief does not address the responsibility determina-
tions of the Contracting Officer.  At oral argument the Army 
clarified that it has not changed its position on these issues but has 
simply chosen not to appeal the district court's decision.

clear import of treaty language controls unless 'application of 
the words of the treaty according to their obvious meaning 
effects a result inconsistent with the intent or expectations of 
its signatories.' "  Id. (quoting Maximov v. United States, 373 
U.S. 49, 54 (1963)).

     To the extent that the meaning of treaty terms are not 
plain, we give "great weight" to "the meaning attributed to 
treaty provisions by the Government agencies charged with 
their negotiation and enforcement."  Sumitomo, 457 U.S. at 
184-85;  see also In re Papandreou, 139 F.3d 247, 252 n.2 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  Although "we give somewhat less defer-
ence" where an agency and another country disagree on the 
meaning of a treaty or MOU, where an agency has "wide 
latitude in interpreting the MOU, ... we will defer to its 
reasonable interpretation."  Air Canada v. U.S. Dep't of 
Transp., 843 F.2d 1483, 1487 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

     In this case, we deem it proper to refer to the U.S. 
Diplomatic Note for guidance as to the meaning of the terms 
"competition" and "Icelandic shipping companies" under the 
Treaty and MOU, although the Note was not in the record 
before the district court.  Although the Army may have 
considered the Note confidential, TLL and TLI apparently 
had access to it since they presented it to this court at the 
time of the initial application for temporary restraint.  We 
would not, of course, consider evidence offered to support a 
factual proposition which had not been before the district 
court.  However, the Diplomatic Note is not offered as evi-
dence to support a factual proposition, but rather as an 
interpretive guide for our use in making a legal interpreta-
tion.  And although all parties refer to the Note in their 
briefs, appellees do not object to those references, or our 
consideration of the Note, on the ground that it was not in the 
record below.  Because it is important for this court to have 
the guidance of the agency responsible for negotiating this 
treaty, we consider the Note along with the Army's argu-
ments adopting the same views.  A diplomatic note is an 
official position of the type which is unlikely to be taken for 
litigation purposes, and is entitled to deference.  Cf. Smiley v. 
Citibank (South Dakota), N.A., 517 U.S. 735, 741 (1996).

                          B. Competition

     Having reviewed the applicable principles guiding our rea-
soning, we proceed to the issue of whether the affiliated 
status of TLI and TLL transformed the bidding process into 
something other than a "competition."  We hold that there 
was still a "competition" under the Treaty and MOU.  The 
plain meaning of the Treaty and MOU comport with this 
view, but to the extent the meaning of the word "competition" 
is in any doubt, it does not prevent bids of separate corporate 
entities that have common ownership.  Therefore, we agree 
with the U.S. Diplomatic Note that the bidding process was a 
competition.4

     On a surface level, a "competition" certainly occurred be-
tween U.S. flag carriers and Icelandic shippers.  TLI and 
TLL were competing against other U.S. flag carriers and 
Icelandic shippers.  Regardless of whether TLI and TLL 
competed against each other, nothing in the Treaty and MOU 
suggests, as appellees contend, that each and every bidder 
must compete against each and every other bidder.

     In fact, that has never been the nature of the competition.  
Because bidders may bid for between 35 percent and 65 
percent of the trade each has never competed against all.  
Because TLI was effectively vying for the 65 percent portion 
and TLL for the remainder, perhaps it can be said they were 
not in head to head competition.  But the same can be said 
for Eimskip and Van Ommeren and all the other bidders.  
Eimskip, being an Icelandic shipper, and Van Ommeren, a 
U.S. flag carrier, were not in direct head to head competition 
either.  The bottom line is that this conception of a "full 
competition" has nothing to do with the affiliation of bidders.  
Under the appellees' theory, a competition could not occur 
unless each and every bidder requested 100 percent of the 
trade.  The Treaty and MOU do not require such 100 percent 
bids.

__________
     4 We have no occasion to consider whether appellants' behavior 
would or would not constitute "competition" within the meaning of 
the antitrust laws.

     On a deeper level, a form of head to head competition does 
occur between all bidders.  Every bidder is submitting bids in 
a single competition to award the shipping trade.  All the 
bids must be compared in the first instance to determine who 
is the overall lowest bidder.  Even though TLL and Van 
Ommeren (or other U.S. flag carriers) have little chance of 
being the lowest overall bidder, they still compete against 
everyone else.  In this portion of the competition, even TLI 
and TLL's bids are stacked against each other.

     While appellees object to the substantially common owner-
ship of TLI and TLL, it is worth noting that the Comptroller 
General allows affiliated companies to submit multiple bids 
for the same procurement.  In Pioneer Recovery Sys., Inc., 
B-214878, 1984 WL 46915, at *2 (Comp. Gen. Nov. 13, 1984), 
the Comptroller General stated that "[t]he general rule is 
that multiple bids may be accepted unless such multiple 
bidding is prejudicial to the interests of the government or 
other bidders in which case it is clear that the reason for 
multiple bidding was not legitimate."  See also David I. Abse, 
51 Comp. Gen. 403, 404-06 (1972) (upholding award where 
high and low bids were signed by same person of affiliated 
companies).  While the Comptroller General's opinion is not 
binding precedent, we agree that the existence of affiliation 
does not negate the presence of "competition" in the usual 
sense of that word.

     The language of the Treaty and MOU does not define 
"competition" in any peculiar way requiring a different result.  
There is "nothing in the Treaty ... clearly prohibit[ing] a 
relationship between the two awardees."  Iceland Steamship 
Co. v. United States Dep't of the Army, slip op. at 4, No. 
98-2631 (D.D.C. Nov. 10, 1998) (order denying preliminary 
injunction).  The Treaty contemplates awards "on the basis of 
competition between United States flag carriers and Icelandic 
shipping companies," and the MOU uses similar language.  
Neither document addresses a situation in which a U.S. flag 
carrier and Icelandic shipping company have similar owner-
ship.

     Appellees argue that the dictionary definition of competi-
tion precludes affiliates from bidding.  Black's Law Dictio-
nary, for example, describes "competition" as "[t]he effort of 
two or more parties, acting independently, to secure the 
business of a third party by the offer of the most favorable 
terms."  Black's Law Dictionary 257 (5th ed. 1979).  But this 
is exactly what all the bidders, including TLI and TLL, did.  
Even if TLI and TLL colluded and were not acting indepen-
dent of each other, the participation of other bidders would 
meet the definition's requirements.  Appellees' "plain mean-
ing" argument therefore fails.

     We note that the suggestion of collusion (as opposed to 
mere affiliation) could be cause for concern.  It might be 
called "unfair competition," but even that term admits that a 
"competition" occurs.  And there is a mechanism for protect-
ing against collusive bidding.  A Certificate for Independent 
Price Determination ("CIPD") certifies the independent de-
velopment of a bid.  Appellees raised a CIPD issue before the 
district court, but have not pressed it on appeal.

     In Maximov v. United States, 373 U.S. 49 (1963), a peti-
tioner similarly sought to impose a meaning on a term that it 
could not bear.  Under the Income Tax Convention between 
the United States of America and the United Kingdom, Apr. 
16, 1945, 60 Stat. 1377, 1384, capital gains of a "resident of the 
United Kingdom" were exempt from taxation by the United 
States.  See id. at 49.  The petitioner was trustee of a trust 
created under Connecticut law by a grantor who was a 
resident of the United Kingdom.  A trust was considered a 
person under the law of both countries and thus a "resident" 
of the United States, not the United Kingdom, under the 
treaty.  Petitioner urged that the purpose of the treaty 
required the opposite result.  The Supreme Court disagreed.  
Reviewing the plain language, the Court could not construe 
the treaty to effect "so significant a deviation from normal 
word use or domestic tax concepts."  Id. at 52.

     This case is not unlike Maximov.  We cannot, in the name 
of effectuating the purposes of the Treaty and MOU, read 
into those documents a meaning of "competition" which would 

prohibit the bids of separate corporate entities with common 
ownership.  To do so would distort the meaning of the term 
"competition."  If TLI and TLL were one corporation, then 
the entire shipping trade could not be split between them 
because the Treaty and MOU contemplate two separate 
awards to one entity of each country.  But TLI and TLL are 
separate entities, and are entitled to be treated as such. 
Therefore, we conclude that the Treaty and MOU require-
ment of a "competition" does not foreclose bids from affiliated 
companies.  To the extent that the term admits of any 
ambiguity, we will defer to the position of the U.S. Diplomatic 
Note that the bids did not create some unnamed creature that 
was not a "competition."

                 C. Icelandic Shipping Companies

     Our disposition of the meaning of "competition" does not 
end our discussion of the Treaty.  We must also consider 
whether TLI is an "Icelandic shipping company."  As a 
preliminary point, we make clear that this dispute is not 
whether TLI is a properly registered Icelandic company, 
although it appears to be one.  Instead, we are asked to 
decide whether it is an "Icelandic shipping company" as that 
term in used in the Treaty and MOU.  While it could be said 
these two inquiries, absent other direction, should be identi-
cal, we need not decide that issue.  We can conclude that 
whatever the Treaty and MOU require, the interpretation of 
the U.S. Diplomatic Note is reasonable and is entitled to 
deference.

     The Iceland Diplomatic Note suggests that all Icelandic 
shipping companies must fulfill four requirements:  "experi-
ence, technical capability, financial responsibility, and materi-
al connection with Iceland."  How much of any of these 
factors is required?  The Note says sufficient "to ensure a 
viable presence of Icelandic shipping companies" in the trade.  
Unfortunately that is not helpful given that the term "Icelan-
dic shipping company" is used in the "definition" itself.  
Whichever Icelandic shipping company is awarded the con-
tract will have a viable presence.  As the district court feared, 

this is not a meaningful way for a court to analyze what 
constitutes an Icelandic shipping company within the meaning 
of the Treaty.  See Iceland Steamship Co. v. United States 
Dep't of the Army, slip op. at 6 n.2, No. 98-2631 (D.D.C. Feb. 
3, 1999).

     We do recognize the concerns of the government of Ice-
land.  Apparently, when the Treaty was drafted, it was not 
contemplated that newly formed Icelandic-owned shipping 
companies would be able to capture the trade.  Thus a 
specific definition of the term was not included.  Just as 
Rainbow Navigation was formed as a U.S. flag carrier in 1984 
to capture to the entire trade under the Cargo Preference 
Act, TLI was founded by an Icelandic citizen in an attempt to 
capture the Icelandic portion under the regime established in 
1986.  However, if Iceland wished the limitation it now seeks, 
it could have insisted that a more specific definition be 
included.  For example, the U.S. portion of the trade is 
reserved for "U.S. flag carriers" instead of "U.S. shipping 
companies."

     The parties to the international agreements included no 
explicit definition.  We have no authority for engrafting 
terms onto the MOU that they did not include.  The plain 
meaning of the words "Icelandic shipping company" does not 
compel us to find as a matter of law that TLI does or does 
not qualify for such status.  Insofar as there is any ambigui-
ty, we will defer to the reasonable interpretation offered in 
the U.S. Diplomatic Note.  We therefore hold that it was 
reasonable for the Army to find that TLI is an Icelandic 
shipping company under the Treaty and MOU.

     Because we need only decide the case before us, we do not 
identify a line between actions that are permitted and those 
which are prohibited by the Treaty and MOU.  We recognize 
that a reasonable range of choices might exist.  There is no 
call for us to go further.

                     III. Solicitation Issues

                      A.  Standard of Review

     Finally, we consider the challenges to the Contracting 
Officer's responsibility determinations.  Because of the spe-

cial nature of contracting determinations, our review is an 
especially deferential application of the arbitrary and capri-
cious standard.  We clarified the application of the standard 
to contracting determinations in Old Dominion Dairy Prods., 
Inc. v. Secretary of Defense, 631 F.2d 953 (D.C. Cir. 1980):

     As stated in Keco Industries, Inc. v. United States, 492 
     F.2d 1200, 1203 (Ct. Cl. 1974), the ultimate standard is 
     "whether the Government's conduct was arbitrary and 
     capricious toward the bidder-claimant."  Concerning a 
     determination of nonresponsibility, the court in Keco 
     Industries specifically stated that contracting officers 
     "have very wide discretion," and that a complaining 
     bidder "would normally have to demonstrate bad faith or 
     lack of any reasonable basis in order to prevail."  Id. at 
     1205.  In describing the reasonable basis test, the court 
     elsewhere noted that, "although based on external facts 
     and circumstances rather than a showing of animosity 
     toward plaintiff or favoritism for a competitor, this prin-
     ciple is not far removed from the bad faith test;  courts 
     often equate wholly unreasonable action with conduct 
     motivated by subjective bad faith."  Id. at 1204.
     
Old Dominion, 631 F.3d at 960;  see also YRT Servs. Corp. v. 
United States, 28 Fed. Cl. 366, 387-88 (1993).

     As in other agency review contexts, "a procurement deci-
sion is not 'irrational' simply because we might have reached 
a different decision in the first instance."  Elcon Enters., 977 
F.2d at 1478.  But we look for no more than "substantial 
compliance with applicable law and baseline substantive ra-
tionality [because] '[j]udges are "ill-equipped to settle the 
delicate questions involved in procurement decisions." ' "  Id. 
at 1479 (quoting Delta Data Sys. Corp. v. Webster, 744 F.2d 
197, 203 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (quoting Kinnett Dairies, Inc. v. 
Farrow, 580 F.2d 1260, 1271 (5th Cir. 1978))).

     Applying this deferential standard, we conclude that a 
rational basis existed for the responsibility determinations of 
the Contracting Officer.

                              B. TLI

     Although various challenges were advanced below, appel-
lees' primary argument is that the Contracting Officer should 
not have relied on a tentative letter of credit to one compa-
ny--TLL--in finding another--TLI--to be financially re-
sponsible.  While the basic proposition is appealing, on the 
specific facts before us we cannot hold that the officer acted 
improperly.  The line of credit letter relied on was addressed 
to Mr. Rose at TLL, a stockholder of both companies, and 
stated that the line of credit was based on the bank's relation-
ship with Mr. Rose's family.  TLI also provided written 
assurance to the Army that the letter of credit applied to both 
companies.  And while the letter was "tentative," it does not 
state what "tentative" means.

     Viewing the totality of the evidence, we hold that the Army 
had a rational basis for finding TLI to be responsible.  In 
fact, before the district court, the Army even suggested that 
the Contracting Officer could have found that no line of credit 
was needed at all.  See Iceland Steamship Co. v. United 
States Dep't of the Army, slip op. at 13 n.9, No. 98-2631 
(D.D.C.  Feb. 3, 1999).  This suggestion highlights the diffi-
culty of second-guessing the Contracting Officer's determina-
tion.  We have no basis for requiring that a letter of credit be 
more than "tentative."  And while the fact that the letter of 
credit was addressed to TLL might be troubling, the ultimate 
weight given to this piece of information is based on a 
discretionary weighing of financial risks and rewards by the 
Contracting Officer.

     Furthermore, it is in an agency's self-interest to make 
proper responsibility determinations.  Otherwise, the agency 
runs the risk of contractor default which could cause "sub-
stantial delay and inconvenience."  Keco Indus., 492 F.2d at 
1206.  But in any event, considering the deferential standard 
of review applied to this type of decision, and the fact that 
judges are not financial advisors to the United States govern-
ment, we conclude that there is no basis for overturning the 
Contracting Officer's finding that TLI was responsible.

                              C. TLL

     Appellees challenge the Contracting Officer's responsibility 
determination regarding TLL on the ground that TLL pre-
sented insufficient evidence to show a right to control a 
vessel.  The solicitation required "sufficient evidence to es-
tablish control or irrevocable right to gain control of the 
necessary vessels in sufficient time to commence service on 
[the contract starting date]."  TLL submitted four letters 
from marine companies pledging the availability of vessels.  
For example, the letter from Tidewater Marine stated:

     This is to confirm that [TLL] has the option to charter 
     the supply boat Native Dancer....  The maximum char-
     ter shall not exceed 180 days.  Additional unspecified 
     options shall be mutually negotiated.
     
     The purpose of the charter is to fulfill a part of [TLL's] 
     obligation to the Joint Traffic Management Office, in the 
     event that the company is awarded the contract.
     
J.A. at 216.  Based on these submissions, the Contracting 
Officer concluded that TLL would obtain the ships necessary 
to be a responsible contractor.

     Deferring to the expertise of the Contracting Officer in 
these matters, we find this decision to be rational.  We have 
no occasion to weigh the quantum of evidence needed to 
establish the legal requirements of an irrevocable option.  
Considering these letters, we cannot say it was arbitrary for 
the Contracting Officer to decide that TLL would be able to 
obtain vessels.  Moreover, we note that we have held in a 
contract action that an irrevocable option can be created 
despite a paucity of stated terms.  See Ammerman v. City 
Stores Co., 394 F.2d 950, 954-55 (D.C. Cir. 1968).  Although 
the letters apparently did not state price terms, we have no 
information on the typical evidence required by contracting 
officers, or furnished by prospective charterers.  Therefore, 
we must conclude that the appellees have not established that 
the Contracting Officer's decision was arbitrary or capricious.

                          IV. Conclusion

     For the reasons set forth above, we conclude that the 
Army's decision to award the shipping contracts to TLI and 
TLL does not require rebidding.  Because there are no issues 
of material fact to be decided, we reverse the judgment of the 
district court and remand for the entry of summary judgment 
in favor of appellants.

                                                      So ordered.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, concurring in part 
and dissenting in part:

     The majority rightly focuses on our narrow standard of 
review of the Contracting Officer's two responsibility determi-
nations.  Although its focus is blurred by the quotation from 
Old Dominion Dairy Products, Inc. v. Secretary of Defense, 
631 F.2d 953, 960 (D.C. Cir. 1980), discussing an ill-defined 
"reasonable basis test," Maj. Op. at 18, in the end my 
colleagues adhere to the well-established arbitrary and capri-
cious standard of review of administrative action.  See id. at 
18, 20 ("[O]ur review is an especially deferential application of 
the arbitrary and capricious standard.");  id. at 18 ("[T]he 
ultimate standard is 'whether the Government's conduct was 
arbitrary and capricious.' ") (quoting Old Dominion Dairy 
Prods., Inc. v. Secretary of Defense, 631 F.2d 953 (D.C. Cir. 
1980)).

     In any event, even with "an especially deferential applica-
tion" of an already deferential standard of review, id., we are 
nevertheless obligated to review the administrative decisions 
with some scrutiny.  The Army regulations mandate that 
contracts "be awarded to[ ] responsible prospective contrac-
tors only."  See 48 C.F.R. s 9.103(a).  My review of the 
Contracting Officer's decision leads me to reject his determi-
nation of TLI's financial responsibility.  In addition, although 
I concur in the majority holding regarding the Contracting 
Officer's determination of TLL's operational responsibility, I 
cannot agree that our standard of review intends nothing 
more than rubber-stamping the same.

                                I.

     The regulations governing the financial responsibility de-
termination mandate that a bidder provide information "clear-
ly indicating" it has, or can obtain, adequate financial re-
sources to perform the contract.1  48 C.F.R. s 9.103(b) ("In 
__________
     1 The solicitation here provided:

     The Government shall require a showing of financial and 
     operational responsibility prior to making an award.  The 
     applicable provisions of the FAR [Federal Acquisition Regula-
     tion], Sub-part 9.1 require that prior to award, an affirmative 
     determination be made by the Contracting Officer that the   
the absence of information clearly indicating that the prospec-
tive contractor is responsible, the contracting officer shall 
make a determination of nonresponsibility.");  see id. s 9.104-
1 ("To be determined responsible, a prospective contractor 
must ... [h]ave adequate financial resources to perform the 
contract, or the ability to obtain them.").  Evidence of a 
prospective contractor's ability to obtain required resources 
"normally consists of a commitment or explicit arrangement."  
Id. s 9.104-3(a).  Moreover, the regulations consider affiliat-
ed entities like TLL and TLI separately for the purpose of 
determining financial responsibility.  See id. s 9.104-3(c).2

     The majority concludes that there is no basis to overturn 
the Contracting Officer's finding that TLI was financially 
responsible.  See Maj. Op. at 19.  His determination was 
based on a letter from the State Bank of Long Island 
purporting to extend a tentative line of credit.  As the 
majority notes, see id., the letter was addressed to Brandon 
Rose, a stockholder in both TLI and TLL.  The majority, 
however, omits that it was addressed to Rose at TLL.  More-
over, the letter extended nothing to Rose and nothing to TLI;  
it merely "tentatively approved" a line of credit to TLL.  JA 
313.  One of the bases for the bank's decision was its relation-
ship with Rose's family.  The bank also cited TLL's business 
plan and made no reference to TLI.  Perhaps the State Bank 
of Long Island would not extend credit equally to an entity 
like TLI, organized under the laws of another country.  Per-
haps TLI's financial status or business plan was not as sound 
as TLL's.  I also wonder if the letter "clearly indicat[ed]" the 
prospect of a line of credit for other companies Rose owned 
stock in.3

__________
     prospective offeror is responsible and meets the minimum 
     standards specified herein.
     
Joint Appendix (JA) 107-08.

     2 Section 9.104-3(c) provides that "[a]ffiliated concerns ... are 
normally considered separate entities in determining whether the 
concern that is to perform the contract meets the applicable stan-
dards for responsibility."

     3 Although TLL provided the Contracting Officer a letter of 
assurance that the credit applied equally to both companies, TLL 

     Even assuming the letter bears on the determination of 
TLI's financial responsibility, the letter approved the line of 
credit only "tentatively."  JA 313.  The majority discounts 
the conditional nature of the approval because the letter 
"does not state what 'tentative' means."  Maj. Op. at 19.  
Indeed, the letter did not detail what conditions must be 
satisfied before the bank in fact extended credit.  But "tenta-
tive" means "subject to change or withdrawal" or otherwise 
"not final."  Webster's Third New International Dictionary 
2357 (1981).  The majority also claims:  "We have no basis for 
requiring that a letter of credit be more than 'tentative.' "  
Maj. Op. at 19.  On the contrary, the standards that govern 
award of a procurement contract (the FAR, Sub-part 9.1, 
discussed above) plainly envision that a bidder provide more 
than a tentatively approved line of credit to an affiliated 
entity.  See 48 C.F.R. s 9.103(b) ("In the absence of informa-
tion clearly indicating that the prospective contractor is re-
sponsible, the contracting officer shall make a determination 
of nonresponsibility.").

     Because the letter from the bank neither "clearly indi-
cat[ed]" applicability to TLI nor extended credit to anyone, I 
would conclude that the Contracting Officer's determination 
of TLI's financial responsibility was especially arbitrary and 
capricious and that he was bound to "make a determination of 
nonresponsibility."  Id.

                               II.

     The majority omits review of the Contracting Officer's 
operational responsibility determination regarding TLL.  The 
Army's solicitation mandates that "[n]o offer will be consid-
ered for award which does not include sufficient evidence to 
establish control or irrevocable right to gain control of the 
necessary vessels in sufficient time to commence service on 
[contract starting date]."  JA 102.  Because TLL proffered 
no evidence "establish[ing] control," our review focuses on 

__________
did not purport to be speaking for the bank.  See JA 187.  In any 
event, the regulations provide that affiliated entities are to be 
considered separately.  See 48 C.F.R. s 9.104-3(c).

whether TLL proffered sufficient evidence establishing "an 
irrevocable right to gain control."  Id.  The majority notes 
that the Contracting Officer relied on four letters from ma-
rine companies pledging the availability of vessels to TLL.  It 
concludes that "[w]e have no occasion to weigh the quantum 
of evidence needed to establish the legal requirements of [an] 
irrevocable option."  Maj. Op. at 20.  I disagree.  First, while 
the majority is no doubt correct that, as a general rule, 
"judges are ill-equipped to settle the delicate questions in-
volved in procurement decisions," id. at 18, the determination 
of an "irrevocable right to gain control" requires a legal 
conclusion and, thus, a conclusion which judges are presum-
ably adept at making.  Moreover, the solicitation provides 
that an "irrevocable right" is a prerequisite to the operational 
responsibility determination, JA 102;  therefore, finding a 
bidder to be responsible without an irrevocable right is 
arbitrary and capricious.  In reviewing the Contracting Offi-
cer's responsibility determination under any formulation of 
the arbitrary and capricious standard, then, we must consider 
whether the four letters TLL submitted were sufficient to 
establish an "irrevocable right to gain control of the neces-
sary vessels."  JA 102.

     Because I believe the four letters could constitute an 
irrevocable option, see Ammerman v. City Stores Co., 394 
F.2d 950 (D.C. Cir. 1968);  see generally Restatement (Sec-
ond) of Contracts (1979) s 87(2) ("An offer which the offeror 
should reasonably expect to induce action or forbearance of a 
substantial character on the part of the offeree before accep-
tance and which does induce such action or forbearance is 
binding as an option contract to the extent necessary to avoid 
injustice.");  3 Eric Mills Holmes, Corbin on Contracts s 11.7 
(rev. ed. 1996) ("[A]n option contract can be made binding and 
irrevocable ... by subsequent action ... by the option holder 
in reliance on the option."), I join the majority in deferring to 
the Contracting Officer's determination that the letters con-
stituted "sufficient evidence" to establish an "irrevocable 
right to gain control of the necessary vessels in sufficient time 
to commence service," JA 102, and that TLL was therefore 
operationally responsible.

     Accordingly, I concur in toto in Parts I and II and in Parts 
III.A and III.C as explained above.  I respectfully dissent 
from Part III.B.  My resolution of Part III.B, finding revers-
ible error in the award to TLI, would require remand to the 
Army for rebidding.

                                                                    