                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 11, 2000    Decided March 10, 2000 

                           No. 99-1010

                      ANR Pipeline Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

               BP Exploration & Oil, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Daniel F. Collins argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were G. Mark Cook and Howard L. Nelson.

     Monique Penn-Jenkins, Attorney, Federal Energy Regu-
latory Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With 

her on the brief were Jay L. Witkin, Solicitor, and Timm L. 
Abendroth, Attorney.  Susan J. Court, Special Counsel, en-
tered an appearance.

     Linda G. Stuntz argued the cause for intervenors Nautilus 
Pipeline Company, L.L.C., et al.  With her on the brief were 
Matthew Merrill Schreck, Frederick T. Kolb, Jon L. Brunen-
kant, Cheryl J. Walker, Charles Joseph McClees, Karol L. 
Newman, and Robert C. Murray.  Lisa D. Harville entered 
an appearance.

     Before:  Silberman, Williams, and Ginsburg, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Silberman, Circuit Judge:  ANR Pipeline Company peti-
tions for review of an order of the Federal Energy Regulato-
ry Commission (FERC) permitting a competitor to build and 
operate a natural gas pipeline.  Insofar as ANR contends 
FERC acted unreasonably in refusing to hold a comparative 
hearing, we deny the petition.  And to the extent petitioner 
raises environmental objections to FERC's decision, we con-
clude that it lacks standing and therefore dismiss the petition.

                                I.

     ANR operates a natural gas pipeline system.  The system 
takes gas from several different platforms, including Ship 
Shoal Block 207 in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of 
Louisiana, where it receives gas from Manta Ray Offshore 
Gathering Company.  It transports this gas to its onshore 
compression station in Patterson, Louisiana.  From there, its 
interstate pipelines deliver the gas directly to customers, 
most of whom are in the Midwest, or to connections with 
other pipeline systems for delivery elsewhere.

     Manta Ray is owned by affiliates of Shell Offshore, Inc., 
Marathon Oil Company, and Leviathan Gas Pipeline Part-
ners, L.P.  Affiliates of those three companies formed the 
Nautilus Pipeline Company, L.L.C., to build a new pipeline 
from Ship Shoal Block 207 to the onshore pipeline grid.  In 
September 1996, Nautilus filed an application with the Com-

mission under s 7(c) of the Natural Gas Act for permission to 
construct and operate 101 miles of 30-inch diameter pipe.  
The proposed line was to run from Block 207 to an onshore 
station in Garden City, Louisiana.

     A month later, ANR petitioned for a certificate under 
s 7(c) for permission to expand the capacity of its existing 
offshore system.  It sought to add about 37 miles of 30-inch 
mainline loop, increasing its capacity to transport gas from 
Block 207 to the mainland.  And then it promptly filed 
motions in both the ANR and the Nautilus dockets to consoli-
date the two proceedings and set the projects for a compara-
tive evidentiary hearing.  It argued that Ashbacker Radio 
Corp. v. FCC, 326 U.S. 327 (1945), required a comparative 
hearing because its application and the Nautilus application 
were mutually exclusive.  Since it contended the capacity of 
the Manta Ray system was not sufficient to supply gas to 
both projects, ANR reasoned that the construction of one 
project would preclude construction of the other.  It invoked 
a 1968 FERC policy statement directing the Commission staff 
to review applications to construct facilities in the Gulf "on 
both a joint and individual company basis" with a view toward 
promoting joint arrangements that would ensure the full 
utilization of those facilities.  See 18 C.F.R. s 2.65.  And it 
raised as further support for a comparative hearing leading to 
a choice of only one pipeline the National Environmental 
Policy Act (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. s 4321, et seq.

     The Commission denied ANR's motion for consolidation 
and a comparative hearing because in its view the two pro-
jects were not necessarily mutually exclusive and the public 
interest could best be served by allowing market forces to 
channel demand.  See Nautilus Pipeline Co., 78 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,325 (1997);  ANR Pipeline Co., 78 F.E.R.C. p 61,326 
(1997) ("ANR I").  It approved the Nautilus application, 
allowing construction to begin.  At the same time it issued a 
preliminary determination that ANR's application was also in 
the public interest, subject to completion of an environmental 
assessment.  ANR requested rehearing of both orders.  A 
few days later it sought a stay of the order allowing Nautilus 
to begin construction.  The Commission denied the stay, see 

Nautilus Pipeline Co., 79 F.E.R.C. p 61,151 (1998), and we 
denied ANR's petition for a writ of prohibition and stay.  The 
Commission ultimately granted ANR's certificate but denied 
its motions for rehearing. See Nautilus Pipeline Co., 85 
F.E.R.C. p 61,200 (1998);  ANR Pipeline Co., 85 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,056 (1998) ("ANR II").  ANR petitioned for review of the 
Commission's rulings in the Nautilus proceeding.1

                               II.

     Petitioner claims that the Commission was obliged under 
the Ashbacker doctrine to hold a comparative hearing before 
it granted the Nautilus certificate.  But Ashbacker, which 
involved a grant of a broadcast license by the FCC, applies 
only if the certificates are, in fact, mutually exclusive.  In that 
case both applications could not have been granted because 
both petitioning companies could not broadcast on the same 
frequency (two men on second base).  And "where two bona 
fide applications are mutually exclusive the grant of one 
without a hearing to both deprives the loser of the opportuni-
ty which Congress chose to give him."  Ashbacker, 326 U.S. 
at 333.

     Petitioner contends that Ashbacker is not limited to cases 
of physical exclusivity but extends to situations in which 
economic or other factors preclude the granting of both 
licenses.  The Commission does not dispute this, at least 
directly.  Instead, it responds that the applications of ANR 
and Nautilus were not mutually exclusive;  indeed both were 
granted.  ANR's substantive objection then is that the Com-
mission unreasonably concluded that the projects were not 
mutually exclusive.

     The pipelines do run roughly parallel.  But "[m]any exist-
ing pipelines share similar routes while serving different 
production areas and linking different fields."  ANR I, 78 
F.E.R.C. at 62,405.  Here FERC found that the proposals 
were not necessarily "dependent upon transporting the same 
reserves or upon serving the same customers."  Id.  While 

__________
     1 Nautilus has completed its pipeline--which would raise an inter-
esting remedial question if we agreed with ANR.

the Commission recognized that Manta Ray could not deliver 
enough gas to fill both the Nautilus pipeline and the ANR 
expansion, it noted that ANR's system "accesses an area of 
the OCS [Outer Continental Shelf] where ... large new gas 
reserves are being developed."  ANR II, 85 F.E.R.C. at 
61,177.  ANR is hardly in a position to dispute this finding, 
for its own application asserted that "there are currently 
under development significant new gas reserves" that will 
lead to a "substantial increase in offshore production." Peti-
tioner seems to argue that the Commission was not entitled 
to look down the road, to consider further development in its 
certificate proceeding.  But that contention runs afoul of the 
specific language of s 7(e) of the Natural Gas Act which 
directs FERC to approve a project when it "is or will be 
required by the present or future public convenience and 
necessity."  15 U.S.C. s 717f(e) (emphasis added).

     The Commission recognized in issuing ANR's certificate as 
well that "if the shippers of the additional reserves coming on 
line find that ANR's project is attractive from an economic 
standpoint, they will subscribe to ANR's project and assure 
its ultimate success." ANR II, 85 F.E.R.C. at 61,177.  It 
imposed an at-risk condition on ANR's certificate (as it had 
on Nautilus's) so that the pipelines' customers would not bear 
any of the risk associated with either project.  This approach 
left ANR "free to compete with Nautilus and other projects 
for markets and shippers," allowing ANR to "consider the 
likelihood that market forces will respond to the need for 
upstream feeder capacity that can move the additional gas 
reserves being developed" in deciding whether to proceed 
with construction.  Id.  Presumably, that leaves ANR in the 
position of building its pipeline extension only when sufficient 
demand justifies it, or when it can effectively wean existing 
customers away from Nautilus.

     To be sure, this leaves ANR at something of a disadvan-
tage, for the Nautilus pipeline is already in place and serving 
customers, because Nautilus filed its application first.  So it 
might be thought that the short-term difficulty of competing 
with an incumbent pipeline makes the two pipelines in some 
sense exclusive.  But FERC seems at least implicitly to have 

concluded that this kind of economic disadvantage is different 
from a situation in which economic factors make it possible to 
grant only one license, so that Ashbacker does not apply here.  
We think its judgment was reasonable.

     ANR protests the Commission's reliance on market 
forces--even in this limited fashion--is inconsistent with the 
premise of the Natural Gas Act.  It is up to the Commission, 
not the market, to determine what is in the public interest.  
We do not understand, however, how the Commission could 
determine the public interest without taking into account 
future demand which is what the Commission means by 
"market forces," nor do we think that the general language of 
s 7(e) precludes FERC from encouraging competition.

     It may well be that petitioner's more basic concern is that 
competition will not really be free in this setting because 
Nautilus is affiliated with Manta Ray.  "Due to the vertically 
integrated nature of the Nautilus project," it argues, "it 
cannot be assumed that the owner-shippers of Nautilus will 
choose the least cost transportation alternative."  But Manta 
Ray has the same incentive to minimize its shipping cost as 
any other producer in the competitive market for natural gas 
(petitioner does not claim that the downstream market is not 
competitive).  Its owners would have no reason to build the 
Nautilus pipeline if it would be cheaper for them to use 
ANR's.  There is nothing inherently suspicious about the 
vertical integration of Nautilus and Manta Ray.  Cf. Jack 
Walters & Sons Corp. v. Morton Building, Inc., 737 F.2d 698, 
710-11 (7th Cir. 1984).

     Even if FERC's decision is in conformity with its statutory 
authority, ANR contends that 18 C.F.R. s 2.65 required 
FERC to hold a comparative hearing.  That provision states, 
it will be recalled, that the Commission directs its staff to 
review applications for construction of pipelines in the Louisi-
ana offshore area "on both a joint and individual company 
basis with a view toward the development of pipeline compa-
ny gas exchange procedures that will minimize cross-hauls 
and toward the promotion of joint use arrangements that will 
assure the early full utilization of large capacity facilities in 
the Outer Continental Shelf area."  It is argued that this 

section imposes "legal requirements that are designed to 
foster the maximum use of these high-cost facilities," and that 
the Commission unlawfully disregarded its own regulation.

     The difficulty with this argument is that s 2.65 is a policy 
statement, not a regulation.  Tellingly, the section begins:  "It 
will be the general policy of the Commission...."  It is not a 
rule that is binding on FERC or the public--nor could it be, 
for it was promulgated without notice and comment.  See 
Order No. 363, 39 F.P.C. 925, 926 (1968) ("The statement 
issued herein concerns a matter of general policy which does 
not require notice or hearing" under the APA.).  A policy 
statement does not become a regulation simply because an 
agency chooses to publish it in the Code of Federal Regula-
tions.

     An agency may not of course depart from prior policy 
without explanation.  But FERC explained how changed 
circumstances justified a new policy.  It pointed out that the 
"structure of the natural gas industry as well as the Commis-
sion's regulatory approach have undergone significant 
changes" since s 2.65 was promulgated.  ANR II, 85 
F.E.R.C. at 61,176.  More specifically, it explained that new 
technology has made it possible to produce gas from very 
deep waters, giving access to reserves of gas that are much 
larger than those available in the 1960s.  For that reason, 
"[t]he challenge facing today's offshore industry is in estab-
lishing an infrastructure capable of transporting new OCS 
production to diverse onshore markets rather than allocating 
limited production among existing pipelines."  ANR I, 78 
F.E.R.C. at 62,406.  It was entirely appropriate for the 
Commission to change its regulatory approach in response to 
technological changes in the industry.2

                               III.

     ANR's remaining argument is that the Commission violated 
NEPA by failing to conduct a comparative hearing.  NEPA 

__________
     2 In light of the extensive changes in FERC's regulatory ap-
proach since 1968, we think that it might be appropriate for the 
Commission to amend s 2.65 to reflect its new policy.

requires agencies to evaluate the environmental impact of a 
project as compared to its alternatives.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 4332(2)(C)(iii).  ANR contends that its project is a more 
environmentally friendly alternative to that of Nautilus, and 
one pipeline is environmentally better than two, so FERC 
should have considered the two pipelines together before 
approving either.  Although neither FERC nor the interve-
nor has questioned ANR's standing to raise this claim, we are 
obliged to do so sua sponte.  See, e.g., De Jesus Ramirez v. 
Reich, 156 F.3d 1273, 1276 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

     The jurisdictional section of the Natural Gas Act provides 
that "[a]ny party ... aggrieved by an order issued by the 
Commission" may petition for review.  15 U.S.C. s 717(b).  
To be "aggrieved," a party must assert an interest that is 
arguably within the zone of interests intended to be protected 
by the statute on which it relies.  See Association of Data 
Processing Serv. Orgs. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150 (1970).  NEPA, 
of course, is a statute aimed at the protection of the environ-
ment.  But ANR has not alleged that it will suffer any 
environmental injury as a result of the Commission's action.  
Indeed, it has not alleged that it has any interest in the 
environment at all.  Its only concern is with suppressing 
competition from Nautilus, and that economic interest is not 
within the zone of interests protected by NEPA.  See Nevada 
Land Action Ass'n v. United States Forest Serv., 8 F.3d 713, 
716 (9th Cir. 1993);  cf. Competitive Enterprise Inst. v. 
NHTSA, 901 F.2d 107, 123-24 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (informational 
injury confers standing under NEPA only when the informa-
tion sought relates to environmental interests).  We therefore 
conclude that ANR lacks prudential standing to bring a 
NEPA challenge to the Commission's action.

                            *  *  *  *

     The petition for review is denied in part and dismissed in 
part.

                                                                       So ordered.

                                         