                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 17, 2002    Decided March 15, 2002 

                           No. 00-1544

            Computer Associates International, Inc., 
                   Petitioner/Cross-Respondent

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                   Respondent/Cross-Petitioner

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     David Bennet Ross argued the cause for the petitioner.  
Lori M. Meyers and Ronald A. Lindsay were on brief.

     Jill A. Griffin, Attorney, National Labor Relations Board, 
argued the cause for the respondent.  Arthur F. Rosenfeld, 
General Counsel, John H. Ferguson, Associate General Coun-
sel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, 
and Frederick C. Havard, Attorney, National Labor Relations 

Board, were on brief.  Jeffrey L. Horowitz, Attorney, Nation-
al Labor Relations Board, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Computer As-
sociates International, Inc. (CA) seeks review of a National 
Labor Relations Board (NLRB or Board) determination that 
CA violated section 8(a)(1) and (3) of the National Labor 
Relations Act (Act), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (a)(3), by terminat-
ing a subcontract with Cushman & Wakefield of Long Island 
(Cushman) to provide engineers at CA's Islandia, New York 
facility and thereby discharging the engineers in retaliation 
for their union activities.  See Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc, 32 
N.L.R.B. No. 108, 2000 WL 1699038 (Oct. 31, 2000).  Crucial 
to the Board's holding was its finding that CA was a "joint 
employer" of the engineers.  Because the engineers' union, 
Local 30 of the International Union of Operating Engineers 
(Union), had stipulated that Cushman was its sole employer 
and the Board cited no changed circumstances after the 
stipulation to support its finding that CA was a joint employ-
er, we conclude the Board's joint employer finding is not 
supported by substantial evidence and we therefore grant 
CA's petition for review.  We also grant the Board's cross-
application insofar as it seeks to enforce the Board's separate 
unchallenged finding that CA violated section 8(a)(1) of the 
Act by using interrogations, threats and promises to discour-
age the engineers' union activities.1

__________
     1 CA's petition for review challenges only the Board's Supplemen-
tal Decision and Order, dated October 31, 2000, which addressed 
only the section 8(a)(1) and (3) violation based on CA's termination 
of the subcontract.  The Board's cross-application, however, also 
seeks enforcement of the Board's initial August 19, 1997 Decision 
and Order in which it found in addition that CA violated section 
8(a)(1) through anti-union interrogation, threats and promises.  Be-
cause CA has not contested this finding, we conclude the Board's 
cross-application should be granted.

                                I.

     In September 1991 CA, which designs, develops and mar-
kets computer software, entered into a management contract 
with Cushman, a real estate management company, to pro-
vide operating engineers to work at the soon-to-be-completed 
Islandia facility.  The contract was for an initial 18-month 
term and month to month thereafter.  Cushman staffed the 
facility with engineers either from other Cushman sites or 
referred by the Union's hiring hall.

     The Union filed a petition to represent the engineers on 
May 11, 1992 identifying CA as the employer.  An amended 
petition was filed in late May identifying CA and Cushman as 
"Co-employers."  Shortly thereafter, however, the Union en-
tered a stipulated election agreement identifying a single 
employer:  "Cushman & Wakefield of Long Island."  JA 364;  
see also Computer Assocs. Int'l, 324 N.L.R.B. 285, 288 (1997) 
(ALJ finding that "the Union ... entered into a stipulated 
election with Cushman as a single employer");  JA 297 (testi-
mony of Cushman's manager that "[t]he parties agreed to a 
stipulation that listed Cushman & Wakefield as the sole 
employer and allowed them to have an election").  The Union 
won the election on a 5-0 vote and on July 1, 1992 the Board 
issued a Certification of Representative certifying Cushman 
as the employer.

     On January 14, 1993 the Union filed a petition to represent 
a group of workers directly employed by CA at the Islandia 
facility.  CA opposed the Union's organization efforts and on 
March 25, 1993 the CA employees voted unanimously against 
the Union.  On April 2, 1993 CA's on-site manager assembled 
the engineers, who had supported the unsuccessful effort to 
unionize the CA employees, and informed them the Cushman 
contract was terminated.

     On May 3, 1993 the Union filed an unfair labor practice 
charge with the NLRB and on June 30, 1993 the Board's 
General Counsel issued a complaint charging CA with violat-
ing the Act by (1) using interrogations, threats and promises 
to discourage the engineers' union activities and (2) discharg-
ing the engineers in retaliation for their union activities, on 

the theory that CA was, with Cushman, the engineers' joint 
employer.

     On March 16, 1996, after a hearing, the Administrative Law 
Judge (ALJ) issued a decision finding that CA (1) violated 
section 8(a)(1) by its interrogations, threats and promises and 
(2) violated section 8(a)(1) and (3) by discharging the engi-
neers.  See Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc., 324 N.L.R.B. at 287-
95.  As to the second violation, however, the ALJ did not rely 
on the General Counsel's theory that CA was a joint employer 
that unlawfully discharged the engineers.  To the contrary, 
the ALJ stated that the fact that the Union entered into a 
stipulated election agreement with Cushman as a single em-
ployer meant that "the General Counsel's contention that 
such joint-employer relationship exists is questionable."  
Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc., 324 N.L.R.B. at 288.  Instead, 
relying on the NLRB's decision in Esmark, Inc., 315 
N.L.R.B. 763 (1994) (finding unfair labor practice by contract-
ing company that coerced subcontractor into discharging 
employees for union activity), the ALJ based the violation on 
the fact that CA as contractor terminated the subcontract 
based on anti-union animus and thereby caused the engineers 
to lose their jobs at CA's Islandia facility.

     In a decision issued August 19, 1997 the Board upheld the 
first violation but rejected the second, concluding the ALJ 
misapplied Esmark, and remanded for a determination 
whether CA was, as the General Counsel contended, a "joint 
employer."  Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc., 324 N.L.R.B. at 
285-87.

     On remand, in a supplemental decision dated June 4, 1998, 
the ALJ determined CA was a joint employer and therefore 
liable for retaliatory discharge.  See Computer Assocs. Int'l, 
Inc., 332 N.L.R.B. No. 108, slip op. at 2-6.  His recommended 
order required CA to offer to reinstate its subcontract with 
Cushman and to make the engineers whole.  The decision did 
not explain why the ALJ changed his view that the Union's 
stipulation cast doubt on the existence of a joint-employer 
relationship.

     In its Supplemental Decision and Order of October 31, 2000 
the Board "decided to affirm the judge's rulings, findings, and 
conclusions and to adopt the judge's recommended Order, as 
modified."  332 N.L.R.B. No. 108, slip op. at 1 (footnotes 
omitted).  The Board modified the ALJ's order to require 
CA, in the event Cushman declined to reinstate the subcon-
tract, to hire the engineers itself.

     CA petitioned for review of the Board's finding in the 
Supplemental Decision that CA, in its capacity as joint em-
ployer, violated section 8(a)(1) and (3) by terminating the 
subcontract.  CA also sought review of the ordered remedy.  
The NLRB cross-applied for enforcement.

                               II.

     CA first, and foremost, challenges the Board's conclusion 
that CA was a joint employer of the engineers, arguing inter 
alia that the Union's May 1992 stipulation that Cushman was 
the sole employer decides the issue.  We agree.

     The Board's regulations require that "[a] petition for certi-
fication, when filed by an employee or group of employees or 
an individual or labor organization acting in their behalf, shall 
contain the following:  ... The name of the employer." 29 
C.F.R. s 102.61(a)(1).  When, as here, the parties stipulate to 
the employer, the stipulation is binding on the parties absent 
a showing of "changed or unusual circumstances entitling [a 
party] to withdraw its stipulation."  Micro Pac. Dev.  Inc. v. 
NLRB, 178 F.3d 1325, 1335 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (citing NLRB v. 
Unifemme, Inc., 570 F.2d 230 (8th Cir. 1978);  Sunnyvale 
Med. Clinic, 241 N.L.R.B. 1156 (1979);  NLRB v. Local 
Union No. 74, Int'l Ass'n of Marble, Slate & Stone Polishers, 
471 F.2d 43, 45-46 (7th Cir. 1973));  see also Dynair Servs., 
Inc., 314 N.L.R.B. 161, 162 (1994) ("With regard to the 
Employer's motion to withdraw from the Stipulated Election 
Agreement, it is well established that the Board will allow a 
party to withdraw from an Election Agreement only on a 
showing of unusual circumstances or by agreement of all the 
parties.") (citing Sunnyvale).  The Union offered no changed 
circumstances below and the Board found none.  Accordingly, 

the Board had no ground to deviate from the Union's stipula-
tion of Cushman as the sole employer.

     Relying on Central Transport, Inc. v. NLRB, 997 F.2d 
1180, 1184-88 (7th Cir. 1993),2 the Board now argues that 
there is a distinction between refusals to bargain and non-
bargaining violations of the Act.  Regarding the latter it 
maintains that CA can be a "joint employer in fact," notwith-
standing the contrary stipulation and no changed circum-
stances.  This was not, however, the theory on which the 
Board or the ALJ relied below and hence cannot be relied 
upon here.  See SEC v. Chenery Corp., 318 U.S. 80 (1943).  
Both the Board and the ALJ concluded that CA was a joint 
employer--period.  They offered no explanation of how that 
could be so in light of the undisputed, unambiguous stipula-
tion of employer;  indeed, neither the Board nor the ALJ (in 
his second decision) mentioned the stipulation at all.

     Because the Board neither identified changed circum-
stances to support its finding that CA was a joint employer in 
the face of a stipulation and certification establishing CA was 
not nor offered an alternative theory to overcome the pre-
sumptive validity of the designation of employer in the Certi-
fication of Representative, the Board's finding of the section 
8(a)(1) and (3) violation based on joint employer status cannot 
stand.3  Accordingly, the petition for review is granted and 

__________
     2 In Central Transport the court rejected the Board's finding that 
Central had a joint employer duty to bargain with employees it 
leased from Big John Inc. because the union's representation 
petition and the Board's representation certification named only Big 
John Inc. as the employer.  997 F.2d at 1184-88.  The court 
nevertheless upheld the finding that Central violated the Act by 
threatening and interrogating employees, stating, summarily, that 
"Central's lack of formal status as a joint employer does not excuse 
the threats to, and interrogations of its employees, nor the retaliato-
ry layoffs."  Id. at 1189.  Central is distinguishable because the 
company there stipulated to joint employer status.  See Central 
Transport, Inc. 306 N.L.R.B. 306, 306 (1992);  997 F.2d at 1186.

     3 In light of this holding we need not address CA's other objec-
tions to the finding of violation or to the remedy imposed therefor.

the cross-application for enforcement is denied as to the 
Board's Supplemental Decision and Order.  The cross-
application for enforcement is granted as to the Board's 
August 19, 1997 Decision and Order in which it concluded 
that CA violated section 8(a)(1) by its anti-union interroga-
tions, threats and promises.

                                   So ordered.

                                                          