                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 4, 2001   Decided January 18, 2002 

                           No. 00-1371

       National Rural Electric Cooperative Association and 
               American Public Power Association, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

               Securities and Exchange Commission, 
                            Respondent

            American Electric Power Company, Inc. and 
                         Paul S. Davis, 
                           Intervenors

             Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Securities and Exchange Commission

     Scott Hempling argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
him on the briefs was David S. Lapp.  Richard B. Geltman 
entered an appearance.

     John W. Avery, Special Counsel, Securities & Exchange 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief was Eric Summergrad, Deputy Solicitor.

     J. A. Bouknight Jr. argued the cause for intervenor.  With 
him on the brief were Samuel T. Perkins, Cynthia L. Taub 
and Niki Kuckes.  Douglas G. Green entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.  
Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The Securities and Exchange Com-
mission authorized American Electric Power Company, which 
provides electricity services in a number of eastern and 
midwestern states, to acquire a company that provides elec-
tricity services in several distant southern and southwestern 
states. Challenging the Commission's decision, two electric 
utility associations argue that the post-acquisition company 
will violate section 10 of the Public Utility Holding Company 
Act, 15 U.S.C. s 79j, which requires that any registered 
public-utility holding company comprise a "single integrated 
... system" that is "physically interconnected or capable of 
physical interconnection" and "confined in its operations to a 
single area or region," id. ss 79j(c)(1);  79k(b)(1);  
79b(a)(29)(A).  Because the Commission failed to explain its 
conclusions regarding the interconnection requirement, and 
because it failed to justify its finding that the proposed 
acquisition will satisfy the single-area-or-region requirement, 
we vacate the Commission's order and remand for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                I.

     Congress passed the Public Utility Holding Company Act 
of 1935, 15 U.S.C. ss 79a et seq. ("PUHCA"), to "protect 
consumers and investors from abuses associated with [inter-
state] public utility holding companies," Envtl. Action, Inc. v. 
SEC, 895 F.2d 1255, 1258 (9th Cir. 1990).  Many of these 
companies had developed highly pyramidal structures with a 
few not always responsible shareholders of the top holding 
company exercising excessive control over the underlying 

operating companies.  See Am. Power & Light Co. v. SEC, 
329 U.S. 90, 100-03 (1946).  To ensure that "the growth and 
extension of holding companies" bear some "relation to econo-
my of management and operation or ... integration and 
coordination of related operating properties," 15 U.S.C. 
s 79a(b)(4), the Act requires most interstate holding compa-
nies to register with the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion, id. s 79e, and charges the Commission with reviewing 
all transactions in which a registered holding company pro-
poses to acquire securities or utility assets of another holding 
or public-utility company, id. s 79j.

     Although PUHCA states that the Commission "shall ap-
prove" most proposed acquisitions, id. s 79j(b), it details 
several conditions barring approval, two of which are relevant 
here.  First, the Act prohibits approval of an acquisition if the 
Commission finds that the resulting holding company will no 
longer constitute a single "integrated public-utility system," 
id. ss 79j(c)(1);  79k(b)(1), defined elsewhere as--

     [A] system ... whose utility assets, whether owned by 
     one or more electric utility companies, are physically 
     interconnected or capable of physical interconnection and 
     which under normal conditions may be economically op-
     erated as a single interconnected and coordinated system 
     confined in its operations to a single area or region, in 
     one or more States, not so large as to impair (considering 
     the state of the art and the area or region affected) the 
     advantages of localized management, efficient operation, 
     and the effectiveness of regulation.
     
Id. s 79b(a)(29)(A).  The Commission has broken this lan-
guage down into four separate prerequisites for approval of a 
proposed acquisition:  (1) The post-acquisition public-utility 
system's assets must be "physically interconnected or capable 
of physical interconnection" (the interconnection require-
ment);  (2) the assets must be capable of economic operation 
"as a single interconnected and coordinated system" (the 
coordination requirement);  (3) the system itself must be 
confined to a "single area or region" (the region require-

ment);  and (4) the system "must not be so large as to impair 
... the advantages of localized management, efficient opera-
tion, and the effectiveness of regulation" (the localization 
requirement).  Electric Energy, Inc., PUHCA Release No. 
13871, 38 S.E.C. 658, 668 (Nov. 28, 1958).  The second 
relevant PUHCA condition prohibits the Commission from 
approving an acquisition unless the Agency finds that the 
proposed transaction will "serve the public interest by tend-
ing towards the economical and efficient development of an 
integrated public-utility system."  15 U.S.C. s 79j(c)(2).  To 
win Commission approval, then, a proposed acquisition must 
not only meet the four single-integrated-system require-
ments, but do so in a way that produces net " 'efficiencies and 
economies.' "  Wisconsin's Envtl. Decade, Inc. v. SEC, 882 
F.2d 523, 528 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (quoting Union Elec. Co., 
PUHCA Release No. 18368, 45 S.E.C. 489, 494 (Apr. 10, 
1974)).

     The proposed acquisition at issue here will merge Central 
and South West Corporation's ("CSW") four wholly-owned 
operating subsidiaries, which currently supply power to parts 
of Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas, with Interve-
nor American Electric Power Company's ("AEP") wholly-
owned electric generating company and seven wholly-owned 
electric operating utilities, which supply power to parts of 
Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, Tennessee, Virginia, and 
West Virginia.  Under the terms of the agreement, a newly-
formed AEP subsidiary will merge with and into CSW.  CSW 
will survive the merger, but it and most of its subsidiaries will 
become subsidiaries of the post-acquisition company--so-
called "New AEP."  With more than thirty-seven thousand 
megawatts of generating capacity, New AEP will serve close 
to five million customers in eleven states.

     AEP and CSW's systems are neither contiguous nor physi-
cally interconnected--indeed, at their closest point, they are 
separated by hundreds of miles.  See Appendix A;  see also 
AEP, Service Territories, at http://www.csw.com/about/ 
territory.htm (last visited Nov. 8, 2001).  The companies 
propose to interconnect their systems by means of a 250-
megawatt, unidirectional transmission service contract with 

Ameren Corporation.  This "contract path" will enable New 
AEP's western zone (the current CSW system) to make use 
of some surplus generating capacity--that is, generating ca-
pacity over and above firm load obligations--in the eastern 
zone (the current AEP system).  The contract extends for 
four years (from June 1, 1999 to May 31, 2003), after which 
New AEP may renew, though potentially at greater cost.  
See Resp't's Br. at 35.  AEP and CSW apparently expect that 
there will be fewer "opportunit[ies] to transfer energy eco-
nomically" from west to east than from east to west, but when 
and if such opportunities arise, New AEP proposes to make 
use of its rights under pre-existing transmission service 
agreements.  Am. Elec. Power Co., Inc. & Central S. W. 
Corp., PUHCA Release Nos. 35-27186, 70-9381, 2000 SEC 
LEXIS 1227, at *61 n.79, *65-66 (June 14, 2000) ["Approval 
Order"].

     The proposed acquisition requires the approval of several 
regulatory agencies in addition to the Securities and Ex-
change Commission.  The Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission granted conditional approval in March 2000 provided 
that AEP and CSW reduce the merger's potential anticom-
petitive effects by divesting 550 megawatts of generating 
capacity and "limit[ing] their ability to contract for firm 
transmission capacity from [east to west] to 250" megawatts.  
Am. Elec. Power Co., Cent. & S. W. Corp., Docket Nos. 
EC98-40-000, ER98-2770-000, ER98-2786-000, 90 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,242, 61776 (2000) (reversing in part, affirming in part, 
vacating in part, and modifying FERC's initial decision);  see 
also Wabash Valley Power Ass'n v. FERC, 268 F.3d 1105 
(D.C. Cir. 2001) (denying petition for review).  The public 
utility commissions of the affected states also considered the 
proposed merger, and most explicitly approved side agree-
ments among AEP, CSW, and third parties, all drafted to 
ensure that ratepayers realize benefits from the transaction.  
Approval Order, 2000 SEC LEXIS 1227, at *23-24 & n.28.

     On June 14, 2000, the Securities and Exchange Commission 
added its voice to the chorus approving the proposed acquisi-
tion.  Id. at *113.  Dismissing concerns expressed by four 
intervenors--a coalition of utility stakeholders and a group of 

consumer counselors, as well as Petitioners in this case, the 
American Public Power Association and the National Rural 
Electric Cooperative Association--the Commission found that 
the merger satisfies PUHCA's requirements.  Id. at *44-109.  
Specifically, the Commission concluded that the contract path, 
though both temporary and unidirectional, "is adequate to ... 
satisfy the interconnection requirement" because it will per-
mit "the economic transfer of energy from one zone of the 
New AEP System ... to another," generating "net-fuel relat-
ed savings of approximately $98 million over the ten-year 
period following the merger."  Id. at *50-51.  Moreover, the 
Commission observed, AEP has "committed" either "to renew 
the [c]ontract [p]ath" or to find another way to satisfy the 
interconnection requirement after 2003.  Id. at *48.

     With respect to the statute's coordination requirement, the 
Commission conceded that New AEP's structure will "differ 
in some respects from the traditional ... utility model," in 
which generating capacity is centrally pooled and dis-
patched--presumably because New AEP's east and west 
zones will continue to satisfy their respective power demands 
separately, transferring power from east to west only when 
"one [z]one has surplus capacity available for sale and the 
other has insufficient capacity."  Id. at *54-55, 61.  The 
Commission was unconcerned by this lack of centralization, 
however, because it viewed "unbundling of generation and 
transmission" to be "the direct result of [government] efforts 
to promote a competitive energy market--a goal consistent 
with" PUHCA's purpose of ensuring that the growth of 
holding companies fosters economy of management and oper-
ation.  Id. at *75.

     The Commission next addressed PUHCA's region require-
ment.  Finding that recent technological advances have "re-
duced the relative importance of ... geographical limitations" 
on utility systems, the Commission declined to read this third 
requirement as imposing any independent conditions on the 
proposed merger.  Id. at *83.  Rather, the Commission found 
that the merger satisfies PUHCA's other requirements--
including interconnection and coordination (discussed above) 
and localization (discussed below)--and then concluded, "[i]n 

view of these considerations, ... the New AEP System will 
operate in a 'single area or region.' "  Id. at *85.

     Turning to the fourth single-integrated-system require-
ment, localization, the Commission observed that "[v]arious 
state regulators have ... demonstrated that they can effec-
tively regulate the New AEP System," in that they have 
already imposed "an extensive list of service quality stan-
dards on the New AEP System Operating Companies that 
operate within their states."  Id. at *94.  Additionally, the 
Commission indicated that most affected states have imposed 
conditions on the proposed merger, under which the states 
retain the ability to review the activities of New AEP and its 
affiliates and subsidiaries.  Id. at *94-95.  Noting that it has 
historically "found that effectiveness of state regulation is not 
impaired where state regulators have the same jurisdiction 
before and after a merger," id. at *95 (citing Conectiv, Inc., 
PUHCA Release Nos. 35-26832, 70-9069, 60 S.E.C. Docket 
1260 (CCH) (Feb. 25, 1998)), and also citing its conclusion 
(discussed below) that the AEP-CSW merger will generate 
efficiencies, id. at *99, the Commission concluded that New 
AEP will not be "so large as to impair ... the advantages of 
localized management, efficient operation, and the effective-
ness of regulation," PUHCA, 15 U.S.C. s 79b(a)(29)(A).

     Finally, the Commission considered PUHCA's requirement 
that any "acquisition of securities or utility assets of a public 
utility or holding company" must itself tend "towards the 
economical and efficient development of an integrated public-
utility system."  Id. s 79j(c)(2).  Referring to AEP and 
CSW's projection that the merger will save "almost $2 billion 
of net non-fuel cost[s]" and "approximately $98 million" of 
fuel-related costs over the first ten years, the Commission 
indicated that it had "reviewed the assumptions and method-
ologies" underlying the projection and found them "reason-
able and consistent with ... precedent."  Accordingly, the 
Commission determined that the merger will produce suffi-
cient "economies and efficiencies" to pass muster under 

PUHCA.  Approval Order, 2000 SEC LEXIS 1227, at *100-
04.

                               II.

     Reiterating many of the substantive arguments they raised 
during the Commission's review process, Petitioners claim 
that the Commission erred in finding that the proposed 
acquisition satisfies PUHCA's interconnection and region re-
quirements and in accepting AEP and CSW's projections 
regarding the cost savings that will result from the merger.  
Petitioners also argue that the Commission's "decision not to 
hold evidentiary hearings as part of its review of the applica-
tion for approval of the acquisition was arbitrary and capri-
cious because the acquisition raised factual issues substantial-
ly in dispute."  Pet'rs' Br. at 2.  In considering these claims, 
we follow the familiar rules of administrative review, accept-
ing the Commission's findings of fact as long as they are 
supported by "substantial evidence," Steadman v. SEC, 450 
U.S. 91, 97 n.12 (1981) ("Commission findings of fact are 
conclusive for a reviewing court if supported by substantial 
evidence." (internal citations omitted)), and affirming its con-
clusions of law unless they are "arbitrary, capricious, an 
abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law," 
5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).  See, e.g., Wonsover v. SEC, 205 F.3d 
408, 412 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (applying this standard).

                   Interconnection Requirement

     Petitioners have two principal concerns regarding the Com-
mission's application of the statute's interconnection require-
ment:  first, that the companies' "temporary, one-way trans-
mission contract" is "too small and too tentative" to satisfy 
PUHCA, and second, that the Approval Order departed from 
Commission precedent without adequate explanation.  Pet'rs' 
Br. at 23-24, 33-35.  In support of their first point, Petition-
ers contend that AEP and CSW's contract with Ameren 
permits the transfer of only a "[t]oken [a]mount" of power, in 
that the 250-megawatt contract path "represents just 0.68 
percent" of New AEP's combined 37,000 megawatts of gener-
ating capacity.  Id. at 24-25.  Moreover, they argue that the 
unidirectional contract path cannot satisfy PUHCA because 
the Act requires interconnection--a term that, to Petitioners, 

implies two-way transfers of power.  Petitioners also point 
out that AEP and CSW have never said how they plan to 
satisfy the interconnection requirement after 2003.  The com-
panies' promise to devise an alternative method of intercon-
necting their systems if they opt not to renew the contract 
path is, according to Petitioners, inadequate because " 'sepa-
rate properties not interconnected must be capable of physi-
cal interconnection ... at the time the Commission considers 
the matter and not at some indefinite future time.' "  Id. at 27 
(quoting Gen. Pub. Utils. Corp., PUHCA Release No. 10982, 
32 S.E.C. 807, 825 (Dec. 28, 1951)).  Finally, Petitioners 
invoke our decision in Madison Gas & Elec. v. SEC, 183 F.3d 
1337, 1340 (D.C. Cir. 1999), for the proposition that a trans-
mission contract cannot, in and of itself, support a finding 
that utility assets are "physically interconnected or capable of 
physical interconnection," PUHCA, 15 U.S.C. s 79b(a)(29)(A).

     We are unpersuaded by Petitioners' characterization of the 
contract path as too "small" and "tentative."  Although we 
recognize that 250 megawatts represents a small percentage 
of New AEP's total generating capacity, Petitioners point to 
no statutory language, legislative history, or case law requir-
ing that physically separated zones of a power system be 
interconnected by lines capable of transmitting any specific 
percentage of the power generated in each zone.  Moreover, 
the Commission said it could order New AEP to divest one of 
the systems if the company fails to devise a satisfactory 
method of integrating its utilities after the contract with 
Ameren expires.  Resp't's Br. at 35-36.

     Nor are we swayed by Petitioners' reference to Madison 
Gas.  All we said there was that a power system's "showing 
of a current transmission line contract and of a plan to build 
two tie-lines ... before the end of the contract term" ade-
quately supported the Commission's finding that the system's 
two zones were "capable of physical interconnection."  Madi-
son Gas, 168 F.3d at 1340 (internal citations omitted).  This 
in no way implies that the transmission line contract would be 
insufficient, in and of itself, to satisfy PUHCA.  On the 
contrary, just before approving the Commission's intercon-
nection finding we observed that "[t]he SEC has reasonably 

construed [the interconnection] requirement to be satisfied in 
cases past on the basis of contractual rights to use a third-
party's transmission lines or if physical interconnection is 
contemplated or ... possible within the reasonably near 
future."  Id. (internal citations omitted) (emphasis added).  
Thus, nothing in Madison Gas precludes a finding that AEP 
and CSW's contract with Ameren meets PUHCA's intercon-
nection requirement.

     We are, however, puzzled by the Commission's acceptance 
of a unidirectional contract path to "interconnect" AEP and 
CSW.  Webster's Dictionary defines "interconnection" as 
"connection between two or more:  mutual connection"--a 
definition that seems, on its face, to require two-way transfers 
of power.  Webster's Third New International Dictionary 
1177 (1993) (emphasis added).  In addition, PUHCA itself 
requires that the interconnected system be one "which under 
normal conditions may be economically operated as a single 
interconnected and coordinated" whole.  15 U.S.C. 
s 79b(a)(29)(A).  Absent some explanation from the Commis-
sion, we cannot understand how a system restricted to unidi-
rectional flow of power from one half to the other can be 
operated in such a manner.

     Moreover, we agree with Petitioners that the Commission 
failed to follow its own prior reasoning regarding interconnec-
tion of distant utilities.  Petitioners point to several prior 
orders in which the Commission expressly indicated that 
"contract rights cannot be relied upon to integrate two dis-
tant utilities."  WPL Holdings, Inc., PUHCA Release No. 35-
26856, 53 S.E.C. 501, 517 n.39 (Apr. 14, 1998) (emphasis 
added) (concluding that "the distances at issue in this mat-
ter"--between cities in Iowa and Wisconsin--are "within the 
parameters of the previous decisions"), aff'd, Madison Gas & 
Elec., 183 F.3d 1337;  see also UNITIL Corp., PUHCA 
Release No. 35-25524, 50 S.E.C. 961, 967 n.30 (Apr. 24, 1992) 
("[C]ontract rights cannot be relied upon to integrate two 
distant utilities.");  Northeast Utils., PUHCA Release Nos. 
35-25221, 70-7695, 50 S.E.C. 427, 449 n.75 (Dec. 21, 1990) 
(indicating that "the use of a third party cannot be relied 
upon to integrate two distant utilities").  Although these 

statements were dicta, Petitioners argue that they express a 
clear policy from which the Commission departed in approv-
ing the AEP-CSW merger.  We agree.

     As Petitioners point out, the Commission has clearly indi-
cated that a contract path cannot alone integrate distant 
utilities.  We think those statements sufficiently explicit to 
obligate the Commission to provide some rationale for its 
current contrary view.  "[A]n agency changing its course 
must supply a reasoned analysis indicating that prior policies 
and standards are being deliberately changed, not casually 
ignored."  Greater Boston Tel. Corp. v. FCC, 444 F.2d 841, 
852 (D.C. Cir. 1970).  This is particularly true here, since the 
few cases in which the Commission has accepted transmission 
contracts as evidence of interconnection, unlike this case, 
have involved contracts for transmission of large amounts of 
power in both directions between relatively closely situated 
utility assets.  E.g., Conectiv, Inc., 66 S.E.C. Docket at 1266 
(stating that "the physical interconnection requirement of the 
Act can be satisfied on the basis of contractual rights to use 
third parties' transmission lines, when the merging companies 
are members of a tight power pool"--that is, a group of 
utilities that coordinate their planning and operation to im-
prove economy and reliability); UNITIL Corp., 50 S.E.C. at 
966 (deciding that contract rights were adequate to intercon-
nect utilities, both because the utilities were part of a tight 
power pool, and because they were located in New England, a 
small area with "unique geographical characteristics");  Cen-
terior Energy Corp., PUHCA Release Nos. 35-24073, 
70-7149, 49 S.E.C. 472, 478 (Apr. 29, 1986) (approving use of 
third-party transmission lines to interconnect two formerly 
separate utility systems in light of a study showing that the 
transmission lines would be adequate even in an emergency 
in which one of the systems had to meet 100% of the other 
system's power demand).

     Recognizing the apparent conflict between its past and 
present views on the interconnection issue, the Commission 
rationalized its approval of the contract path in this case as 
follows:

     There is dicta in a series of our decisions stating that 
     contract rights cannot be relied on to "integrate" "dis-
     
     tant" utility properties....  We do not believe that these 
     statements mean that a contract path might not meet the 
     interconnection requirement because of its length.  
     These earlier cases suggest that the reason a contract 
     path might not "integrate" two distant utilities was due 
     to the "single area or region" requirement....  We did 
     not hold in any of these prior cases that the length of a 
     contract path was relevant in determining whether the 
     interconnection requirement ... was met.  Such an ap-
     proach would be inappropriate in view of the express 
     language of [PUHCA] as well as technological and com-
     mercial developments that have made feasible the trans-
     mission of power over longer distances.
     
Approval Order, 2000 SEC LEXIS 1227, at *49-50.  We 
perceive only one rational interpretation of this peculiar 
paragraph:  Although a long transmission line may be suffi-
cient to interconnect two distant utilities, the length of the 
line--that is, the distance between the connected utilities--
may violate PUHCA's region requirement.  Yet the Commis-
sion concedes that it failed explicitly to consider the length of 
the contract path in deciding whether New AEP meets the 
region requirement.  Resp't's Br. at 37 n.24.  The Commis-
sion cannot first distinguish its prior orders on the grounds 
that a factor considered in those orders is relevant to one part 
of its analysis but not another, and then ignore that factor 
altogether.  There may be a satisfactory explanation for the 
Commission's change in course, but it is not evident from the 
Approval Order now before us.

                        Region Requirement

     Challenging the Commission's determination that the pro-
posed merger satisfies PUHCA's region requirement, Peti-
tioners make three arguments:  No industry standard sup-
ports the conclusion that AEP and CSW are in the same 
"region";  the Commission failed to make independent eviden-
tiary findings to support that conclusion;  and finally, the 
Commission erred in deciding that a proposed acquisition that 
meets the other single-integrated-system requirements is 

necessarily also confined to a single region.  We agree with 
the Commission that the first argument "read[s] into [PUH-
CA] additional constraints that are not imposed by" the 
statute's language.  Resp't's Br. at 30.  Nothing in the Act 
requires, as Petitioners imply, that a utility system's bound-
aries conform to those of the "reliability regions" created by 
the voluntary North American Reliability Council ("NARC").  
Nor does the Act mention FERC's "regional transmission 
organizations."  While the Commission could potentially 
point to boundaries identified by NARC or FERC as evi-
dence that a utility system is confined to a single region, 
Petitioners may not point to such boundaries as evidence that 
a utility system is not so confined.  The Commission may 
make its own decision regarding the meaning of the region 
requirement;  NARC and FERC actions have no precedential 
value for that decision.

     That said, we agree with Petitioners that the Commission's 
decision that New AEP meets the region requirement cannot 
withstand even the most deferential review, both because the 
Commission failed to make any evidentiary findings on the 
issue and because it erroneously concluded that a proposed 
acquisition that satisfies PUHCA's other requirements also 
meets the statute's region requirement.  On the first point, 
we note that prior Commission decisions addressing the 
region requirement have analyzed such factors as the geogra-
phy and socioeconomic characteristics of the areas covered by 
the system.  In Middle West Corp., for example, the Commis-
sion stated:

     To find that an aggregation of the properties of South-
     western Light, Public Service and Southwestern Gas 
     constitutes a single system, we must find that an area 
     400 miles north-to-south and 350 miles east-to-west em-
     braces but a single area or region.  In well-settled and 
     economically developed territory such a finding might be 
     impossible.  But the geographical characteristics of the 
     territory encompassed by this sector of properties are 
     fairly homogeneous.  The area is more or less typical 
     throughout, relying largely on oil and other minerals, 
     
     agriculture, and relatively light industry for its subsis-
     tence.  The rendition of satisfactory service in arid and 
     sparsely-settled areas frequently requires the stretching 
     of lines over long distances to connect small population 
     centers with generating facilities strategically placed 
     near suitable water and fuel supplies.  In view of these 
     facts we believe that the properties in question lie within 
     a single area or region.
     
PUHCA Release No. 4846, 15 S.E.C. 309, 336 (Jan. 25, 1944).  
Similarly, in American Natural Gas Co., the Commission 
listed several factors that could be relevant to a finding that 
different service areas are located in "a common economic 
and geographic region," including "industrial, marketing and 
general business activity, transportation facilities, and gas 
utility requirements."  PUHCA Release No. 15620, 43 S.E.C. 
203, 206 (Dec. 12, 1966).

     The Approval Order in this case considers none of these 
factors.  Never mentioning whether the territories served by 
AEP and CSW have common geographic or geologic traits, 
the order's discussion of the region requirement rests on two 
repeated assertions:  that the terms "area" and "region" are 
"by their nature ... susceptible of flexible interpretation," 
e.g., Approval Order, 2000 SEC LEXIS 1227, at *81, 84, and 
that "recent institutional, legal and technological changes 
have reduced the relative importance of geographical limita-
tions" on utility systems, id. at *83, 87, 92.  From these 
statements, which we accept as true, the Commission some-
how concludes that it may reach an affirmative decision 
regarding the region requirement without any substantive 
discussion of the noncontiguous and seemingly dissimilar 
regions served by New AEP.

     In fact, as Petitioners' final argument stresses, the Com-
mission's Approval Order ultimately determines that New 
AEP satisfies the region requirement not because of any 
identified similarities between the areas currently served by 
AEP and those served by CSW, but instead because New 
AEP satisfies all other PUHCA requirements:

     As described above, the New AEP System will be inter-
     connected and susceptible of economic and coordinated 
     operation....  We find below that the size of the New 
     AEP System will not impair efficient operation, localized 
     management or effective regulation and that the Merger 
     will result in economies and efficiencies....  In view of 
     these considerations, we find that the New AEP System 
     will operate in a single area or region.
     
Id. at *85 (internal quotations omitted).  This analysis con-
flicts with PUHCA's express requirement that an electric 
utility system be "confined in its operations to a single area or 
region ... not so large as to impair ... the advantages of 
localized management, efficient operation, and the effective-
ness of regulation."  15 U.S.C. s 79b(a)(29)(A).  The Com-
mission applies the requirement as if it did not include the 
word "single" but instead read:  "confined to an area or areas 
not so large as to impair...."  Technological improvements 
may well justify ever-expanding electric utilities, but PUHCA 
confines such utilities to a "single" area or region.

     In support of its approval of the merger in this case, the 
Commission cites its decision in North American Co., 
PUHCA Release No. 35-5657, 18 S.E.C. 459 (Mar. 13, 1945), 
for the principle that a "flexible approach" to interpreting the 
region requirement "is not new," Resp't's Br. at 26-27.  But 
that case involved an integrated gas rather than electric 
system--a highly relevant detail, for even in 1945, PUHCA 
specifically provided that "gas utility companies deriving nat-
ural gas from a common source of supply may be deemed to 
be included in a single area or region." 15 U.S.C. 
s 79b(a)(29)(B) (1940).  Thus, the statute itself expressly 
supported the Commission's conclusion that the two natural 
gas companies in question lay "in a single area within the 
meaning of the Act" despite the "wide intervening territory 
lying between them."  North American Co., 18 S.E.C. at 462-
63.  No comparable statutory language supports the Commis-
sion's parallel decision regarding the electric utilities at issue 
in this case.  See 15 U.S.C. s 79b(a)(29)(A).

     The Commission may well be right that PUHCA's region 
requirement is outdated in light of recent technological ad-
vances.  In view of the statute's plain language, however, only 
Congress can make that decision.  In fact, a pending bill 
would repeal PUHCA, but it has not yet become law.  See 
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2001, S. 206, 107th 
Cong. s 4 (2001) (last action in May 2001).  In the meantime, 
the Commission may not interpret the phrase "single area or 
region" so flexibly as to read it out of the Act.  The Commis-
sion may have some legitimate basis for concluding that 
AEP's service territories in Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, 
Ohio, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia fall in the same 
"region" as CSW's service territories in Arkansas, Louisiana, 
Oklahoma, and Texas, but we cannot find it in the record 
before us.

                    Economies and Efficiencies

     This brings us finally to Petitioners' arguments regarding 
PUHCA's requirement that a holding company's acquisition 
of securities or utility assets of another holding or public-
utility company produce net "economies and efficiencies."  
According to Petitioners, the Commission erred in accepting 
AEP and CSW's projections that the proposed merger will 
produce approximately $2.1 billion in cost savings.  We dis-
agree.  We owe considerable deference to the Commission's 
assertion that it "reviewed the assumptions and methodolo-
gies that underlie" the projections and found them "reason-
able and consistent with ... precedent."  Approval Order, 
2000 SEC LEXIS 1227, at *102.  Moreover, Petitioners point 
to no evidence or expert testimony supporting their assertion 
that the companies' calculations were flawed.  Their unsup-
ported claims that the projections are speculative and that 
the companies' FERC-mandated divestiture of generating 
capacity is neither economical nor efficient are insufficient to 
cast doubt on the Commission's contrary findings or even to 
raise a substantial question of fact warranting a hearing.  Cf. 
City of Holyoke Gas & Elec. Dep't v. SEC, 972 F.2d 358, 365 
(D.C. Cir. 1992) (noting that the Commission need only grant 
a hearing if "the ultimate decision will ... be enhanced or 
assisted by the receipt of [additional] evidence," and that we 

review for abuse of discretion a Commission decision not to 
hold a hearing).

                               III.

     The Commission's order is vacated and this matter is 
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opin-
ion.

                                                                 So ordered.

      

                                 


              [Photo not available electronically]








Appendix A: Map of the United States showing the CSW
service territories in parts of Arkansas, Louisiana,
Oklahoma, and Texas, and the AEP service territories in
parts of Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, Tennessee,
Virginia, and West Virginia.

              