                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 8, 1999    Decided February 11, 2000 

                           No. 99-1025

                   Entravision Holdings, LLC, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                 Davis Television Fairmont, LLC, 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Barry A. Friedman argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Michael L. Martinez.

     K. Michele Walters, Counsel, Federal Communications 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent. With her on 

the brief were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, Dan-
iel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, Joel I. Klein, 
Assistant Attorney General, and Robert B. Nicholson and 
Chris Sprigman, Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Tatel, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Entravision Holdings, LLC, peti-
tions for review of an order of the Federal Communications 
Commission denying reconsideration of a prior order.  Be-
cause the Commission order denying reconsideration is unre-
viewable under ICC v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, 
482 U.S. 270, 280 (1987), and we cannot fairly infer from 
Entravision's filings an intent to seek review of the prior 
order, we dismiss the petition for lack of jurisdiction.

                          I. Background

     In 1997 the Federal Communications Commission proposed 
to reallocate channels 60-69 from broadcast television service 
to other commercial and public safety uses.  Latin Communi-
cations Group (LCG), Entravision's predecessor in interest in 
the licenses for two low power television (LPTV) stations 
operating on channels 61 and 63, submitted comments to the 
Commission suggesting certain protections be granted to 
LPTV stations that would be displaced by the proposed 
reallocation.  The Commission adopted the reallocation pro-
posal but declined to adopt the protections suggested by 
LCG.  In re Reallocation of Television Channels 60-69, 
Report & Order, 12 F.C.C.R. 22953 (Jan. 6, 1998).  LCG filed 
a petition for partial reconsideration, asking the Commission 
to reconsider the Report & Order and to adopt the protec-
tions LCG had suggested.  The Commission denied reconsid-
eration.  In re Reallocation of Television Channels 60-69, 
Memorandum Opinion & Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 21578 (Oct. 9, 
1998).

     Entravision and LCG then timely filed a joint petition for 
review.  Subsequently, LCG completed assignment of the two 

LPTV broadcast licenses to Entravision and withdrew from 
this action, leaving Entravision as the sole petitioner.

                           II. Analysis

     Under Fed. R. App. P. 15(a), a petition for review of an 
agency order must "specify the order or part thereof to be 
reviewed."*  Failure to specify the correct order can result in 
dismissal of the petition.  See City of Benton v. NRC, 136 
F.3d 824, 826 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  John D. Copanos & Sons, Inc. 
v. FDA, 854 F.2d 510, 527 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  A mistaken or 
inexact specification of the order to be reviewed will not be 
fatal to the petition, however, if the petitioner's intent to seek 
review of a specific order can be fairly inferred from the 
petition for review or from other contemporaneous filings, 
and the respondent is not misled by the mistake.  See Martin 
v. FERC, No. 98-1398, 1999 WL 1261546, at *2-3 (D.C. Cir. 
Jan. 25, 2000) (reviewing order underlying rehearing order 
specified in petition because intent to seek review fairly 
inferred from contemporaneous motion for stay and respon-
dent not prejudiced);  Damsky v. FCC, No. 99-1018, 1999 WL 
1211668, at *5-6 (D.C. Cir. Jan. 7, 2000) (reviewing order 
underlying rehearing order specified in notice of appeal be-
cause intent to seek review fairly inferred from filings at-
tached to notice and repondent not prejudiced);  Southwest-
ern Bell Telephone Co. v. FCC, 180 F.3d 307, 313 (D.C. Cir. 
1999) (declining to review order underlying rehearing order 
specified in petition because intent to seek review not fairly 
inferable from petition, docketing statement, or preliminary 
statement of issues);  cf. Nichols v. Board of Trustees of 
Asbestos Workers Local 24 Pension Plan, 835 F.2d 881, 889 
(D.C. Cir. 1987) (reviewing judgment inexactly designated in 
notice of appeal because contemporaneously-filed Rule 10(b) 
certification adequate to infer intent to appeal from judgment, 
and appellee not prejudiced);  Brookens v. White, 795 F.2d 
178, 180 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (declining to review unspecified 

__________
     * Effective December 1, 1998, Fed. R. App. P. 15(a) was amended 
(in style but not in substance) to require that a petitioner "specify" 
rather than "designate" the order or part thereof to be reviewed.  
Because Entravision and LCG filed their petition after the amend-
ment, we refer to the amended version of the Rule in this opinion.

judgment because intent to appeal from that judgment not 
fairly inferable from appellant's notice of appeal or subse-
quent filings).

     Here Entravision specified for review the Memorandum 
Opinion & Order.  Under ICC v. Brotherhood of Locomotive 
Engineers, 482 U.S. 270, 280 (1987), however, that order, in 
which the Commission merely denied reconsideration of the 
prior Report & Order, is unreviewable except insofar as the 
request for reconsideration was based upon new evidence or 
changed circumstances.  See Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 
311.  Because Entravision gave neither as a ground for 
reconsideration of the Report & Order, the Memorandum 
Opinion & Order is unreviewable.  Therefore we must dis-
miss Entravision's petition for lack of jurisdiction* unless we 
can fairly infer that Entravision intended to seek review of 
the order not specified in the petition for review.

     Entravision's claim that we may infer it intended to seek 
review of the Report & Order appears to be foreclosed by 
Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 313-14.  In that case the 
agency had issued an Investigation Order prescribing certain 
actions that local exchange carriers (LECs) were to take.  
See id. at 310.  Two LECs filed petitions for rehearing, which 
the Commission denied in a Reconsideration Order.  South-
western Bell then petitioned for review of the Reconsidera-
tion Order.  We denied the petition for review because the 
Reconsideration Order was unreviewable and we could not 
fairly infer from the petition for review or nearly contempora-
neous filings an intent to seek review of the Investigation 
Order:  the petition itself designated for review only the 
Reconsideration Order, and only that order was appended to 
the petition;  the docketing statement likewise named and had 
appended only the Reconsideration Order;  and the prelimi-
nary statement of issues discussed only matters raised in the 
LECs' petitions for rehearing.  See id. at 313;  see also City 
of Benton, 136 F.3d at 825-26 (dismissing petition that speci-
fied only an unreviewable order).

__________
     * To the extent that Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. v. FCC, 180 
F.3d 307 (D.C. Cir. 1999), and Beehive Telephone Co. v. FCC, 180 
F.3d 314 (D.C. Cir. 1999), treat nonreviewability under Brotherhood 
of Locomotive Engineers as nonjurisdictional, those holdings are 
disapproved.  See 482 U.S. at 287.  Our resolution of this issue has 

     Entravision points to one difference between its filings and 
those in Southwestern Bell and City of Benton:  Entravision 
expressly mentioned not just the order denying reconsidera-
tion but the underlying Report & Order--the one it wants the 
court to review--in the petition for review.  In context, 
however, the mere mention of the Report & Order does not 
make fairly inferable Entravision's intent to seek review of 
that order.  On the contrary, Entravision mentions the Re-
port & Order in its petition for review only in the course of 
stating the history of the proceeding prior to the order of 
which review is being sought.  Consider:

     [Entravision and LCG] petition this Court for review of 
     the [FCC's] Memorandum Opinion & Order ("MO&O"), 
     FCC 98-261 (released October 9, 1998;  published in 
     Federal Register November 17, 1998), in which the FCC 
     denied LCG's Petition for Partial Reconsideration of the 
     FCC's earlier Report and Order ("RO&O") [sic] in which 
     it decided not to protect low power television ("LPTV") 
     stations operating on Channels 60-69....  A copy of the 
     MO&O is attached hereto as Exhibit A....  The MO&O 
     constitutes final FCC action rejecting LCG's request for 
     protection....
     
The clear import is that only the Memorandum Opinion & 
Order is under review;  this is reinforced by Entravision 
having attached only the Memorandum Opinion & Order to 
the petition.  See 28 U.S.C. s 2344 ("The petitioner shall 
attach to the petition as exhibits copies of the order, report, 
or decision [for review]").

     Entravision's contemporaneous filings even more clearly 
demonstrate that it intended to put before the court only the 
order denying reconsideration.  Entravision's docketing 
statement, filed within a month of its petition, specifies only 
the Memorandum Opinion & Order for review:  In the space 
for denoting the "date(s) of order(s) [under review]," Entravi-
sion entered the date of the Memorandum Opinion & Order 
and only that date.  Entravision's preliminary statement of 
issues, filed the same day, likewise points only to the Memo-

__________
been circulated to and approved by the entire court and thus 
constitutes the law of the circuit.  See Irons v. Diamond, 670 F.2d 
265, 268 n. 11 (D.C. Cir. 1981).

randum Opinion & Order;  there Entravision identifies two 
issues, both of which relate exclusively to the Commission's 
denial of reconsideration in the Memorandum Opinion & 
Order:

     1. Whether the FCC's denial of the Petition for Partial 
     Reconsideration was contrary to law ...;
     
     2. Whether the FCC's denial of the Petition for Partial 
     Reconsideration adequately addresses how the FCC may 
     weigh the public interest benefits of continued LPTV 
     services....
     
Based upon Entravision's petition for review and these nearly 
contemporaneous filings, we cannot fairly infer that it intend-
ed to seek review of the Report & Order.  Because Entravi-
sion fails to satisfy this first requirement for review of an 
unspecified order, we need not consider the second require-
ment--that the Commission not have been prejudiced by 
Entravision's mistake.  See Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 
314.  We conclude that Entravision has not brought the 
Report & Order before this court for review.

     In a last ditch effort to avoid this conclusion, Entravision 
claims that, because the Commission's argument based upon 
Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Southwestern Bell 
would dispose entirely of the case, the Commission was 
required by Interim D.C. Circuit Rule 27(g)(1) to raise it in a 
timely-filed motion, and the Commission cannot now raise it 
on brief.  Rule 27(g)(1) provides:

     Any motion which, if granted, would dispose of the 
     appeal or petition for review in its entirety, or transfer 
     the case to another court, must be filed within 45 days of 
     the docketing of the case in this court, unless, for good 
     cause shown, the court grants leave for a later filing.
     
If Entravision's interpretation of our Rule were correct, then 
we suppose briefs would contain only non-dispositive argu-
ments and there would be no point in counsel writing them or 
in our reading them.  But of course, Entravision is not 
correct:  the Rule governs motions, not arguments, and is 

therefore no bar to the disposition of this case on the basis of 
the arguments in the briefs.

                         III. Conclusion

     Entravision petitioned for review only of the Memorandum 
Opinion & Order.  Under Brotherhood of Locomotive Engi-
neers, 482 U.S. at 280, that order is unreviewable.  Entravi-
sion's petition is therefore

                                                       Dismissed.

                                                