                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 18, 2002     Decided June 18, 2002 

                           No. 01-5169

                   Hershey Foods Corporation, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                   Department of Agriculture, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (99cv02138)

     Andrew G. McBride argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs was Eve J. Klindera.  Robert M. Reese 
entered an appearance.

     Douglas N. Letter, Litigation Counsel, U.S. Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief 
was Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Hershey Foods Corporation ap-
peals the dismissal of its complaint seeking to vacate a 
portion of the Department of Agriculture's regulation estab-
lishing pricing classifications of milk used in the manufacture 
of milk chocolate.  The district court dismissed the complaint 
on the ground that legislation converted the regulation into a 
statute, not subject to judicial review under the Administra-
tive Procedure Act.  Although we disagree with the district 
court in this respect, we hold that dismissal was proper 
because Hershey failed to exhaust its administrative reme-
dies.

                                I.

     The Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 
("AMAA"), empowered the Secretary of Agriculture to regu-
late the sale of milk by geographic region.  See 7 U.S.C. 
s 608c(5).  Over the years, the Secretary issued many milk 
marketing orders, applying to different geographic regions 
and classifying milk according to the "form in which or the 
purpose for which it is used."  7 U.S.C. s 608c(5)(A).  By 
1998, there were thirty-one milk marketing orders in effect.  
See Milk in the New England and Other Marketing Areas:  
Proposed Rule and Opportunity to File Comments, Includ-
ing Written Exceptions, on Proposed Amendments to Mar-
keting Agreements and Orders, 63 Fed. Reg. 4802, 4805 (Jan. 
30, 1998).  In the Federal Agriculture Improvement and 
Reform Act ("FAIR Act") of 1996, Congress directed the 
Secretary to reduce the number of these orders to no more 
than fourteen, and authorized the use of informal rulemaking 
to expedite the process of milk marketing order consolidation.  
See 7 U.S.C. s 7523.  In January 1998, the Department of 
Agriculture proposed a rule consolidating the number of 
marketing orders to eleven, and reconfiguring the milk pric-
ing classification system.  See 63 Fed. Reg. 4802.  As promul-
gated, the final rule contained four milk classifications.  In 
very general terms, Class I consisted of fluid milk;  Class II, 

fluid milk used to produce food products such as candy;  Class 
III, milk used to produce spreadable cheeses;  Class IV, milk 
used to produce butter and milk products in dried form.  See 
Milk in the New England and Other Marketing Areas;  
Order Amending the Orders, 64 Fed. Reg. 47,898, 47,903 
(Sept. 1, 1999) ("the final rule").  The final rule's pricing 
formulas made Class II skim milk 70 cents more expensive 
per hundredweight than Class IV milk.  See id. at 47,907 (to 
be codified at 7 C.F.R. s 1000.50(e)).

     Hershey is the leading maker of milk chocolate in the 
United States.  The company traces its beginnings to the late 
19th century when Milton S. Hershey developed a process in 
which fresh milk was sweetened, mixed with chocolate, and 
dried as the first step in making milk chocolate.  Today, 
Hershey is the only major manufacturer of milk chocolate still 
using fresh fluid milk in the proprietary process developed 
more than a century ago.  Hershey's competitors purchase 
their milk in dried form from independent milk drying plants.  
(Milk chocolate must be made with dried milk.)

     When Hershey buys fluid milk to make candy, it purchases 
the milk at Class II prices.  Hershey's competitors in the 
milk chocolate industry pay Class IV prices because they use 
dried milk.  Alleging the unlawfulness of the price disparity 
resulting from the final rule, Hershey brought an action in 
district court seeking injunctive and declaratory relief.

     Hershey claimed the final rule violated the Administrative 
Procedure Act because it was arbitrary, capricious, and con-
trary to the AMAA.  The rule's effective date was October 1, 
1999, but a federal district court in Vermont, on September 
28, 1999, enjoined the Secretary from implementing the rule.  
See St. Albans Coop. Creamery, Inc. v. Glickman, 68 
F. Supp. 2d 380, 392 (D. Vt. 1999).  (The court called its 
injunction a "temporary restraining order" but it was in effect 
a preliminary injunction.)  Two weeks later, Representative 
Blunt introduced a bill in the House of Representatives "to 
provide for the modification and implementation of the final 
rule for the consolidation and reform of Federal milk market-
ing orders."  H.R. 3428, 106th Cong. (Nov. 17, 1999).  Among 

other things, the bill called for the "final rule" to "take effect, 
and be implemented" with some alterations.  H.R. 3428, 
s 1(b).  Twelve days later, H.R. 3428 was "enacted into law," 
incorporated by reference as part of the 2000 Appropriations 
Act.  See Pub. L. No. 106-113, s 1000(a)(8), 113 Stat. 1501, 
1536-37 (1999).

     On December 29, 1999, the district court here dismissed 
Hershey's suit without prejudice, stating that enactment of 
H.R. 3428 transformed the regulation into statutory law not 
subject to APA review.  Hershey amended its complaint to 
include constitutional challenges to the enactment of H.R. 
3428, but alternatively contended that H.R. 3428 simply im-
plemented the rule so that Hershey could still bring suit 
under the APA to have it set aside.  The government moved 
to dismiss, arguing that the regulation became law through 
the Appropriations Act.  The Department further argued 
that even if it this were not the case, Hershey could not 
challenge the rule without first exhausting its administrative 
remedies under the AMAA.  The district court granted the 
Department's motion, refusing to reconsider its determination 
that the enactment of H.R. 3428 converted the regulation into 
a statute.  See Hershey Foods Corp. v. USDA, 158 
F. Supp. 2d 37, 37 n.1 (D.D.C. 2001).

     On appeal, Hershey does not press its constitutional argu-
ments.  The company argues instead that the district court 
erred in determining that "the rule originally challenged by 
[Hershey] has been enacted into law by the Appropriations 
Act."  Id.

                               II.

     Sections 1 and 2 of H.R. 3428, which the Appropriations 
Act enacted into law, deal with the rule Hershey challenged.  
Because of their importance to the case, both sections are 
quoted in their entirety in the margin.*

__________
     *    SECTION 1.  USE OF OPTION 1A AS PRICE STRUC-
TURE FOR CLASS I MILK UNDER CONSOLIDATED 
FEDERAL MILK MARKETING ORDERS

          


          (a) Final Rule Defined.-In this section, the term "final 
     rule" means the final rule for the consolidation and reform of 
     Federal milk marketing orders that was published in the 
     Federal Register on September 1, 1999 (64 Fed. Reg. 47897-
     48021), to comply with section 143 of the Federal Agriculture 
     Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 U.S.C. 7253).
     
          (b) Implementation of Final Rule for Milk Order Re-
     form.-Subject to subsection (c), the final rule shall take effect, 
     and be implemented by the Secretary of Agriculture, on the 
     first day of the month beginning at least 30 days after the date 
     of the enactment of this Act.
     
          (c) Use of Option 1A for Pricing Class I Milk.-In lieu of the 
     Class I price differentials specified in the final rule, the Secre-
     tary of Agriculture shall price fluid or Class I milk under the 
     Federal milk marketing orders using the Class I price differen-
     tials identified as Option 1A "Location-Specific Differentials 
     Analysis" in the proposed rule published in the Federal Regis-
     ter on January 30, 1998 (63 Fed. Reg. 4802, 4809), except that 
     the Secretary shall include the corrections and modifications to 
     such Class I differentials made by the Secretary through April 
     2, 1999.
     
          (d) Effect of Prior Announcement of Minimum Prices.-If 
     the Secretary of Agriculture announces minimum prices for 
     milk under the Federal milk marketing orders pursuant to 
     section 1000.50 of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, before 
     the effective date specified in subsection (b), the minimum 
     prices so announced before that date shall be the only applica-
     ble minimum prices under Federal milk marketing orders for 
     the month or months for which prices have been announced.
     
          (e) Implementation of Requirement.-The implementation of 
     the final rule, as modified by subsection (c), shall not be subject 
     to any of the following:
                    (1) The notice and hearing requirements of section 8c(3) of 
     the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c(3)), reen-
     acted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing 
     Agreement Act of 1937, or the notice and comment provi-
     sions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
     
               (2) A referendum conducted by the Secretary of Agricul-
     ture pursuant to subsections (17) or (19) of section 8c of the 
     Agriculture Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c), reenacted with 

     amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act 
     of 1937.
                    (3) The Statement of Policy of the Secretary of Agricul-
     ture effective July 24, 1971 (36 Fed. Reg. 13804), relating to 
     notices of proposed rulemaking and public participation in 
     rulemaking.
                    (4) Chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly 
     known as the Paperwork Reduction Act).
                    (5) Any decision, restraining order, or injunction issued by 
     a United States court before the date of the enactment of 
     this Act.
     
     SEC. 2.  FURTHER RULEMAKING TO DEVELOP PRIC-
     ING METHODS FOR CLASS III AND CLASS IV MILK 
     UNDER MARKETING ORDERS.
               (a) Congressional Finding.-The Class III and Class IV milk 
     pricing formulas included in the final decision for the consolida-
     tion and reform of Federal milk marketing orders, as published 
     in the Federal Register on April 2, 1999 (64 Fed. Reg. 16025), 
     do not adequately reflect public comment on the original pro-
     posed rule published in the Federal Register on January 30, 
     1998 (63 Fed. Reg. 4802), and are sufficiently different from the 
     proposed rule and any comments submitted with regard to the 
     proposed rule that further emergency rulemaking is merited.
               (b) Rulemaking Required.-The Secretary of Agriculture 
     shall conduct rulemaking, on the record after an opportunity 
     for an agency hearing, to reconsider the Class III and Class IV 
     milk pricing formulas included in the final rule for the consoli-
     dation and reform of Federal milk marketing orders that was 
     published in the Federal Register on September 1, 1999 (64 
     Fed. Reg. 47897-48021).
               (c) Time Period for Rulemaking.-On December 1, 2000, the 
     Secretary of Agriculture shall publish in the Federal Register a 
     final decision on the Class III and Class IV milk pricing 
     formulas.  The resulting formulas shall take effect, and be 
     implemented by the Secretary, on January 1, 2001.
               (d) Effect of Court Order.-The actions authorized by sub-
     sections (b) and (c) are intended to ensure the timely publica-
     tion and implementation of new pricing formulas for Class III 
     and Class IV milk.  In the event the Secretary of Agriculture 
     is enjoined or otherwise restrained by a court order from 
     implementing a final decision within the time period specified 
     in subsection (c), the length of time for which that injunction or 
     other restraining order is effective shall be added to the time 
     limitations specified in subsection (c) thereby extending those 
     
     There is much to be said in favor of Hershey's contention 
that the Appropriations Act did not convert the rule into a 
statute.  H.R. 3428 nowhere states that the rule is enacted 
into statutory law.  It refers instead in section 1(e) to "imple-
mentation of the final rule" and, in the same subsection, 
states that the "final rule" "shall not be subject to" the 
"notice and comment provisions" of the APA.  None of this 
makes any sense unless what is being implemented is a rule.  
To state the obvious, statutes are not promulgated by agen-
cies and they are not subject to the requirements of the APA.  
Section 1(e) also overrides the injunction issued in the St. 
Albans Creamery case.  The court's order had enjoined the 
agency from putting its rule into effect.  If H.R. 3428 meant 
to enact the rule as a statute this provision would have been 
unnecessary.  The Vermont district court issued its prelimi-
nary injunction on the basis that plaintiffs' claims--that the 
Secretary had violated several statutory procedural require-

__________
     time limitations by a period of time equal to the period of time 
     for which the injunction or other restraining order is effective.
     
          (e) Failure to Timely Complete Rulemaking.-If the Secre-
     tary of Agriculture fails to implement new Class III and Class 
     IV milk pricing formulas within the time period required under 
     subsection (c) (plus any additional period provided under sub-
     section (d)), the Secretary may not assess or collect assess-
     ments from milk producers or handlers under section 8c of the 
     Agriculture Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c), reenacted with 
     amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 
     1937, for marketing order administration and services provided 
     under such section after the end of that period until the pricing 
     formulas are implemented.  The Secretary may not reduce the 
     level of services provided under that section on account of the 
     prohibition against assessments, but shall rather cover the cost 
     of marketing order administration and services through funds 
     available for the Agricultural Marketing Service of the Depart-
     ment.
     
          (f) Implementation of Requirement.-The Implementation of 
     the final decision on new Class III and Class IV milk pricing 
     formulas shall not be subject to congressional review under 
     chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code.
     
ments--would likely be successful.  See St. Albans Coop. 
Creamery, 68 F. Supp. 2d at 388-90.  That reasoning, and the 
injunction itself, could not have prevented a statute from 
going into effect, if the rule were intended to be such.  
Furthermore, the final rule had allowed the Secretary to 
"suspend or terminate any or all provisions" upon a finding 
that any provision contravened the AMAA.  64 Fed. Reg. 
47,902 (to be codified at 7 C.F.R. s 1000.26(b)).  Nothing in 
H.R. 3428 altered this aspect, as a result of which the 
Secretary retained the authority to modify or delete provi-
sions in the rule.  While it is not unheard of for Congress to 
allow an agency to modify the substantive portions of a 
statute, see Touby v. United States, 500 U.S. 160, 162-63 
(1991), it is far from ordinary and we would expect Congress 
to be more explicit than it was here if that were its intent.  
Cf. 21 U.S.C. s 811(a)-(c) (authorizing Attorney General to 
add or remove substances from the Controlled Substance Act 
schedule only after various steps including consultation with 
Secretary of Health and Human Services and notice-and-
hearing provisions).

     As against these considerations, the government points out 
that Congress, not the Secretary, decided upon the specific 
content of the Class I pricing differentials.  This raises an 
obvious question:  if Congress has dictated the classification 
scheme, how could it be arbitrary or capricious for an agency 
to implement Congress's choice?  The government also thinks 
the legislature's override of the Vermont court's injunction 
against the Secretary would make little sense if Hershey, or 
anyone else, could just return to court to get a restraining 
order as soon as the President signed the Appropriations Act 
into law.  (This has special force with respect to the Class I 
price differentials.  It is hard to see why Congress would 
have intended the provision to be subject to judicial review 
under the APA immediately after enactment.)  The govern-
ment relies on Congress's specific action in altering one part 
of the rule to mean that Congress intended to enact the rest 
of it.

     There is also the matter of section 2 of the bill, which 
directed the Secretary to undertake formal rulemaking on the 

subject of Class III and IV pricing formulas.  This provision 
effectively removed parts of the original rule and remanded 
to the agency for further consideration.  (Although the pric-
ing formulas were left in a state of flux, Hershey's challenge 
is ripe because the provision setting the Class II price at "the 
advanced Class IV skim milk price ... plus 70 cents" re-
mained intact.  64 Fed. Reg. 47,907.  The Class IV milk price 
might change, but the difference between it and the Class II 
price would remain fixed at 70 cents per hundredweight.)  
The parties disagree on what we should infer from the bill's 
explicit call for further rulemaking on certain provisions of 
the original rule.

     As the government's argument shows, the problem here is 
somewhat more complicated than if Congress had simply 
directed an agency to implement an entire regulation.  H.R. 
3428 did more.  Congress required the Secretary to adopt a 
specific formula for Class I price differentials, see s 1(c), and 
to conduct rulemaking on Class III and IV prices, see s 2.  
The subject of this litigation, however, is the Class II price.  
On that subject, Congress did nothing but direct the rule to 
be implemented despite the Vermont district court's injunc-
tion.  By leaving the Class II pricing provision untouched, we 
believe--for the reasons already given--that Congress meant 
to treat at least this portion of the rule, not as a statute, but 
as agency action, still subject to challenge under the APA.  
To decide otherwise would be to go beyond the words of H.R. 
3428 and attribute to Congress by inference what it never 
made explicit.

     The legislative history of H.R. 3428, to the extent there is 
any, supports this conclusion.  Congress enacted this bill 
without any committee consideration and almost no floor 
debate.  See 145 Cong. Rec. H12,732 (daily ed. Nov. 18, 1999) 
(remarks of Rep. Obey) ("We have H.R. 3428, which brings 
several dairy authorization measures to this floor, including 
the Northeast Compact.  That compact was slipped into the 
law in the first place several years ago without ever having 
been voted on by either body.  It was slipped in by the 
Senate, and now we are again slipping it in without it ever 
having been considered by either body.").  To understand the 

concern with the Class I pricing differentials, some history is 
needed.  Since 1961 the price a farmer receives for milk 
depends in part on how far that farmer (or perhaps more 
accurately, the farmer's cow) lives from Eau Claire, Wiscon-
sin.  See, e.g., 7 C.F.R. ss 1001.51, 1001.52, 1001.53 (1999);  
145 Cong. Rec. E2528 (daily ed. Nov. 22, 1999) (remarks of 
Rep. Baldwin);  see also David Hess, Art of Milk Pricing:  It 
is Rocket Science, The Record (N. N.J.), Nov. 26, 1999, at 
B54, available at 1999 WL 7119902.  Under these price 
"differentials," dairy farmers in the eastern United States 
collected more per gallon produced than those in the midwest.  
The Secretary's final rule, promulgated in September 1999, 
replaced this differential formula.  Section 1(c) of H.R. 3428 
reinstated the "Class 1A option," which did not dramatically 
change the old differentials.  See 63 Fed. Reg. 4809-10;  145 
Cong. Rec. H12,734 (daily ed. Nov. 18, 1999) (remarks of Rep. 
Peterson).  Although senators from Wisconsin and Minnesota 
threatened a filibuster to prevent the passage of the Appro-
priations Act because it included H.R. 3428, in the end it 
passed.  See, e.g., Meg Jones, Anti-Reform Move Upsets 
State Dairy Farmers, Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, Nov. 26, 
1999, available at 1999 WL 21553546.  (Another provision of 
H.R. 3428 extended the life of the Northeast Dairy Compact, 
a USDA-approved arrangement favoring New England dairy 
farmers.  See H.R. 3428, s 4.) The issues underlying the 
Class I pricing changes indicate that Congress sought only to 
legislate the terms of the Class I price differentials, not the 
entire milk marketing system.  The Class II price remains 
the product of agency action and is subject to judicial review 
as such.

                               III.

     Our decision that the portion of the rule Hershey chal-
lenges remains a rule despite H.R. 3428 does not fully resolve 
the issues in this appeal.  The AMAA contains an exhaustion 
requirement.  See Block v. Cmty. Nutrition Inst., 467 U.S. 
340, 346 (1984).  It provides that "[a]ny handler subject to an 
order may file a written petition with the Secretary of Agri-
culture" challenging the order or requesting an exemption, 

that the Secretary "shall thereupon [provide] an opportunity 
for a hearing upon such petition," and that "[a]fter such 
hearing, the Secretary shall make a ruling upon the prayer of 
such petition which shall be final, if in accordance with law."  
7 U.S.C. s 608c(15)(A). "And so Congress has provided that 
the remedy in the first instance must be sought from the 
Secretary of Agriculture."  United States v. Ruzicka, 329 
U.S. 287, 294 (1946);  see also Am. Dairy of Evansville v. 
Bergland, 627 F.2d 1252, 1259 (D.C. Cir. 1980).

     Hershey states that it is a "handler" of milk;  we shall 
assume this to be the case.  (If Hershey were a consumer of 
milk rather than a handler, it would not have statutory 
standing to sue.  See Block, 467 U.S at 346-48.)  Hershey 
also admits that it did not exhaust its remedies under the 
AMAA.  But it contends that the AMAA is inapplicable 
because the Secretary promulgated the rule pursuant to the 
FAIR Act, which does not mention administrative remedies.  
The underlying assumption is that the FAIR Act supercedes 
the AMAA.  But that assumption is incorrect.  Hershey itself 
claims that the final rule violates the terms of the AMAA.  To 
be sure, the FAIR Act allows informal rulemaking, rather 
than the formal rulemaking the AMAA demanded.  But the 
purpose is to facilitate the Secretary's efforts to "amend" the 
milk marketing orders the AMAA requires.  See 7 U.S.C. 
s 7253(a)(1).  The FAIR Act thus streamlined the procedures 
for implementing AMAA orders without disturbing, for ex-
ample, the AMAA's requirement that the Secretary classify 
milk according to the purpose for or form in which it is used.  
The AMAA's exhaustion requirement remained unchanged 
and the final rule Hershey challenges itself states that "ad-
ministrative proceedings must be exhausted before parties 
may file suit in court."  See 64 Fed. Reg. 47,898.  A handler 
of milk thus must petition the Secretary before seeking 
judicial review of a milk marketing order promulgated under 
the FAIR Act.  Hershey did not undertake this required 
step, and therefore the dismissal of its complaint was the 
proper result.

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                                                            