                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 11, 2000   Decided January 5, 2001 

                           No. 99-7221

                          Paul Weyrich, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                 The New Republic, Inc., et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv01213)

     Larry Klayman argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Andrew H. Marks argued the cause for appellees.  With 
him on the brief were Clifton S. Elgarten and Stuart H. 
Newberger.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Rogers, Circuit Judge, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards Chief Judge:  Appellant Paul Weyrich appeals 
from an order of the District Court dismissing his suit for 
defamation, false light invasion of privacy, and civil conspiracy 
to defame.  Weyrich's complaint asserts that he was defamed 
by an article, "Robespierre of the Right--What I Ate at the 
Revolution," authored by David Grann and published by The 
New Republic on October 27, 1997.  The article is flowered 
with anecdotes that reveal Weyrich to be both emotionally 
volatile and short-tempered, and it depicts him as both a 
zealoted political extremist and an easily-enraged tyrant of 
the first order.

     Weyrich complains that the article oversteps the bounds of 
protected political commentary by attributing to him, as its 
central theme, the diagnosable mental condition of paranoia.  
He further contends that, in presenting its overall picture of 
mental instability, the piece relies on false and misleading 
anecdotes, as well as two defamatory caricatures.  The Dis-
trict Court disagreed and granted appellees' motion to dis-
miss Weyrich's complaint in its entirety prior to discovery.

     We reject Weyrich's claim that the article attributes to him 
a diagnosable mental illness.  "Paranoia" is used in the article 
as a popular, not clinical, term, to embellish the author's view 
of Weyrich's political zealotry and intemperate nature.  The 
author's musings on these scores are protected political com-
mentary, for, in context, it is clear that his comments are 
meant only to deride Weyrich's political foibles and, relatedly, 
to attack what the author sees as the inability of the conser-
vative movement "to accept the compromising nature of pow-
er."  In short, these comments cannot reasonably be under-
stood as verifiably false, and, therefore potentially actionable, 
assertions of mental derangement.

     There are other segments of the article, however, that may 
extend beyond protected commentary.  Accepting the facts as 
alleged in the complaint, as we must, it appears that some of 

the anecdotes reported in the article are reasonably capable 
of defamatory meaning and arguably place Weyrich in a false 
light that would be highly offensive to a reasonable person.  
Thus, because we find that some of the article's contested 
statements are both verifiable and reasonably capable of 
defamatory meaning, at least a portion of the complaint is 
sufficient to survive a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss.  We 
are therefore constrained to reverse and remand the case for 
further proceedings.

                          I. Background

A.   The Article

     The cover of the October 27, 1997 issue of The New 
Republic carries a caricatured and smiling Paul Weyrich 
leaning against a guillotine, arms crossed and wearing the 
square-buckled shoes of a puritan.  The disembodied heads of 
conservative politicians--Newt Gingrich, Fred Thompson, and 
others--litter the ground, each donning wide-eyed looks of 
consternation and disbelief.  Just left of the scene, the cover 
reads "Robespierre of the Right--Paul Weyrich and the 
Conservative Quest for Purity."  Between the covers of the 
cited issue of the magazine is the disputed article that is the 
subject of this law suit.  See David Grann, Robespierre of the 
Right--What I Ate at the Revolution, The New Republic, Oct. 
27 1997, at 20 (hereinafter "Article").  The five-page article 
purports to offer a brief story of appellant's life as a leading 
member of the conservative movement over the past 30 years.  
The article poses Weyrich as a symbol of the movement.  
And the author postulates that, because of its uncompromis-
ing character, the movement has torn apart and destabilized a 
Republican party it helped to create.

     At the outset of the article, Grann offers a justification for 
the piece:  "If Weyrich were the only conservative purging 
Republicans, he would be no more than an interesting charac-
ter--a minor, albeit compelling, player in the history of the 
conservative movement.  Yet, he has become, in many re-
spects, a case study of the conservative mind."  Article, at 20.  
Grann then dedicates the first part of the article to appel-

lant's role in the rise of populist conservatives to national 
prominence in the 1970s.  The article catalogs Weyrich's 
various leadership roles in the ideological movement:  from 
founding the Conservative Lunch Club of Capitol Hill, to 
launching the Heritage Foundation, to establishing the Free 
Congress Foundation, appellant helped grow the movement 
at every stage--even coining the term "moral majority."

     The article's description of appellant takes a decided turn, 
however, when the story moves to the period beginning with 
the inauguration of Ronald Reagan:  "By 1981, while his 
friends were still basking in their newfound power, Weyrich 
began to experience sudden bouts of pessimism and para-
noia--early symptoms of the nervous breakdown that afflicts 
conservatives today."  Article, at 22 (emphasis added).  
Thereafter, the remainder of the article reveals appellant to 
be an uncompromising, vengeful, and often tyrannical "sym-
bol" of the conservative movement.  He engineers the down-
fall of John Tower.  Id.  He accuses Senator Orrin Hatch of 
having "psychological problems."  Id. at 19.  He distances 
himself from Newt Gingrich, who, he says, "does not have 
any immutable principles that he would die for," and Trent 
Lott, who he describes as "the greatest disappointment of my 
life."  Id. at 24 (emphasis in original).

     The article relays the following notable episode:

     By the 1988 presidential campaign, Weyrich was even 
     more disillusioned.  When the Bush camp refused to 
     meet with a group of Afghani resistance fighters, Wey-
     rich conspired to hide them in an adjoining room when 
     Dan Quayle turned up for a luncheon hosted by the Free 
     Congress Foundation;  the plan was to spring them on 
     the unsuspecting Quayle.  But at the last minute, Bill 
     Pascoe, Bush's liaison to the Beltway conservatives, 
     leaked the plot, and Weyrich snapped.  "Suddenly there 
     was a volcano of screaming," recalls one lobbyist in the 
     room.  "Weyrich was calling Bill a traitor.  He was 
     spitting and frothing at the mouth.  We were ready to 
     get him a room right next to Hinckley."  When the 
     yelling stopped, Weyrich dispatched a letter to Pascoe's 
     
     fiancee, questioning Pascoe's loyalty and implying that he 
     was unfit for marriage.
     
Id. at 22.  On the page opposite this vignette, there appears a 
second caricature, this time depicting appellant in a tie and 
suspenders, feeding on a skewer of charred bodies.  Its 
portrayal of appellant echoes Grann's comparison of appellant 
to conservatives generally:  "Since taking power in 1994, 
conservatives have gorged even by their standards.  They 
have savaged Dole, ravaged Gingrich, plumped up and then 
devoured Lott.  They have shut down the government they 
spent decades trying to fill.  They have, in short, acted as 
nutty as Weyrich."  Id. at 22.  The piece calls this tendency 
"Weyrichism," referring to "the kind of rhetoric that brands 
one's own people apostates when they make some of the 
compromises that power inevitably demands."  Id.

     Grann then details appellant's latest project, a conservative 
cable channel known as National Empowerment Television 
("NET"):  "Launched in 1993 with a budget of roughly $10 
million, it was supposed to be Weyrich's masterwork:  the 
first ideologically driven public affairs network in America, a 
kind of third-wave Pravda."  Id. at 23.  The article describes 
the network as a 24-hour vehicle, both on and off screen, for 
Weyrich's conservatism.  Not only did he host many of the 
shows, he "even imposed ideological litmus tests on stage-
hands and secretaries.  The result, staffers say, was sound 
technicians who could spout the pro-life line but not plug in 
the microphone."  Id.  Grann notes that "[o]ne reporter says 
he was nearly fired for getting a response from the Clinton 
administration about a scandal;  he recalls how, when a guest 
blurted out on air that he was gay, Weyrich became apoplec-
tic.  'Why should I be ashamed?'  Weyrich says.  'I want 
people on a mission.' "  According to the article, appellant 
eventually transformed the station into a self-contained fief-
dom:

     More and more isolated, Weyrich now surrounds himself 
     with a coterie of sycophants who, aides say, have little 
     understanding of television and who patrol the corridors 
     maintaining ideological discipline.  His inner circle con-
     
     sists mainly of family members who receive handsome 
     salaries for their services:  one son is in charge of 
     coalition luncheons;  another produces "Morning View" 
     on NET;  his daughter is vice president for development.
     
          Weyrich also increasingly relies on Bill Lind, a kind of 
     minister of culture who hosts "Next Revolution" each 
     week, always wearing what appears to be the same black 
     turtleneck.  Lind's own Manichaean ideology has only 
     encouraged Weyrich.
     
Id. at 24.

     "As they had back home in Wisconsin," the article reports, 
"people in Washington soon crossed to the other side of the 
street when they saw Weyrich coming.  Gingrich, who had 
anchored two shows, declined to sign another contract.  Lott 
revoked the special Senate parking privileges Weyrich had 
gotten after a car accident.  GOP Senator John McCain of 
Arizona refused even to talk to him.  'We know,' says Senator 
Orrin Hatch, 'who has the psychological problems.' "  Id.  By 
1996, the network had run into financial trouble.  Too much 
conservative competition on the national networks and main-
stream cable channels meant that Weyrich needed to "shout 
louder just to be heard.  On one recent evening, when 
Republican Congressman Joe Barton left an NET broadcast 
early in order to cast a vote, Weyrich lost it.  He blastfaxed 
his remarks to the media under the headline:  'Congressman 
walks out on NET live interview.'  'You wonder why they 
break their word on these big things,' he fumed.  'They can't 
even keep their word on little things.' "  Id.

     The article closes with Grann interviewing appellant at the 
Monocle, a famed insider Washington restaurant, "where 
JFK sent a limo from the White House to pick up his favorite 
sandwich."  Id.  Grann notices that appellant appears uncom-
fortable with his surroundings, that "[h]e seems conscious of 
being mistaken for the people around him....  When 
[Grann] ask[s] him what to order, he says he doesn't eat here 
enough to know.  Yet, judging by the staff's reaction to him, 
he seems to be a regular--a fact the manager later confirms."  
Id.  Asked whether he had not become "a kind of K Street 

Robespierre--a man who once devoted his life to building a 
movement and who now profits by destroying it," appellant 
offers Grann a "glimpse [of] his famous temper":

     "I defy anybody to tell me any privilege that I have as a 
     result of what I'm doing," Weyrich says, turning red.  "I 
     just think that is a bogus charge."  Though he makes at 
     least $280,000 a year for all his operations, and was 
     driven to the restaurant in a chauffeured sedan, [Grann 
     doesn't] say anything.  "If the good Lord wants me to do 
     something else then I'll be gone tomorrow," he continues, 
     his voice rising.  "Every year I have been in this city, I 
     find it more sinful.  And I have prayed many times for 
     the opportunity to do something else.  And so far the 
     answer keeps coming back:  'Keep doing what you're 
     doing.' "
     
Id.

B.   The Present Action

     Less than one year after the disputed publication, appellant 
filed suit against appellees The New Republic, Grann, and 
others in Florida state court for defamation, civil conspiracy 
to defame, and false light invasion of privacy.  See Complaint, 
Weyrich v. The New Republic, Inc., No. 098-7628 (Fla. Cir. 
Ct. Sept. 22, 1998) (hereinafter "Complaint"), reprinted in 
Joint Appendix ("J.A.") at 5.  Appellees removed the case on 
diversity grounds to the United States District Court for the 
Middle District of Florida, which then transferred it to the 
District Court for the District of Columbia.  The District 
Court dismissed the complaint on August 13, 1999 in response 
to appellees' Rule 12(b)(6) motion.  The instant appeal fol-
lowed.

     The complaint alleges that the article "contains false, mis-
leading, disparaging and defamatory statements about Mr. 
Weyrich that wrongfully portray him as mentally unsound 
and paranoid.  Persons who read this Article understood it to 
have such meaning."  Complaint p 12.  As examples, it cites 
both the above-quoted reference to "bouts of pessimism and 
paranoia," and a pair of sentences from the first page of the 

piece:  "The habits of suspicion, pessimism, and antagonism 
run too deep.  And nowhere do they run deeper than in Paul 
Weyrich."  Id. p 13 (quoting Article, at 20, but failing to finish 
the quoted sentence:  "--a man trying his hardest to destroy 
the very Republican establishment he spent his life building").  
In addition to these direct "attributions" of paranoia, the 
complaint identifies a number of the article's anecdotal vi-
gnettes, including most of the above-quoted passages, which 
"further wrongfully depict Mr. Weyrich as mentally unsound 
and paranoid ... [and] that wrongfully portray Mr. Weyrich 
as isolated, tyrannical and violent."  Id. pp 14-15.  Finally, it 
alleges that the two caricatures contribute to the article's 
portrait of appellant as "mentally unsound and paranoid."  
Id.pp 16-17.

                           II. Analysis

     We review the District Court's grant of appellees' Rule 
12(b)(6) motion to dismiss de novo.  Taylor v. FDIC, 132 F.3d 
753, 761 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  "Dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6) is 
proper when, taking the material allegations of the complaint 
as admitted, Jenkins v. McKeithen, 395 U.S. 411, 421 (1969), 
and construing them in plaintiff['s] favor, Scheuer v. Rhodes, 
416 U.S. 232, 236 (1974), the court finds that the plaintiff[ ] 
ha[s] failed to allege all the material elements of [his] cause of 
action."  Id.  In undertaking this review, we must assume, as 
the complaint alleges, the falsity of any express or implied 
factual statements made in the article.  See Complaint pp 12-
17, 28, 32.  We must also assume that such statements were 
made by appellees with knowledge of their falsity or reckless 
disregard for their truth.  See id.pp 29, 33.  We must then 
decide whether the disputed article (1) contains express or 
implied verifiably false statements of fact, which (2) are 
reasonably capable of defamatory meaning or otherwise place 
appellant in an offensive false light.  See Moldea v. New York 
Times Co., 15 F.3d 1137, 1142-43 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (hereinafter 
"Moldea I"), rev'd in part on reh'g, 22 F.3d 310 (D.C. Cir. 
1994) (hereinafter "Moldea II");  see also Guilford Transp. 
Ind., Inc. v. Wilner, 760 A.2d 580, 597 (D.C. 2000).

A.   Verifiable Statements under Milkovich, Moldea I, and 
     Moldea II

     For a statement to be actionable under the First Amend-
ment, it must at a minimum express or imply a verifiably 
false fact about appellant.  Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co., 
497 U.S. 1, 19-20 (1990);  Moldea II, 22 F.3d at 313 ("[S]tate-
ments of opinion can be actionable if they imply a provably 
false fact, or rely upon stated facts that are provably false.").  
However, "a statement of opinion relating to matters of public 
concern which does not contain a provably false factual 
connotation will receive full constitutional protection."  Mil-
kovich, 497 U.S. at 20 (relying on Philadelphia Newspapers, 
Inc. v. Hepps, 475 U.S. 767 (1986)).  Thus, the First Amend-
ment provides protection for "statements that cannot 'reason-
ably [be] interpreted as stating actual facts' about an individ-
ual."  Milkovich, 497 U.S. at 20 (quoting Hustler Magazine, 
Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 50 (1988)).  In deciding whether 
a reasonable factfinder could conclude that a statement ex-
pressed or implied a verifiably false fact about appellant, the 
court must consider the statement in context.  Moldea II, 22 
F.3d at 313-15.  "This provides assurance that public debate 
will not suffer for lack of 'imaginative expression' or the 
'rhetorical hyperbole' which has traditionally added much to 
the discourse of our Nation."  Milkovich, 497 U.S. at 20 
(quoting Hustler Magazine, 485 U.S. at 53-55).  Verifiability 
is therefore a critical threshold question at the Rule 12(b)(6) 
stage.

     With these principles in mind, we reject appellant's claim 
that, by stating that he "began to suffer bouts of pessimism 
and paranoia" following the 1981 election, the article actually 
attributes to appellant a "debilitating psychological condi-
tion."  Appellant's Br. at 15.  The article's single reference to 
"paranoia" is certainly pejorative, but the author deploys it in 
its popular, not clinical, sense to describe and criticize what 
he sees as "early symptoms of the nervous breakdown that 
afflicts conservatives today."  Article, at 22.  Appellees right-
ly point out that the definitive, clinical term "paranoia" has 
taken on a less-than-definitive popular meaning, as have 
"crazy" and "nutty."

     Appellant argues that the present case is indistinguishable 
from Goldwater v. Ginzburg, 414 F.2d 324 (2d Cir. 1969), in 
which the Second Circuit upheld a defamation judgment 
against media defendants for reporting that Senator Barry 
Goldwater had a paranoiac personality.  There, two authors 
penned a psychobiography of the Senator for Fact Magazine, 
asserting that he, in fact, suffered from clinically diagnosable 
paranoia.  In so doing, they relied on a single-question survey 
of thousands of psychiatrists, whom they asked whether the 
Senator was "psychologically fit to serve as President of the 
United States" after informing each that the Senator had 
already suffered from two nervous breakdowns (which was 
not true).  Id. at 329-30.  They presented their findings as a 
psychological profile of the Senator, detailing various instanc-
es of his political and personal conduct as predictable man-
ifestations of an underlying psychological illness.  In short, 
the article purported to be a well-researched psychiatric 
diagnosis--which it was not.

     The holding in Goldwater is both unremarkable and inappo-
site.  The defendants in that case had published a fraudulent 
diagnosis, which was itself verifiable.  Here, references to 
"bouts of pessimism and paranoia," "habits of suspicion, pessi-
mism, and antagonism," and the fact that other conservatives 
have acted "as nutty as Weyrich," cannot be so understood.  
Certainly, looking at these statements in isolation, a reason-
able reader might interpret them to attribute a diagnosable 
and debilitating mental affliction to appellant.  "Bouts of ... 
paranoia" might suggest appellant actually suffered repeated 
delusional or psychotic episodes, as appellant's brief suggests.  
But, the First Amendment demands that we place these 
references in their proper context.  Moldea II, 22 F.3d at 314 
(reversing in part Moldea I on rehearing, because "Moldea I 
erred in assuming that Milkovich abandoned the principle of 
looking to the context in which speech appears").

     The present case fits comfortably within the well-guarded 
Bresler-Letter Carriers line of decisions, the vitality of which 
the Supreme Court recently reaffirmed in Milkovich.  497 
U.S. at 20.  In Greenbelt Cooperative Publishing Ass'n v. 
Bresler, 398 U.S. 6 (1970), the Court extended First Amend-

ment protection to a newspaper's assertion that a real estate 
developer had "blackmailed" the city.  The Court noted that 
the statements would have been actionable if the paper 
actually had accused Bresler of committing the crime of 
blackmail.  However, context revealed that the newspaper 
had used the term only to describe Bresler's hard-nosed 
negotiating tactics.  Id. at 13.  Similarly, in National Ass'n of 
Letter Carriers v. Austin, 418 U.S. 264 (1974), the Court held 
that a union could not be sued for its use of the term "scab," 
defined in part as a "traitor," though actual accusations of 
treason would be actionable.  Id. at 283-84.

     As used in the present case, the term "paranoia" animates 
the author's critique of what he sees as appellant's (and other 
conservatives') unwavering and, ultimately, self-defeating po-
litical dogmatism.  The difficulty in the present case, if there 
is one, stems from the author's decision to interweave exam-
ples of appellant's political extremism with examples of his 
behavioral extremism.  In one episode, the article reports 
appellant as having "snapped" and "frothed at the mouth," 
erupting in anger so irrationally that onlookers were "ready 
to get him a room right next to Hinckley."  Article, at 22.  In 
another, he becomes "apoplectic" after a guest admits his 
homosexuality on the air.  Id. at 23.  Former colleagues no 
longer speak to him;  Orrin Hatch has implied that he has 
"psychological problems."  Id. at 24.  Appellant has with-
drawn, "[m]ore and more isolated," surrounding himself with 
"a coterie of sycophants," including Bill Lind, whose "Mani-
chaean ideology has only encouraged [appellant]."  Id.  Ap-
pellant argues that these episodes and anecdotes provide as 
much context for the phrase "bouts of ... paranoia" as does 
the general political commentary, and a reasonable reader 
might therefore regard the article as actually asserting that 
appellant suffers from, or has been diagnosed with, a psycho-
logical ailment.

     Admittedly, the article paints an unflattering picture of 
appellant.  Indeed, it uses examples of his "famous temper" 
to shade the line between political extremism and personal 
extremism, suggesting that the alleged irrationality of the 
conservative right runs deeper than mere ideology.  But the 

article's suggestion that appellant's behavior exhibited "para-
noia" is rhetorical sophistry, not a verifiably false attribution 
in fact of a "debilitating mental condition" as was the case in 
Goldwater.  Never does the article claim to make a psycho-
logical pronouncement, nor would a reasonable reader under-
stand it to do so.  The New Republic is itself well-known to 
be a magazine of political commentary, a self-described 
"Weekly Journal of Opinion."  Presented in such a loose 
manner, in such a well-understood context, the article's refer-
ence to "bouts of ... paranoia" is neither verifiable nor does 
it imply specific defamatory facts about appellant.  Likewise, 
the caricatures, though biting, are not actionable.  See Hus-
tler Magazine, 485 U.S. at 53-54 (extolling the value of 
political cartoons to a free society).

     These findings do not end our analysis, however.  The fact 
that the use of the term "paranoia" constitutes protected, 
unverifiable comment in the present case does not insulate 
the otherwise verifiable anecdotes reported by the author in 
support of his assertions that Weyrich is "nutty" and notable 
for his "famous temper."  In other words, an article's political 
"context" does not indiscriminately immunize every statement 
contained therein.

     The complaint asserts that appellees have published a 
number of false anecdotes, suggesting to the average reader 
that appellant is not only a political reactionary, but emotion-
ally volatile, perhaps even mentally unsound, and otherwise 
unfit for his profession.  For example, the article includes 
some historical vignettes which, alone and in concert, offer 
the reader a glimpse of appellant's "famous temper."  Article, 
at 24.  Unlike the two caricatures, nothing in the common 
parlance of political criticism would alert a reasonable reader 
that the article's anecdotes about Weyrich are other than 
verifiable facts.  Indeed, in a number of instances, the author 
utilizes quotations, some purportedly from appellant, to fur-
ther reinforce the impression that the stories are in fact true.  
See Masson v. New Yorker Magazine, Inc., 501 U.S. 496, 
519-20 (1991) ("The orthodox use of a quotation is the quin-
tessential 'direct account of events that speak for them-
selves.' " (quoting Time, Inc. v. Pape, 401 U.S. 279, 285 

(1971)).  The anecdotes are not offered as forms of parody, 
see Hustler Magazine, 485 U.S. 46 (offering examples of 
protected parody);  they are presented as the truth about 
Weyrich.  And in most instances, the offending anecdotes are 
verifiable.

     The line separating a fabricated narrative and hyperbolic 
description of an actual event is sometimes fuzzy.  The First 
Amendment protects a reporter's "rational interpretation" of 
events or factual statements when relying on ambiguous 
sources.  Masson, 501 U.S. at 519.  If it turns out that the 
facts underlying the offending anecdotes are true, and appel-
lant takes issue instead with the article's description and 
rhetorical juxtaposition of events, appellant's claim must fail.  
Rational interpretation passes over into verifiably false re-
porting of the described events only when the author has, 
through description and reporting, materially altered the 
underlying facts.  Id. at 516.  These issues are not before us 
on this appeal, however.  Rather, as noted above, our inqui-
ries on this appeal are limited to whether the disputed article 
(1) contains express or implied verifiably false statements of 
fact, which (2) are reasonably capable of defamatory meaning 
or otherwise place appellant in an offensive false light.  We 
conclude here that the reported anecdotes survive the verifia-
bility screen.  We turn now to consider whether the cited 
anecdotes are reasonably capable of defamatory meaning.

B.   Reasonably Capable of Defamatory Meaning

     Because this is a diversity action, we must first decide the 
proper law of defamation and false light invasion of privacy to 
apply.  This court looks to the choice of law rules prevailing 
in the District of Columbia, see Klaxon Co. v. Stentor Elec. 
Mfg. Co., 313 U.S. 487, 496 (1941), which employs the govern-
mental interest analysis test of the Restatement Second of 
Conflict of Laws, Vaughan v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 702 
A.2d 198, 200 (D.C. 1997).  Applying it to defamation actions, 
"[t]he weight of authority considers that the law to be applied 
is ... [that of] the place where the plaintiff suffered injury by 
reason of his loss of reputation."  Dowd v. Calabrese, 589 

F. Supp. 1206, 1210 (D.D.C. 1984) (citing Restatement (Sec-
ond) of Conflict of Laws s 150 cmt. e (1971)).  Given the 
nature of appellant's livelihood, given that appellant worked 
in Washington, D.C. at the time the article was published, and 
given that both parties rely on District of Columbia law, we 
apply the District's common law of defamation and false light 
invasion of privacy in assessing the claims before us.

     A statement is actionable in defamation under District of 
Columbia law if it is both false and defamatory.  Moldea I, 15 
F.3d at 1142.  As noted above, because this is an appeal from 
a grant of a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, we must assume the falsity 
of any verifiable statement.  A statement is defamatory "if it 
tends to injure plaintiff in his trade, profession or community 
standing, or lower him in the estimation of the community."  
Liberty Lobby, Inc. v. Dow Jones & Co., 838 F.2d 1287, 1293-
94 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (quoting Howard Univ. v. Best, 484 A.2d 
958, 988 (D.C. 1984)).  An "allegedly defamatory remark must 
be more than unpleasant or offensive;  the language must 
make the plaintiff appear 'odious, infamous, or ridiculous.' "  
Best, 484 A.2d at 989.  Whether a statement is capable of 
defamatory meaning is a question of law, but "[i]t is only 
when the court can say that the publication is not reasonably 
capable of any defamatory meaning and cannot be reasonably 
understood in any defamatory sense that it can rule as a 
matter of law, that it was not libelous."  White v. Fraternal 
Order of Police, 909 F.2d 512, 518 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (quoting 
Levy v. American Mut. Ins. Co., 196 A.2d 475, 476 (D.C. 
1964)).

     Although we do not here dissect each verifiable statement 
to provide an exhaustive list for the District Court, potential 
candidates include the author's observation that appellant, in 
response to Bill Pascoe's perceived betrayal, "snapped," 
erupted in a "volcano of screaming," "froth[ed] at the mouth," 
and "dispatched a letter to Pascoe's fiancEe, questioning 
Pascoe's loyalty and implying that he was unfit for marriage."  
Article, at 22.  If indeed the story is fabricated, we cannot 
say that it is not reasonably capable of any defamatory 
meaning--it arguably makes appellant appear highly volatile, 

irrational, unsound and otherwise "odious, infamous, or ridic-
ulous."

     Not all of the verifiably false anecdotes relied upon by 
appellant are reasonably capable of defamatory meaning.  
For example, at the hearing on the motion to dismiss in the 
District Court, counsel for appellant protested vigorously that 
the author had defamed appellant by falsely asserting that 
Newt Gingrich had refused to sign another NET anchor 
contract, that Trent Lott had revoked appellant's capitol 
parking privileges, and that John McCain will not talk with 
him.  Transcript of Hearing, at 8-9 (Aug. 13, 1999), reprinted 
in J.A. at 33.  We agree with the District Court that, even if 
false, these facially innocuous statements are not themselves 
defamatory and, as such, should have no bearing on the 
resolution of appellant's claims on remand.  They certainly do 
not, on their face, suggest anything untoward about appellant.  
On remand, the District Court must decide which of the 
verifiably false statements cited by appellant are reasonably 
capable of defamatory meaning.  We emphasize again that, to 
be actionable, the story must be materially false.  If the 
author has merely hyperbolized, provided colorful rhetorical 
description of appellant's anger, that will not suffice.  Re-
statement (Second) of Torts  s 581A cmt. f (1977) ("Slight 
inaccuracies of expression are immaterial provided that the 
defamatory charge is true in substance.");  see also Masson, 
501 U.S. at 516-17 (applying "substantial truth" doctrine).

C.   False Light Invasion of Privacy

     We pause only briefly over appellant's related false light 
invasion of privacy claim.  Though invasion of privacy false 
light is distinct from the tort of defamation, the same First 
Amendment protections apply.  See Moldea I, 15 F.3d at 
1151 ("[A] plaintiff may not avoid the strictures of the bur-
dens of proof associated with defamation by resorting to a 
claim of false light invasion.").  Because the two torts are so 
similar, "[a] plaintiff may only recover on one of the two 
theories based on a single publication, but is free to plead 
them in the alternative."  Id.

     To prevail on a false light claim under District of Columbia 
law, appellant must show that (a) the published material 
places appellant in a false light which "would be highly 
offensive to a reasonable person," and (b) "the actor had 
knowledge of or acted in reckless disregard as to the falsity of 
the publicized matter and the false light in which the other 
would be placed."  Id. at 1150-51 (quoting Restatement 
(Second) of Torts s 652E).  The second element tracks the 
First Amendment's intent requirement for defamation claims 
brought by public figures, see New York Times, 376 U.S. 254, 
and the court at this stage assumes the requisite state of 
mind.  The Restatement Second of Torts recognizes that the 
"highly offensive" and "odious, infamous, and ridiculous" in-
quiries, though similar, may sometimes produce different 
results.  Restatement (Second) of Torts s 652E cmt. b.  We 
remind the District Court that, before finding that a state-
ment is not actionable, because it is not reasonably capable of 
defamatory meaning, it must also satisfy itself that the state-
ment does not arguably place appellant in a "highly offensive" 
false light.

                         III. Conclusion

     Political commentary can be brutal, and the brutality of 
that commentary alone does not render protected speech 
unprotected.  But neither does the label "political commen-
tary" insulate the reporting of verifiable and arguably defam-
atory facts.  There is no doubt that a reasonable person, 
reading the article's repeated tale of appellant's volatile tem-
per and apparent emotional instability, could very well con-
clude that appellant is an emotionally unstable individual unfit 
for his trade or profession.  One or more of the anecdotes 
arguably make appellant appear personally odious, infamous, 
or ridiculous.  On remand, the District Court must take pains 
to distinguish those anecdotes that are both verifiably false 
and reasonably capable of defamatory meaning from those 
that are not.

     In remanding this case, we do not in any way suggest the 
proper outcome on the merits.  Appellant must still clear a 

number of difficult hurdles.  He must show that the potential-
ly defamatory statements are indeed materially false.  Be-
cause appellant is a public figure and the offending state-
ments speak to his capabilities and credibility as a political 
actor, he must also "demonstrate by clear and convincing 
evidence that [appellees] published the defamatory falsehood 
with 'actual malice,' that is, with 'knowledge that it was false 
or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.' "  
Liberty Lobby, 838 F.2d at 1292 (quoting New York Times, 
376 U.S. at 280).

     We are mindful that trial courts are understandably wary 
of allowing unnecessary discovery where First Amendment 
values might be threatened.  As we have suggested on previ-
ous occasions, the District Court may in its discretion limit 
discovery to the threshold issue of falsity, thereby delaying 
and possibly eliminating the more burdensome discovery 
surrounding evidence of "actual malice."  McBride v. Merrell 
Dow & Pharm., Inc., 800 F.2d 1208, 1214 (D.C. Cir. 1986).

                                                              So ordered.

                                   