                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 28, 2000   Decided January 5, 2001 

                           No. 00-7021

   Western Associates Limited Partnership, individually and on 
        behalf of Avenue Associates Limited Partnership, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                Market Square Associates, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv02452)

     Barry Wm. Levine argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs was Richard J. Conway.

     Paul B. Gaffney argued the cause for appellees.  With him 
on the brief were Paul Martin Wolff, Joseph B. Tompkins, 
Jr., and Christine Liverzani Prame. James D. Miller, Mi-
chael R. Smith and Peter M. Todaro entered appearances.

     Before:  Henderson, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  In this appeal the court again 
addresses the continuity prong of the "pattern of racketeer-
ing activity" requirement of the Racketeer Influenced and 
Corrupt Organizations Act ("RICO"), 18 U.S.C. s 1961, et 
seq.  Western Associates Limited Partnership ("Western") 
sued various individuals and investors associated with Market 
Square Associates (collectively, "Market"), its partner in the 
development of a real estate project known as Market 
Square.  Western alleged violations under RICO and District 
of Columbia law based on an accounting dispute in the 
partnership.  The district court, applying the multi-factor 
analysis of Edmondson & Gallagher v. Alban Towers Tenants 
Association, 48 F.3d 1260 (D.C. Cir. 1995), dismissed the 
complaint pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) because West-
ern failed to allege the requisite pattern of racketeering 
activity.1  Western contends that in finding the "continuity" 
element lacking, the district court erred by failing to focus on 
the length of the time period during which Market's predicate 
acts occurred, and misread Edmondson.  We disagree, and 
accordingly we affirm.

                                I.

     Market Square is a mixed-use property in downtown Wash-
ington, D.C. that consists of office and retail space and 
residential condominium units.  In 1985, Western, a District 
of Columbia limited partnership, formed Avenue Associates 
Limited Partnership ("Avenue Associates") to "develop, own, 
manage, and ultimately dispose of the Market Square Pro-
ject."  In 1987, Western invited Market Square Associates, a 
Washington, D.C. general partnership, to join Avenue Associ-
ates.  Upon completion of the construction of the project, 
Western held a 30 percent limited partnership interest, and 

__________
     1  After dismissing the RICO claims, the district court dismissed 
the remaining claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  See 28 
U.S.C. s 1367(c)(3).

Market Square Associates owned a 67.5 percent limited part-
nership interest and a 2.5 percent general partnership inter-
est.

     In October 1997, Western filed suit in the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia, alleging that 
beginning in 1988 and continuing for more than eight years 
thereafter, Market repeatedly violated partnership agree-
ments, transmitted fraudulent accounting statements, and 
stole the value of Western's partnership interest.  At the 
heart of the alleged fraud are alleged misrepresentations of 
expected costs and profits that Market made in budget 
projections for the Market Square project.  According to the 
complaint, after Western was deceived into approving a 
fraudulent budget in 1989, Market covered up its misrepre-
sentations by exaggerating the economic viability of the pro-
ject in annual financial statements.  Western alleged that 
Market also violated the terms of the partnership agreement 
regarding the priority of cash flow distribution by improperly 
favoring itself over Western for cash flow disbursements, and 
caused the partnership to repay loans for cost overruns that 
Market alone was responsible for repaying.  Western assert-
ed that as a result of Market's violations of the RICO Act, 
Western had suffered over $89 million in damages.2

     The following month, in November 1997, Western filed for 
an injunction to prevent Market from transferring some of its 
interests in the Market Square Project.  Relying on 
Edmondson, the district court denied the request for an 
injunction, ruling that because Western had alleged a single 
scheme, a single discrete injury, and a single victim, Western 
had not demonstrated the requisite "pattern of racketeering 
activity" under s 1961(5) of the RICO Act, and thus, was 
unlikely to succeed on the merits.

     Subsequently, Western filed an amended complaint, in-
creasing the number of schemes and victims alleged.  The 

__________
     2  Under RICO's civil provisions, treble damages may be sought 
by "any person injured in his business or property," 18 U.S.C. 
s 1964(c), by one or more of four types of "prohibited activities," 
which are defined in 18 U.S.C. s 1962.

amended complaint alleges that Market conspired to commit 
and engaged in four separate but related schemes to defraud 
Avenue Associates, Western, and the general and limited 
partners that make up Western.  The four schemes consist 
of:  (1) the Revised Budget-Approval Scheme;  (2) the Cost-
Shifting Scheme;  (3) the Income Projection Scheme;  and (4) 
the Going-Concern Scheme.

     The four alleged schemes are briefly summarized as fol-
lows.  (1) The Revised Budget-Approval Scheme was a plot 
to conceal cost overruns.  According to the complaint, Market 
knew as early as April 1988 that the total cost of the project 
would exceed the original budget, and improperly approved 
and conspired to conceal cost increases.  In August 1989, 
after 18 months, Market sent a revised budget to Western, 
knowing that the cost projections in this budget were also 
inaccurate.  Western relied on the false representations in 
the revised budget and approved it in December 1989.  (2) 
The Cost-Shifting Scheme addresses the priority of alloca-
tions and the continuing cost increases.  The partnership's 
budgets called for costs to be divided into "guaranteed" and 
"non-guaranteed" categories, and prohibited guaranteed cost 
overruns from being repaid from partnership cash flow.  Ac-
cording to the complaint, Market circumvented these account-
ing restrictions by shifting guaranteed cost items into the 
non-guaranteed category, used improperly authorized option-
al loans to cover these cost increases, and repaid these loans 
out of partnership distributions.  This fraudulent scheme was 
concealed by annual financial statements mailed to Western 
each year between 1990 and 1996.  (3) The Income Projection 
Scheme arises from Market's attempt to conceal the impact of 
the budget overruns.  According to the complaint, in 1992, in 
a series of financial documents, Market falsely represented 
the expected revenues from Market Square over the next 15 
years, overstated the value the cost increases had added to 
the project, and deceived Western regarding the partner-
ship's debt.  Due to these misrepresentations, Western re-
frained from suing appellees or pursuing other remedies.  (4) 
The Going-Concern Scheme relates to a failure to provide 
honest annual accounting statements.  The complaint alleges 

that from 1994 to 1996, Market sent Western financial state-
ments that omitted a "going-concern clause," in an effort to 
conceal Avenue Associates' burdensome debt.

     According to the amended complaint, Western did not 
become aware that the Market Square Project's financial 
health was in jeopardy until early 1997, when it received a 
financial statement indicating that the partnership was having 
difficulty meeting its financial obligations.  This statement 
also acknowledged that Market Square would not meet Mar-
ket's 1992 income projections.  The amended complaint al-
leged that the four schemes included numerous violations of 
the mail and wire fraud statutes, 18 U.S.C. ss 1341 and 1343, 
and that these allegedly fraudulent acts violated s 1962(c) of 
the RICO Act.  Western also alleged a violation of s 1962(d) 
of the RICO Act, which prohibits conspiracy to violate 
s 1962(c).  Finally, Western alleged common law claims of 
fraud, civil conspiracy to defraud, breach of fiduciary duty, 
aiding and abetting a fiduciary, and breach of contract, and 
requested various types of injunctive relief, including access 
to the records of Avenue Associates.

     The district court granted Market's motion to dismiss 
under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), based on Western's failure to 
allege a "pattern of racketeering activity," as required by 
s 1961(5) of the RICO Act.  Relying on similarities to 
Edmondson, 48 F.3d 1260, the district court found Western's 
RICO claims deficient because Western had alleged a single 
fraudulent scheme, the single harm of a diminished partner-
ship interest, and, at most, one set of victims.  The district 
court rejected Western's argument that because it had al-
leged fraudulent acts over an eight-year period of time, it had 
successfully distinguished Edmondson and established a pat-
tern of racketeering activity.

                               II.

     On appeal, Western contends that the district court misap-
plied Edmondson and overlooked the importance of the eight-
year time period during which the alleged fraud occurred.  
Our review of the district court's order dismissing the com-

plaint is de novo.  The court assumes that the factual allega-
tions in the complaint are true, but it is not bound by the 
complaint's legal conclusions.  See Whitacre v. Davey, 890 
F.2d 1168, 1168 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1989).

     A violation of s 1962(c) of the RICO Act consists of four 
elements:  "(1) conduct (2) of an enterprise (3) through a 
pattern (4) of racketeering activity."  Pyramid Securities 
Ltd. v. IB Resolution, Inc., 924 F.2d 1114, 1117 (D.C. Cir. 
1991) (quoting Sedima, S.P.R.L. v. Imrex Co., 473 U.S. 479, 
496 (1985)).  The RICO Act defines the term "pattern of 
racketeering activity" as requiring the commission of at least 
two predicate racketeering offenses over a ten year period.  
See 18 U.S.C. s 1961(5).  These predicate offenses are acts 
punishable under certain state and federal criminal laws, 
including mail and wire fraud.  See 18 U.S.C. s 1961(1)(B).

     The Supreme Court has interpreted the pattern require-
ment to include two additional elements:  relatedness and 
continuity.  H.J. Inc. v. Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., 492 
U.S. 229, 239 (1989).  "To prove a pattern of racketeering a 
plaintiff or prosecutor must show that the racketeering predi-
cates are related, and that they amount to or pose a threat of 
continued criminal activity."  Id.  The Court further de-
scribed the relatedness element as criminal acts that share 
"similar purposes, results, victims, or methods of commission, 
or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteris-
tics."  Id. at 240.  Continuity, the most relevant prong in the 
instant case, may be proved by establishing either a "closed 
period of repeated conduct" or a threat of future criminal 
activity.  Id. at 241.  Western alleged a closed period of 
continuous criminal activity between 1988 and 1997.

     The Supreme Court in H.J. Inc. suggested that the related-
ness and continuity concepts required further development in 
subsequent cases, and urged a "natural and commonsense 
approach to RICO's pattern element."  Id. at 237.  In 
Edmondson, this court provided more guidance on the nebu-
lous issue of what constitutes a pattern of racketeering activi-
ty.  Edmondson involved a real estate developer that accused 
a tenants' association of illegally attempting to block the sale 

of the building in which members of the tenants' association 
lived.  See Edmondson, 48 F.3d at 1263-64.  The real estate 
developer alleged that the tenants had "exploited [a] quiet-
title action, holding the building sale hostage and thereby 
attempting to force [the developer] to pay them off."  Id. 
Based on predicate acts such as extortion, bribery, and 
perjury, the developer asserted that the association had vio-
lated RICO.  The court affirmed the dismissal of the RICO 
claims because "the single scheme alleged--designed to frus-
trate one transaction and inflicting a single, discrete injury on 
a small number of victims--fail[ed] to meet RICO's require-
ment of a 'pattern of racketeering activity.' "  Id. at 1263.

     Edmondson identified six factors that a court should con-
sider "in deciding whether a [RICO] pattern has been estab-
lished."  Id. at 1265.  These factors are:  "the number of 
unlawful acts, the length of time over which the acts were 
committed, the similarity of the acts, the number of victims, 
the number of perpetrators, and the character of the unlawful 
activity."  Id. (quoting Kehr Packages, Inc. v. Fidelcor, Inc., 
926 F.2d 1406, 1411-13 (3d Cir. 1991)) (internal quotation 
marks omitted).  Edmondson does not establish a rigid test, 
but rather presents a flexible guide for analyzing RICO 
allegations on a case by case basis.  The court in Edmondson 
acknowledged that in some cases "some factors will weigh so 
strongly in one direction as to be dispositive."  Id.  The court 
also indicated that if a plaintiff alleges only a single scheme, a 
single injury, and few victims it is "virtually impossible for 
plaintiffs to state a RICO claim."  Id.

     Analyzing the allegations of the amended complaint 
through the six-factor lens of Edmondson inexorably leads to 
the conclusion that Western failed to state a legally cogniza-
ble claim under RICO.  Edmondson provides a compelling 
analogy because Western has alleged only a single scheme, a 
single injury, and a single victim (or single set of victims).  
Thus, Western has failed to satisfy the continuity prong of 
RICO's "pattern of racketeering activity" requirement.

     The district court properly rejected Western's notion that 
numerous schemes to defraud were perpetrated by Market.  

"The court need not accept inferences drawn by plaintiffs if 
such inferences are unsupported by the facts set out in the 
complaint.  Nor must the court accept legal conclusions cast 
in the form of factual allegations."  Kowal v. MCI Communi-
cations Corp., 16 F.3d 1271, 1276 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (citing 
Papasan v. Allain, 478 U.S. 265, 286 (1986)).  As the district 
court found, Market's conduct is more accurately character-
ized as a single effort to diminish the value of Western's 
partnership interest, primarily by concealing cost overruns or 
shifting the burden of financing them.  Indeed, Western's 
four-scheme division appears specious on its face.  Compar-
ing the amended complaint with the original complaint fur-
ther demonstrates that Western's four purported schemes are 
merely a cosmetic disguise of a single scheme.  The amended 
complaint simply subdivides Western's initial allegations.  
Despite Western's protests that the court must focus on its 
amended complaint, it is appropriate for the court to look 
beyond the amended complaint to the record, which includes 
the original complaint.  See Philips v. Bureau of Prisons, 591 
F.2d 966, 969 (D.C. Cir. 1979);  5A Charles Alan Wright and 
Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure s 1357 (2d 
ed. 1990).  Thus, the district court properly observed not only 
that the amended complaint merely "dress[ed] up the old 
[complaint] with ... boilerplate RICO verbiage," but also 
that "W[estern] appears to have distorted the allegations 
against [Market] to create the appearance of multiple injuries 
to multiple victims in an apparent effort to satisfy the statuto-
ry language of RICO."

     It is true that depending on the specific circumstances a 
single scheme may suffice for purposes of RICO.  The Su-
preme Court in H.J. Inc. rejected the idea that multiple 
schemes must be proved to establish a pattern of racketeer-
ing activity.  See H.J. Inc., 492 U.S. at 240.  Our holding in 
Edmondson is not to the contrary.  See Edmondson, 48 F.3d 
at 1265.  The Supreme Court also emphasized that the con-
cept of a racketeering "scheme" does not appear in the RICO 
statute, and indicated that it should be applied with caution 
because it is amorphous, highly elastic, and subject to "the 
level of generality at which criminal activity is viewed."  H.J. 

Inc., 492 U.S. at 241 n.3.  However, the number of schemes 
alleged remains a useful consideration.  For example, the 
Supreme Court in H.J. Inc. stated that "proof that a RICO 
defendant has been involved in multiple criminal schemes 
would certainly be highly relevant to the inquiry into the 
continuity of the defendant's racketeering activity."  Id. at 
240.  Although the definition of "scheme" is imprecise, this 
court can help to clarify how this term should be understood 
by providing examples and by indicating "what lies beyond 
[its] conceptual scope."  Apparel Art Int'l, Inc. v. Jacobson, 
967 F.2d 720, 722 (1st Cir. 1992).

     The instant case serves as an example of a vain attempt to 
make a RICO claim seem more viable by parsing one scheme 
into multiple schemes.  See Sil-Flo, Inc. v. SFHC, Inc., 917 
F.2d 1507, 1516 (10th Cir. 1990).  Western's subdivision of 
Market's alleged fraudulent activity is unavailing because the 
four schemes are so similar in nature and purpose (i.e., they 
involve contested bookkeeping entries), and they resulted in a 
single harm rather than separate injuries.  See supra p. 4.  
For the term "scheme" to retain any utility, it cannot be so 
easily invoked that it allows such closely related accounting 
misrepresentations involving a single project to be considered 
distinct schemes.  Under Western's interpretation of what 
constitutes a scheme, almost any fraudulent act could be 
subdivided to establish a RICO claim.  Cf. Apparel Art, 967 
F.2d at 722-23.

     Western's allegations of multiple victims are dubious for 
similar reasons.  By alleging harm to each individual member 
of its partnership, Western has again artificially subdivided 
an aspect of its allegations in a transparent effort to make 
Market's alleged fraudulent conduct seem more expansive.  
For the purposes of RICO pattern analysis, this set of victims 
should be viewed as a single victim.  The district court 
correctly noted that if "W[estern] was injured then naturally 
those who have a financial interest in [Western] may be 
affected."  To the extent that Western's partners were in-
jured, they were injured indirectly, which does not make 
them individual victims under RICO.  Cf. Wade v. Hopper, 
993 F.2d 1246, 1250 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 193 

(1993).  For example, in Wade, the court affirmed the dis-
missal of a RICO claim brought by shareholders against 
alleged looters of a corporation, because the shareholders 
sued individually, and not on the corporation's behalf.  See id.  
The court held that the RICO claim belonged only to the 
corporation, and thus the shareholders were not the "proper 
parties to bring a RICO claim for harm done to [the corpora-
tion]."  Id.  The court also faulted the plaintiff-appellants for 
failing to "describe how they were directly and personally 
injured by the alleged RICO violations."  Id.

     Furthermore, the concept of a single set of victims is 
distinct from a class of victims who are all similarly and 
directly injured, and who should not be considered to be a 
single victim.  For example, in H.J. Inc. the class of victims 
was thousands of customers who were each directly injured 
by a telephone company accused of charging unreasonable 
rates.  Similarly, the single injury to Western was its dimin-
ished partnership interest, and Western does not appear to 
have alleged multiple injuries.

     Consequently, Western can meet the RICO pattern re-
quirement only if it is able to effectively distinguish 
Edmondson.  Western's primary contention in that regard 
focuses on the length of time during which Market mailed and 
faxed alleged financial misrepresentations.  The amended 
complaint alleges dozens of predicate acts extending continu-
ally over an eight-year period, in contrast with Edmondson, 
where the predicate acts extended only over three years, with 
most of the acts occurring in a one-month period.  Western 
relies on the Supreme Court's statement that "continuity is 
centrally a temporal concept," H.J. Inc., 492 U.S. at 242, in 
maintaining that the time difference between the two fact 
patterns is sufficient to establish a dispositive difference.  
According to Western, the district court misinterpreted 
Edmondson by not regarding the length of time over which 
the predicate acts occurred as the most important factor in its 
analysis.

     This line of reasoning is unpersuasive for at least two 
reasons:  it distorts both Supreme Court and D.C. Circuit 
precedent.  First, Western misinterprets H.J. Inc. to the 

extent that it claims that time is such an important factor that 
an eight-year span must create a viable RICO action.  As the 
district court explained, "[t]he mere longevity of a scheme or 
schemes does not necessarily mean that a 'pattern of racke-
teering activity' is present."  H.J. Inc. requires that predicate 
acts be committed over a period longer than "a few weeks or 
months," but an eight-year time period, though highly rele-
vant, is not dispositive.  Even if temporal length was sup-
posed to be the most heavily weighted factor in the multi-
faceted Edmondson analysis (an assumption that is not neces-
sarily mandated by H.J. Inc.), it may be trumped by other 
factors of the Edmondson analysis.  Although H.J. Inc. 
stresses that RICO is directed towards "long-term criminal 
conduct," id., it also makes plain that a pattern can be defined 
with "reference to a range of different ordering principles or 
relationships between predicates, within the expansive bounds 
set."  Id. at 239.

     Second, Western misreads Edmondson to stand for the 
proposition that "sporadic criminal activity ... does not satis-
fy H.J. Inc.'s mandate that predicate acts occur over a 
substantial period of time."  Although the court took tempo-
ral length into account in Edmondson, its rationale relied 
more on three other factors:  "single scheme, single injury, 
and few victims."  Edmondson, 48 F.3d at 1265.  Instead of 
concluding that the predicate acts were too sporadic, the 
court stated in Edmondson that even an assumption that the 
acts were committed over a three year time period could not 
salvage the plaintiff's RICO claims.  See id.

     Finally, not to be overlooked is the character of the alleged 
racketeering activity.  The amended complaint describes a 
business dispute about cost and income projections, and the 
priority of allocations, rather than a wide-ranging series of 
extensive criminal schemes.  Market's conduct can basically 
be characterized as beginning with fraudulent budget under-
estimates, with the subsequent predicate acts serving as 
attempts to cover up or shift the debt burden caused by cost 
overruns.  Additionally, many of the predicate acts consist of 
mailings of annual financial reporting statements that Market 
was ostensibly obligated to provide to Western.  Because 

most of the predicate acts were mailings or faxes that relate 
back to an initial misrepresentation, and because the parties' 
dispute appears to be more in the nature of an ordinary 
business deal gone sour, the activity encompassed by West-
ern's amended complaint is similar to that in Efron v. Embas-
sy Suites (Puerto Rico), Inc., 223 F.3d 12, 21 (1st Cir. 2000), 
where the First Circuit recently affirmed the dismissal of a 
RICO claim.  In Efron, a real estate deal disintegrated into a 
bitter dispute between partners, and one partner alleged that 
he had been defrauded by financial misrepresentations in 
mailings and faxes.  Affirming the dismissal of RICO claims, 
the First Circuit held that "[t]aken together, the acts as 
alleged comprise a single effort, over a finite period of time, 
to wrest control of a particular partnership from a limited 
number of its partners.  This cannot be a RICO violation."  
See id. at 21.

     We recognize that the Supreme Court has interpreted the 
RICO Act broadly, to include many "garden-variety fraud and 
breach of contract cases" that might best be prosecuted 
under state rather than federal law.  Sedima, 473 U.S. at 525 
(Powell, J., dissenting).  The Court has acknowledged that 
"[i]nstead of being used against mobsters and organized 
criminals, RICO has become a tool for everyday fraud cases 
brought against respected and legitimate enterprises."  Sedi-
ma, 473 U.S. at 499.  In the absence of congressional action 
to narrow RICO's scope, the Supreme Court has refused to 
countenance procedural limitations crafted by the courts of 
appeals, and has refused to limit RICO to organized crime, or 
to organizations rather than individuals.  See H.J. Inc., 492 
U.S. at 244.

     Nevertheless, we do not understand the Supreme Court to 
disparage interpreting RICO's pattern requirement to guard 
"against finding continuity too easily in the context of a single 
dishonest undertaking involving mail or wire fraud."  See 
Efron, 223 F.3d at 20.  As other circuits have observed, 
"RICO claims premised on mail or wire fraud must be 
particularly scrutinized because of the relative ease with 
which a plaintiff may mold a RICO pattern from allegations 
that, upon closer scrutiny, do not support it."  Id. This 

caution stems from the fact that "[i]t will be the unusual fraud 
that does not enlist the mails and wires in its service at least 
twice."  Al-Abood ex rel. Al-Abood v. El-Shamari, 217 F.3d 
225, 238 (4th Cir. 2000);  see also United States Textiles, Inc. 
v. Anheuser-Bush Cos., Inc., 911 F.2d 1261, 1268 (7th Cir. 
1990);  cf. Tabas v. Tabas, 47 F.3d 1280, 1290 (3d Cir. 1995) 
(en banc).  Although a RICO claim may be based only on 
predicate acts consisting exclusively of mail and wire fraud, 
scrutiny of such claims is necessary, and not inconsistent with 
the breadth of RICO.  The pattern requirement thus helps to 
prevent ordinary business disputes from becoming viable 
RICO claims, with defendants subject to treble damages, 
simply because the parties used the United States mails or a 
fax machine to transmit contested financial documents.  
Thus, in Menasco, Inc. v. Wasserman, 886 F.2d 681 (4th Cir. 
1989), the Fourth Circuit declined to find a RICO pattern 
where an individual allegedly defrauded two corporations in 
an oil and gas prospecting venture, because the perpetrator's 
"actions were narrowly directed towards a single fraudulent 
goal [and] involved a limited purpose."  Id. at 684.  In so 
ruling, the Fourth Circuit observed that "[i]f the pattern 
requirement has any force whatsoever, it is to prevent ... 
ordinary commercial fraud from being transformed into a 
federal RICO claim....  If we were to recognize a RICO 
claim based on the narrow fraud alleged here, the pattern 
requirement would be rendered meaningless."  Id. at 685 
(citations omitted).

     Neither the instant case nor Edmondson establishes a per 
se rule for RICO pattern analysis.  Instead, the court contin-
ues to endorse a case-by-case, fact-specific approach.  The six 
factors prescribed in Edmondson should be applied in a 
manner that is fluid, flexible, and commonsensical, rather 
than rigid or formulaic.  Holding that the district court did 
not err in ruling that Western failed to allege a pattern of 
racketeering activity is consistent with this method of analy-
sis.3  Accordingly, we affirm the order dismissing the com-
plaint.

__________
     3  Western makes no contention that the district court erred in 
dismissing the non-RICO claims for lack of subject matter jurisdic-









tion.  In view of our disposition, we, like the district court, do not 
reach Market's contention that the complaint is barred by the 
statute of limitations.

                    