                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 13, 1999     Decided March 3, 2000 

                           No. 98-5503

                         Susan M. Borgo, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                Daniel S. Goldin, Administrator, 
         National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 95cv00155)

     Wyneva Johnson, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. 
Attorney.

     Douglas B. Huron argued the cause for appellee.  With 
him on the brief was Richard A. Salzman.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams, and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Alleging violations of Title VII of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Susan Borgo sued her former 
employer, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA), for firing her from her position at the agency.  The 
case was prosecuted on the theory that NASA had mixed 
motives for Borgo's termination.  Concluding that NASA was 
at least partially motivated by a desire to retaliate against 
Borgo for protected activity, the district court granted sum-
mary judgment for plaintiff.  Further concluding that Borgo 
would not have been fired in the absence of the retaliatory 
motive, the court granted her motion for judgment as a 
matter of law on her request for a damages remedy.  Be-
cause we conclude that NASA's motivation is a disputed issue 
of fact that a reasonable jury could decide either of two ways, 
we reverse and remand for a trial on the merits.

                                I

     On October 18, 1992, NASA hired Borgo as a probationary 
employee to work in its Office of Small and Disadvantaged 
Business Utilization.  When hired, she was expected to serve 
primarily as Executive Secretary of the NASA Minority 
Business Resources Advisory Committee (NMBRAC).  But 
Borgo's relationships with her superiors soon deteriorated.  
On February 8, 1993, she was removed as Executive Secre-
tary of NMBRAC because of tension between her and 
NMBRAC's chairman.  Tension also developed between Bor-
go and her supervisor, Ralph Thomas.  Thomas criticized 
plaintiff for shortcomings "that included missed deadlines, 
unexplained absences, and a generally inappropriate attitude 
in dealings with superiors."  Borgo v. Goldin, No. 95cv0155, 
slip op. at 2 (D.D.C. Aug. 21, 1996).1

__________
     1 Although plaintiff disputed those criticisms, for purposes of her 
motion for judgment as a matter of law she "accept[ed] as true 

     On April 29, 1993, Thomas sent Borgo a memorandum 
complaining that she had involved his office in a government-
wide conference without informing him.  Thomas wrote that 
he was "very displeased that you did not tell me about this 
meeting until you had already sent out letters announcing it."  
"In the future," he instructed, "please inform me of any and 
all affairs like this" at their inception.  "It would have been 
very embarrassing to me to have heard about a government-
wide meeting sanctioned by my office which I knew nothing 
about."  J.A. at 127.

     On the following Monday, May 3, 1993, Borgo sent Thomas 
a response.  Her letter consisted of five paragraphs on two 
pages.  See J.A. at 31-32.  The first paragraph characterized 
Thomas' April 29 memorandum as ordering that "all profes-
sional actions on my part must be cleared by you before I 
may proceed."  The second noted that she had received her 
prior employer's "highest award for performance," and that 
she had "made it perfectly clear in [her] employment inter-
view" with NASA that she "would not accept a job in a typical 
bureaucratic operation."  She was unable, she said, "to be idle 
and waste taxpayers' dollars while wait[ing] for specific work 
assignments."  The third paragraph complained that she had 
"not been assigned any action items" during the past two 
weeks, "ha[d] not been included as a participate [sic] in any 
outreach efforts," and had taken action on the conference 
because she "had little else to do."  The letter's penultimate 
paragraph, central to this litigation, stated in relevant part as 
follows:

     It is my opinion, that if I, a white female, was your 
     manager, and I did not include you, an African-American 
     male, as a full member of the team, and treat you as a 
     competent professional, that, by now, I would have been 
     severely reprimanded or fired by senior management.
     
Id. at 32.

     On May 25, 1993, Thomas sent Borgo a termination letter, 
stating that she was being discharged as a result of "unaccep-

__________
every pre-May 3rd criticism made by Mr. Thomas."  2/3/98 Trial 
Tr. at 46 (J.A. at 312).

table conduct and performance during your probationary 
period."  J.A. at 128.  He wrote that there were "serious 
deficiencies in your attitude, behavior and conduct which 
adversely impact the performance of your assigned duties and 
responsibilities."  Thomas noted Borgo's "inability to effec-
tively interact and work with the Chairman" of NMBRAC, 
her "inability to conform to established deadlines on work 
assignments," and her "general negative behavior and atti-
tude in the office."  He listed specific examples of 
"dates/deadlines which you have missed that have adversely 
impacted the office," as well as multiple instances of unex-
plained absences from work.  He further cited examples of 
behavior "bordering on insubordination," including continuing 
to work on NMBRAC matters after having been expressly 
directed not to do so, as well as initiating without authoriza-
tion the government-wide conference discussed above.  With 
respect to the latter, Thomas wrote:  "Despite my counseling 
to you on this matter, your letter to me on May 3, 1993 still 
did not indicate that you understood the necessity that I be 
kept fully informed and would cooperate and give me notice 
of any future meetings."  Id. at 128-29.

     Plaintiff challenged her termination on two fronts.  First, 
before the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) she 
charged that NASA had retaliated against her for whistle-
blowing.2  At the MSPB hearing on those charges, Thomas 
testified regarding his reaction to Borgo's May 3, 1993 letter 
and his reasons for firing her.  See J.A. at 119-20.  He 
described the letter as a "purported answer" to his April 29 
memorandum.  It was "[p]urported," he said, because "it 
doesn't answer it."  Referring to the government-wide con-
ference, he stated:  "I told her, first of all, this was a good 
idea, but she should tell me about things as important as this.  
And she writes me back pretty much telling me where to go."  
Counsel then asked for clarification, and Thomas explained 
that he interpreted the letter as a declaration that plaintiff 

__________
     2 The MSPB adjudicates charges brought under 5 U.S.C. s 2302 
alleging, inter alia, that a federal agency has taken a personnel 
action against an employee for disclosing a violation of law.  The 
substance of Borgo's charge was that NASA fired her because she 
reported acts of misconduct relating to the Federal Advisory Com-
mittee Act, 5 U.S.C. app. II, ss 1 et seq.

was going to do as she pleased.  It was, he said, "full of 
things that were inaccurate and were not addressing my 
memo at all."  Id.

     In an exchange that would later prove pivotal in the Title 
VII litigation, counsel read the penultimate paragraph of the 
May 3 letter aloud and then asked:

     Q: Did you form any opinion about that statement?
     
     THOMAS:  Well, yes.  In this whole--during her whole 
     tenure, I had never mentioned her race at all, and, if 
     anything it was the other way around.  This letter, and 
     the reason I think you saw a lot of emotion coming out--
     and I apologize to you Mr. Gorman--but that was how I 
     felt while reading the letter.  It was the straw that broke 
     the camel's back.  I mean, after all of this, after all--
     after not producing any substantive thing in the office 
     and just giving everyone an overall hard time and mak-
     ing excuses for everything she did that she was supposed 
     to do, but didn't do, just the whole--and then this, you 
     know, and all I did was tell her--let me know about 
     activities as important as this, she writes me a letter like 
     this.  That--in my mind, that was it.
     
     Q: When you say that was it, how did you regard this 
     language?  Did you regard it as misconduct in any way?
     
     THOMAS:  Yes, misconduct, insubordinate.
     
J.A. at 122-23 (emphasis added).  The MSPB did not decide 
Borgo's case until February 3, 1998.  On that date it rejected 
her allegations, ruling that NASA had not retaliated against 
her for whistleblowing, but rather had discharged her for the 
reasons stated in Thomas' May 25, 1993 termination letter.

     In the meantime, Borgo had filed suit in United States 
District Court.  There, she alleged that NASA had discrimi-
nated against her because of her race and sex, and then had 
retaliated for her complaint of discrimination by discharging 
her, all in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
as amended, 42 U.S.C. ss 2000e-5, 2000e-16.  Plaintiff 
moved for partial summary judgment on the retaliation claim.  
Applying Title VII's framework for analyzing allegations of 
mixed motives on the part of an employer, see 42 U.S.C. 

s 2000e-2(m), the district court granted Borgo's motion.  Re-
lying on Thomas' MSPB testimony, the court held that no 
reasonable juror could conclude other than that "retaliation 
was at least part of the defendant's motivation for firing her."  
Borgo, slip op. at 13.

     Thereafter, the case proceeded to trial on the question of 
remedy, applying Title VII's rules for determining appropri-
ate remedies in mixed-motive cases.3  NASA contended that 
even if retaliation had been one motive for terminating Borgo, 
under Title VII the court could not "award damages or issue 
an order requiring ... reinstatement" because the agency 
"would have taken the same action in the absence of 
[that] impermissible motivating factor."  42 U.S.C. 
s 2000e-5(g)(2)(B).  At the end of the testimony of Ralph 
Thomas, NASA's first witness, the district court took the case 
from the jury and entered judgment for plaintiff as a matter 
of law.  "No reasonable juror could conclude," it held, "that 
NASA would have decided to fire [plaintiff], even absent 
retaliation."  2/3/98 Trial Tr. at 47 (J.A. at 313).

                                II

     We review de novo both the district court's decision to 
grant summary judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 56, and its decision to grant judgment as a matter 
of law pursuant to Rule 50(a).  See Hall v. Giant Food, Inc., 
175 F.3d 1074, 1076 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (summary judgment);  
Holbrook v. Reno, 196 F.3d 255, 259 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (judg-
ment as a matter of law).  Summary judgment may be 
granted only if "there is no genuine issue as to any material 
fact [and] the moving party is entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law."  Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 
242, 247 (1986) (quoting Rule 56).  A dispute about a material 
fact "is 'genuine' ...  if the evidence is such that a reason-
able jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party."  

__________
     3 The trial was limited to plaintiff's cause of action for retaliation.  
Prior to trial, Borgo abandoned her underlying claims of race and 
sex discrimination.  See Joint Pretrial Statement at 1 n.1 (Jan. 8, 
1998).

Id. at 248.  As the Supreme Court noted in Anderson, "this 
standard mirrors the standard for a directed verdict under 
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 50(a), which is that ....  [i]f 
reasonable minds could differ as to the import of the evidence 
...  a verdict should not be directed."  Id. at 250-51 (cita-
tions omitted).  The "primary difference between the two 
motions is procedural," the Court explained;  "summary judg-
ment motions are usually made before trial and decided on 
documentary evidence, while directed verdict motions are 
made at trial and decided on the evidence that has been 
admitted."  Id. at 251 (citation omitted).  In both situations, 
the court must view the evidence in the light most favorable 
to the nonmoving party and must not assess witness credibili-
ty.  See Aka v. Washington Hosp. Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 1288, 
1298 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (summary judgment);  Mackey v. Unit-
ed States, 8 F.3d 826, 829 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (judgment as a 
matter of law).

     Title VII states that "[i]t shall be an unlawful employment 
practice for an employer to discriminate against any of [its] 
employees ... because he has opposed any practice made an 
unlawful employment practice by this subchapter."  42 U.S.C. 
s 2000e-3(a).4  The amendments to Title VII contained in the 
Civil Rights Act of 1991 address the proper disposition of 
cases in which there may be a mixture of legitimate and 
illegitimate motives for an employer's actions.  See Civil 
Rights Act of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-166, s 107, 105 Stat. 
1071, 1075 (codified at 42 U.S.C. ss 2000e-2(m), 2000e-5(g)).  
As codified at 42 U.S.C s 2000e-2(m), the statute provides 
that liability for "an unlawful employment practice is estab-
lished when the complaining party demonstrates that race, 
color, religion, sex or national origin was a motivating factor 

__________
     4 The same section makes it unlawful to discriminate against an 
employee because the employee "participated" in any proceeding 
under the subchapter.  See 42 U.S.C. s 2000e-3(a).  As the district 
court held, it is the "opposition" rather than the "participation" 
clause that applies to this case.  Plaintiff complained of retaliation 
"not against her official EEO complaints, but against [the May 3] 
memorandum she wrote to her supervisor opposing discrimination 
she perceived from him."  Borgo, slip op. at 5.

for any employment practice, even though other factors also 
motivated the practice."  Section 2000e-5(g)(2)(B) then ad-
dresses the question of remedy, providing that when the 
plaintiff proves that an impermissible consideration was a 
motivating factor, but the defendant demonstrates that it 
"would have taken the same action in the absence of" that 
factor, a court may not award certain kinds of relief including 
damages and reinstatement (but may grant other specified 
relief, including costs and attorney's fees).5  The parties and 
the district court assumed that the 1991 Act's mixed-motives 
framework applies both where the allegedly impermissible 
motivation is retaliation, as it is here, and where it is race, 
color, religion, sex or national origin, as expressly set forth in 
the statute.  Accordingly, we make the same assumption for 
purposes of this appeal.6

     In the following sections, we examine two questions.  First, 
we consider whether the district court properly granted 

__________
     5 The three provisions of Title VII cited above apply only to 
private employers, see id. s 2000e(b);  a separate provision provides 
that "[a]ll personnel actions affecting employees ... in executive 
agencies ... shall be made free from any discrimination based on 
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin," id. s 2000e-16(a).  
"Despite the differences in language ...  we have held that Title 
VII places the same restrictions on federal and District of Columbia 
agencies as it does on private employers, and so we may construe 
the latter provision in terms of the former."  Bundy v. Jackson, 641 
F.2d 934, 942 (D.C. Cir. 1981).  We have specifically applied that 
principle in the context of retaliation claims.  See Brown v. Brody, 
199 F.3d 446, 452-53 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     6 In Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, the Supreme Court held that 
once a plaintiff proves that an impermissible motive was a substan-
tial or motivating factor in an adverse employment decision, the 
burden shifts to the employer to demonstrate it would have made 
the same decision in the absence of the unlawful motive.  See 490 
U.S. 228, 249-58 (1989) (Brennan, J.) (plurality opinion);  id. at 259 
(White, J., concurring).  It further held that if the employer satis-
fies that burden, it may avoid a finding of liability altogether.  See 
id. at 258 (Brennan, J.) (plurality opinion);  id. at 260 (White, J.);  
id. at 261 (O'Connor, J., concurring).  In Thomas v. National 
Football League Players Ass'n, 131 F.3d 198, 202-04 (D.C. Cir. 

summary judgment on plaintiff's claim that NASA violated 
Title VII because retaliation was a motivating factor in her 
termination.  Second, we consider whether the court properly 
granted judgment as a matter of law against NASA's conten-
tion that the scope of the remedy should be limited because 
the agency would have fired Borgo even in the absence of a 
retaliatory motive.

                                A

     In seeking summary judgment on her retaliation claim, 
Borgo construed Thomas' MSPB testimony as stating that 
the penultimate paragraph of her May 3 letter, which argu-
ably charged him with "reverse" discrimination, was "the 
straw that broke the camel's back."  Pl.'s Mem. in Supp. of 
Partial Summ. J. at 8-9 (J.A. at 19-20).  NASA defended by 

__________
1997), this court applied Price Waterhouse to pre-1991 claims of 
retaliation under Title VII.

 In 1991, Congress overturned Price Waterhouse in part, amend-
ing Title VII to provide that once a plaintiff proves discrimination to 
have been a motivating factor, liability is established.  See Civil 
Rights Act of 1991, s 107 (codified at 42 U.S.C. s 2000e-2(m));  see 
also H.R. Rep. No. 102-40, pt. 1, at 45-49 (1991).  Although an 
employer cannot thereafter avoid liability, it can avoid a damages or 
reinstatement remedy by demonstrating that it would have taken 
the same action in the absence of that factor.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 2000e-5(g)(2)(B).  As noted in the text above, while discrimina-
tion claims based on protected status, such as race or sex, were 
covered by the 1991 Act, Congress did not expressly include retalia-
tion claims in the provision that modified Price Waterhouse.  Some 
circuits have held that retaliation claims are not covered by the 
Civil Rights Act of 1991 and are still governed by Price Water-
house.  See, e.g., McNutt v. Board of Trustees, 141 F.3d 706, 709 
(7th Cir. 1998);  Woodson v. Scott Paper Co., 109 F.3d 913, 932-36 
(3d Cir. 1997).  This circuit has not addressed that question.  
Because both parties agreed below that the Civil Rights Act of 1991 
provided the appropriate framework for decision, see Joint Pretrial 
Statement at 4, and neither asks us to address the issue here, we 
have no need to resolve the question to decide this case.  See also 
Borgo Br. at 13 n.3 (stating that resolution of the issue is not 
required).

arguing that Thomas' testimony was that it was Borgo's 
"entire" letter--not the controverted paragraph--"that was 
the final straw."  Def.'s Opp. to Partial Summ. J. at 11 (J.A. 
at 48) (emphasis in original).7  Accepting Borgo's argument, 
and relying solely on Thomas' MSPB testimony, the district 
court granted plaintiff's motion for summary judgment.  We 
cannot sustain that decision because, viewed in the light most 
favorable to NASA, Thomas' MSPB testimony on this ques-
tion was at best ambiguous.  A genuine issue regarding 
Thomas' motivation therefore remained for determination at 
trial.

     At the MSPB hearing, Thomas testified at length about 
what he regarded as the unresponsiveness of Borgo's letter.  
Rather than acknowledging her failure to advise him of the 
government-wide conference, or promising to do better in the 
future, she had sent him a letter declaring that she was 
"unable to be idle and waste the taxpayers' money."  J.A. at 
120.  In essence, he said, "she writes back pretty much telling 
me where to go....  She is going to do what she wants to 
do."  Id.

     Then came the fateful question and answer.  It is true that 
counsel read the penultimate paragraph of the May 3 letter 
and then asked:  "Did you form any opinion about that 
statement?"  Id. at 122.  It is also true that counsel asked 
Thomas how he regarded "this language."  Id. at 123.  But it 
is not at all clear that those were the questions Thomas 
answered.  Instead, he said:

     This letter, and the reason I think you saw a lot of 
     emotion coming out--and I apologize to you Mr. Gor-
     man--but that was how I felt while reading the letter.  It 
     was the straw that broke the camel's back.  I mean, after 
     all of this, after all--after not producing any substantive 
     thing in the office and just giving everyone an overall 
     hard time ...  and then this, you know, and all I did was 
     
__________
     7 NASA also defended on the ground that the controverted 
paragraph did not constitute protected opposition to an unlawful 
employment practice under 42 U.S.C. s 2000e-3(a).  In light of our 
reversal of summary judgment, we do not reach that question.

     tell her--let me know about activities as important as 
     this, she writes me a letter like this.  That--in my mind, 
     that was it.
     
Id. at 122-23 (emphasis added).

     Thomas' testimony does make clear that Borgo's letter was 
the final straw.  But he did not state that the paragraph 
complaining of reverse discrimination was that straw.  Nor 
was the letter a single, unitary complaint of discrimination.  
Only one paragraph of the letter can be characterized as such 
a complaint.  The balance, although phrased as a response to 
Thomas' original memorandum, communicates a message of 
continuing resistance to Thomas' right to supervise her.  
From Thomas' testimony, a jury could infer that he was 
retaliating for the paragraph alleging discrimination.  But it 
could also reasonably infer that he was responding to the 
letter's overall nonresponsiveness and message of nonacquies-
cence.  That was precisely the point Thomas made in the 
testimony leading up to his reference to the proverbial straw.8  
Accordingly, even focusing solely on Thomas' MSPB testimo-
ny as the district court did, we cannot agree that any reason-
able jury would have to find him motivated at least in part by 

__________
     8 Referring to Borgo's May 3, 1993 letter, Thomas testified:

     This is her purported answer to my April 29th memo....  
     [Purported] [b]ecause it doesn't answer it.  You know, I told 
     her ... she should tell me about things as important as this.  
     And she writes back pretty much telling me where to go....  
     She is going to do what she wants to do....  [R]ather than 
     addressing what I've said, ... she goes over why she was hired 
     at NASA, you know, which is irrelevant....  And she talks 
     about ... what she did in her last job and how qualified she 
     was.  And then she says very curious things like she is unable 
     to be idle and waste the taxpayers' money while she waits for 
     specific work assignments while at the same time she was late 
     with most of the work assignments.  She talks about ... how 
     she was not included to participate in outreach efforts and that 
     was totally untrue....  So the memo was full of things that 
     were inaccurate and were not addressing my memo at all.
     
J.A. at 119-21.

a desire to retaliate against plaintiff for including the offend-
ing paragraph.

     Moreover, Thomas' MSPB testimony was not the only 
evidence before the court.  NASA's filings included an affida-
vit from Thomas asserting that he fired Borgo for "the 
reasons specified in my termination letter to her."  Thomas 
Aff. p 63 (J.A. at 72).  That May 25, 1993 letter listed the 
grounds for termination as including missed deadlines, unex-
plained absences, inability to work with others, behavior 
"bordering on insubordination," and, with specific reference 
to Borgo's May 3 letter, the failure to indicate that she would 
cooperate with Thomas in the future.  J.A. at 128-29.  It did 
not, however, mention Borgo's suggestion that he was guilty 
of reverse discrimination.  A jury considering this list of 
reasons could conclude that retaliation was simply not in the 
mix.  Of course, a jury could also conclude that Thomas was 
not being forthright in omitting the discrimination complaint 
from that list.  For purposes of summary judgment, however, 
the statement in Thomas' affidavit--that he fired Borgo for 
the reasons set out in the termination letter--must be accept-
ed as true.  See Hall v. Giant Food, Inc., 175 F.3d 1074, 1078 
(D.C. Cir. 1999);  Greene v. Dalton, 164 F.3d 671, 674 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999).

     In sum, we cannot reach a conclusion that Thomas had a 
retaliatory motive without both construing ambiguity against 
NASA and discounting Thomas' credibility.  We may not do 
either, however, at the summary judgment stage.  Because 
there remains a genuine issue of material fact, and because a 
reasonable jury could find that NASA did not have, even in 
part, a retaliatory motive, we reverse the grant of summary 
judgment.

                                B

     In addition to granting Borgo's motion for summary judg-
ment on the issue of liability, the district court also granted 
Borgo's motion for judgment as a matter of law on the 
question of remedy, finding that NASA would not have fired 
Borgo in the absence of a retaliatory motive.  Our reversal of 

the grant of summary judgment necessarily requires reversal 
of the grant of judgment as a matter of law.  The latter, 
which goes only to the question of an appropriate remedy, 
cannot be considered until a jury first finds for Borgo on the 
issue of liability.  Moreover, if a reasonable jury could con-
clude that NASA did not have, even in part, a retaliatory 
motive, it necessarily could conclude that NASA would have 
fired Borgo in the absence of such a motive.
     This logic aside, at trial there was more than sufficient 
evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that 
NASA would have fired Borgo in the absence of retaliation.  
At the trial stage, NASA was not limited to Thomas' MSPB 
transcript, affidavit, and termination letter.  Testifying in 
person, Thomas conceded that he could not say he would have 
fired plaintiff absent the May 3 letter.  The letter, he said, 
was "the final thing that swung me."  J.A. at 278.  But he 
steadfastly resisted the suggestion that his true motivation 
was the letter's penultimate paragraph.  To the contrary, he 
repeatedly insisted that Borgo was fired because of the 
letter's overall refusal to acknowledge his supervisory author-
ity, not because of the statement suggesting he was guilty of 
reverse discrimination:

     Q: And it was this statement here that you considered 
     to be misconduct?
     
     THOMAS:  No, I've never said that.  I never referred to 
     that sentence.
     
     Q: You did consider this statement to be misconduct?
     
     THOMAS: No.  I've always referred to the letter.  I've 
     always referred to the letter, and I've always said that 
     it's because the letter did not say she would do what I 
     said to do.
     
Id. at 271.9

     Moreover, when specifically confronted with his MSPB 
testimony, Thomas insisted that, although he had been asked 
__________
     9 See also id. at 254 ("There is no sentence or paragraph in that 
letter where she says that she was going to do what I said.");  id. at 
261 ("[I]t was clear to me that she had indicated that she was not 
going to be supervised by me.");  id. at 265 (stating that the 

about the statement in the controverted paragraph, his an-
swer about the last straw was directed to the letter as a 
whole:

     THOMAS:  Every time I said "letter," didn't I?  When 
     did I say this paragraph?
     
     Q: You were asked specifically about this statement in 
     the letter, and that was your response.
     
     THOMAS:  But what was my answer?  My answer was 
     "letter."  My letter [sic] was never this paragraph.
     
     ....
     
     It was the letter.  The letter.  Once again she was 
     saying she wasn't going to do what I said to do.  How 
     can you supervise someone after that?
     
     ....
     
     Q: Mr. Thomas, when you were asked in the prior 
     proceeding about this particular language, you said that 
     it was the straw that broke the camel's back, didn't you?
     
     THOMAS:  I did not say this language.  I said the letter, 
     and that's what I've always said. 
Id. at 274-75.

     Thomas' admission that the May 3 letter was "the final 
thing that swung me" is not the equivalent of an admission 
that it was the letter's disputed paragraph that did the 
swinging--not unless unless one disbelieves Thomas' re-
peated protestations to the contrary.  The latter, however, is 
a question of credibility for the jury, not a question of law for 
the court.  See Hayman v. National Academy of Sciences, 23 
F.3d 535, 537 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Because a reasonable jury 
could find that NASA would have terminated Borgo in the 
absence of a retaliatory motive, we reverse the grant of 
judgment as a matter of law.
_________
termination letter's description of Borgo's conduct as "defiant and 
border[ing] on insubordination" referred to Borgo's suggestion in 
the May 3 letter that "to answer my memo is a waste of her time, is 
a waste of taxpayers' money").

                         III

     What was the straw that broke the camel's back?  The 
answer, we conclude, is for the jury to decide.  We therefore 
reverse the orders granting plaintiff summary judgment and 
judgment as a matter of law, and remand the case for a trial 
on the merits.

                                  