                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 12, 2001   Decided January 4, 2002 

                           No. 00-1405

               Antelope Valley Bus Company, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Gary C. Moss argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Joanna S. Kishner and Celeste M. Wasie-
lewski.

     Christopher W. Young, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 

Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Robert J. Englehart, 
Supervisory Attorney.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge.1

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Antelope Valley Bus Company 
petitions for review of a decision and order of the National 
Labor Relations Board (NLRB).  The Board found that the 
company violated s 8(a)(5) and (1) of the National Labor 
Relations Act (NLRA), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5) & (1), by refus-
ing to bargain with the Chauffeurs, Sales Drivers, Ware-
housemen and Helpers, Local 572, International Brotherhood 
of Teamsters, AFL-CIO.  The Board had certified the union 
as the collective-bargaining representative of a group of 
Antelope Valley employees following an election conducted by 
mail ballot.  The company alleges that the certification elec-
tion was invalid because some employees in the bargaining 
unit did not receive their mail ballots, and that therefore its 
refusal to bargain with the union did not violate the NLRA.  
We deny the petition for review and grant the Board's cross-
application for enforcement of its order.

                                I

     Antelope Valley operates a bus company that provides 
transportation for commuters, tours, and charters.  The 
length of a bus driver's trip ranges from a few hours to two 
weeks or more.  The buses are garaged at the company's 
facility in Sylmar, California, where employees report to 
check in, process paperwork, and obtain their buses.  At the 
time of the contested election, the company employed approx-
imately 149 drivers.

     On August 23, 1999, the union filed an election petition with 
the NLRB, seeking to represent Antelope Valley's bus driv-
ers.  The parties entered into a stipulated election agree-

__________
     1 Senior Circuit Judge Williams was in regular active service at 
the time of oral argument.

ment, which specified that the balloting would be conducted 
by U.S. Mail.  Pursuant to that agreement, Antelope Valley 
posted three standard election notices in the Sylmar dispatch 
area in early September, 1999.  Each notice advised the 
employees that an election would be conducted by mail, and 
that "[a]ny person who has not received a ballot by Tuesday, 
September 28, 1999, should immediately contact the Election 
Unit, National Labor Relations Board, Region 31, [address 
and phone number], and request a ballot."  Joint Appendix 
(J.A.) at 242.

     The company provided the NLRB with a list, commonly 
referred to as an Excelsior list,2 of the names and addresses 
of employees eligible to vote.  The NLRB mailed ballots to 
those employees on September 17, using address labels pro-
vided by the company.  The ballots were due on October 13, 
and the NLRB counted them the next day.  Of 149 eligible 
voters, 49 cast ballots in favor of representation by the union, 
and 46 cast ballots against the union.

     Antelope Valley filed a timely objection to the election, 
alleging that four eligible employees--Barbara Cameron, 
Richard Guzman, Leo Molina, and Beverly Strong--did not 
receive ballots during the election period.  After a hearing, an 
NLRB Hearing Officer rejected the company's allegations 
regarding the four employees, finding that each had had 
adequate notice and opportunity to vote.  Antelope Valley 
Bus Co., No. 31-RC-7776, slip op. at 14-15 (Jan. 20, 2000) 
("Hearing Officer Op.").  Thereafter, the Board adopted the 
findings and recommendations of the Hearing Officer and 
certified the union.  Antelope Valley Bus Co., No. 31-RC-
7776 (Apr. 17, 2000) ("Board Certification Op.").3

__________
     2 See Excelsior Underwear Inc., 156 N.L.R.B. 1236 (1966).

     3 At the hearing, Antelope Valley also alleged that one employee, 
Garret Green, received a ballot too late to vote in the election.  The 
Hearing Officer rejected that allegation on the ground that, inter 
alia, it was outside the scope of the objection filed by the company.  
Hearing Officer Op. at 16.  The Board, however, found it unneces-
sary to pass on the allegation regarding Green:  because the Board 
rejected the company's allegations concerning the other four em-

     Following certification, the union asked Antelope Valley to 
recognize it as the collective-bargaining representative for the 
unit and to begin bargaining.  The company refused, and the 
union filed a charge with the Board.  The NLRB's General 
Counsel then issued a complaint alleging that the company's 
refusal to bargain constituted an unfair labor practice in 
violation of s 8(a)(5) and (1) of the NLRA.4  In response, the 
company admitted its refusal to bargain, but argued that the 
refusal was not unlawful because certification of the union 
had been improper.  The Board granted summary judgment 
in favor of the General Counsel, holding that Antelope Valley 
had violated the NLRA and ordering the company to bargain 
with the union upon its request.  Antelope Valley Bus Co., 
331 N.L.R.B. No. 171 (2000).

     Antelope Valley seeks review of the Board's final decision 
and order.  It does not dispute that the use of a mail ballot 
was appropriate in this case.  It contends, however, that the 
Board's refusal to overturn the election in light of the failure 
of four employees to receive ballots conflicts with prior 
NLRB precedent and is unsupported by substantial evidence.  
The company further contends that the Board should have 
used additional procedures to ensure that all eligible voters 
__________
ployees, the allegation regarding Green could not affect the outcome 
of the election.  Board Certification Op. at 2 n.1.  We find it 
unnecessary to consider the claim regarding Green for the same 
reason.

     4 Section 8(a) states, in relevant part:

     It shall be an unfair labor practice for an employer--
     
          (1) to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the 
          exercise of the rights guaranteed in [NLRA s 7];
            ...
          
          (5) to refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives 
          of his employees....
          
 29 U.S.C. s 158(a) (1994).  NLRA s 7 guarantees employees "the 
right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, 
... and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of 
collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection...."  29 
U.S.C. s 157 (1994).

received their election ballots.  We consider these three 
arguments below.

                                II

     Antelope Valley maintains that the Board misapplied its 
controlling precedents in rejecting the company's objection to 
certification of the union.  We review Board decisions in part 
to determine whether "the Board acted arbitrarily or other-
wise erred in applying established law to the facts of the 
case."  International Union of Electronic, Electrical, Sala-
ried, Mach. & Furniture Workers v. NLRB, 41 F.3d 1532, 
1536 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (internal quotations omitted).  The 
Board "cannot ignore its own relevant precedent but must 
explain why it is not controlling."  See B B & L, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 52 F.3d 366, 369 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  However, it is not 
necessary for the Board to distinguish a precedent expressly 
if the grounds for distinction are readily apparent.  See 
Gilbert v. NLRB, 56 F.3d 1438, 1445-46 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     In determining the validity of the election in this case, the 
Hearing Officer relied on the "adequate notice and opportuni-
ty to vote" test of Lemco Construction, Inc., 283 N.L.R.B. 
459, 460 (1987).  In Lemco, the Board upheld an election 
notwithstanding that a number of eligible voters either did 
not go to the polls or arrived after the polls were closed.  Id. 
at 459.  "We will issue certifications," the Board held, "where 
there is adequate notice and opportunity to vote and employ-
ees are not prevented from voting by the conduct of a party 
or by unfairness in the scheduling or mechanics of the 
election."  Id. at 460.

     Antelope Valley argues that Lemco is an inappropriate 
precedent for this case, because it arose in the context of a 
challenge to a manual rather than mail ballot and because the 
challenge there did not involve nonreceipt of a ballot but 
rather the claim that too few eligible voters had voted for 
them to be considered "representative" of the entire unit.  
But there is nothing that compels the Board to restrict the 
Lemco test to the circumstances of that case.  Nor is there 
anything unreasonable about the Board equating a failure to 

go to the polls with a failure to request a replacement mail 
ballot, and concluding that neither is sufficient to invalidate 
an election as long as the employee had adequate notice and 
opportunity to vote.

     Antelope Valley contends that the precedent the Board 
should have applied is Star Baking Co., 119 N.L.R.B. 835 
(1957), a case in which the Board set aside an election because 
an employee whose vote could have been determinative did 
not receive a mail ballot.  Id. at 836.5  But the rule enunciat-
ed in Star Baking--that "it is the responsibility of the Board" 
to establish a procedure ensuring "that all eligible voters ... 
be given an opportunity to vote," id.--is not inconsistent with 
the test enunciated in Lemco.  The difference in the results 
of the two cases is instead readily attributable to differences 
in their facts.  In Star Baking, the Board found that, having 
not received a mail ballot, the employee at issue did not have 
an adequate opportunity to vote;  both parties agreed that it 
"was not feasible for him to vote manually" because the 
employee was stationed 45 miles from the polling place.  Id.  
In this case, by contrast, the Board found that the four 
employees who failed to receive their mail ballots did have an 
adequate opportunity to vote;  the stipulated election agree-
ment gave them the option of requesting a duplicate mail 
ballot.  In light of this clear distinction, the Board's refusal to 
set aside the Antelope Valley election as it did the Star 
Baking election was perfectly reasonable.6

__________
     5 Antelope Valley does not dispute that a disenfranchised employ-
ee's vote must be potentially determinative to justify setting aside 
an election, see, e.g., Acme Bus Corp., 316 N.L.R.B. 274, 275 (1995), 
but argues that since the election at issue here was decided by 
three votes, the votes of the four employees could have changed the 
result.  Pet'r Br. at 12 n.9.

     6 The other cases cited more briefly by Antelope Valley, most 
involving manual ballots, are also readily distinguishable as cases in 
which the employees were deprived of an opportunity to vote.  See, 
e.g., Wolverine Dispatch, Inc., 321 N.L.R.B. 796 (1996) (ordering a 
new election where no Board agent or ballot box was present at the 
polling place during part of the election period);  Whatcom Sec. 
Agency, Inc., 258 N.L.R.B. 985 (1981) (same where the doors of the 

                               III

     Antelope Valley next argues that, even if the Lemco test 
were proper in this case, the Board erred in finding that the 
four employees had an adequate opportunity to vote.  We 
review such a finding to determine whether it is "supported 
by substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole."  
29 U.S.C. s 160(e) (1994);  see Universal Camera Corp. v. 
NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 477, 488 (1951).  In making that deter-
mination, we ask only "whether on this record it would have 
been possible for a reasonable jury to reach the Board's 
conclusion," and in so doing we give "substantial deference to 
the inferences drawn by the NLRB from the facts."  Halle 
Enters., Inc. v. NLRB, 247 F.3d 268, 271 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
(citations and internal quotations omitted).

     The company contends that the four drivers who did not 
receive mail ballots did not have an adequate opportunity to 
vote because they did not have adequate notice of the avail-
ability of replacement ballots.  This claim rings particularly 
hollow since the notice procedure was contained in an election 
agreement to which Antelope Valley stipulated, J.A. at 244, 
and because the company concedes that "the Notices were 
properly posted" pursuant to that agreement, Pet'r Br. at 5.  
But even without the agreement, the company's claim is 
meritless.  The notices were large (251/2" by 14"), bold-blue 

__________
polling place were locked for a substantial period of time and a 
large number of eligible voters did not vote);  Glenn McClendon 
Trucking Co., 255 N.L.R.B. 1304, 1304 (1981) (same where employ-
ee truck drivers "were prevented from voting" because they were 
on assignments "distant from the polling place" on the day of the 
(manual) election);  B & B Better Baked Foods, Inc., 208 N.L.R.B. 
493, 493 (1974) (same where Board agent opened polls "so late as to 
possibly disenfranchise" employees on an earlier shift);  Yerges Van 
Liners, Inc., 162 N.L.R.B. 1259, 1260-61 (1967) (same where poten-
tially dispositive voter "had no opportunity to vote through no fault 
of his own" because he was away from the polling place on 
assignment);  see also Davis & Newcomer Elevator Co., 315 
N.L.R.B. 715 (1994) (remanding where the Board failed to follow its 
rules and did not send a new ballot to an identifiable employee 
whose original ballot arrived at the NLRB in two pieces).

posters, each with a banner reading "NOTICE OF ELEC-
TION" running across the top.  Antelope Valley does not 
suggest that the notices were unclear or difficult to under-
stand, and concedes that they were placed in three locations 
frequented by the drivers:  the window of the dispatcher's 
inner office, the counter used by the drivers to complete their 
paperwork in the dispatch office, and the door to the dispatch 
office.  Indeed, it would have been hard for anyone leaving 
the dispatch office to have missed the latter notice, as it was 
tacked to the side of the door that the exiting employee had 
to push to leave the room.  J.A. at 181-82.

     Antelope Valley complains that placing the posters at the 
Sylmar facility was not sufficiently likely to result in notice 
because drivers were often away on road trips.  But that 
theoretical objection has no place here:  according to their 
own testimony, each of the employees was in the dispatch 
office at least twice during the month in which the notices 
were posted there.  J.A. at 35, 54-56, 72-73, 107-08;  see 
Hearing Officer Op. at 9.  Even in a manual election it is not 
necessary to prove actual notice.  Reasonable notice is suffi-
cient, and the Board's conclusion that the notice here was 
adequate is reasonable and supported by substantial evi-
dence.7

     Indeed, Antelope Valley's insistence on this argument is 
surprising because two of the four employees conceded that 
they did see the notice.  One of the two, Richard Guzman, 
testified that he saw the notice in the dispatch office but did 
not read it.  Although he knew that there was a mail ballot 
election in progress and realized (during the voting period) 
that he had not received a ballot, Guzman did not try to get a 

__________
     7 See, e.g., Jowa Sec. Servs., Inc., 269 N.L.R.B. 297, 298 (1984) 
("The Board has never required that employees receive actual 
notice of an impending election.  Rather, the standard has always 
been that reasonable measures must be taken to assure that unit 
employees are aware of their right to exercise freely their fran-
chise....  This is traditionally accomplished through the posting of 
the official notice of election in conspicuous places prior to the 
election.").

replacement ballot because he was "too busy."  J.A. at 37.  
The other employee, Barbara Cameron, testified that she was 
in the dispatch office on an almost daily basis during the 
posting period, knew that there were "things" posted on the 
walls concerning the election, but did not read them.  J.A. at 
81-82.  Like Guzman, Cameron knew that an election was 
being conducted by mail, and even called the company's 
Human Resources Department (still within the voting period) 
after she realized that she had not received a ballot.  Howev-
er, when Human Resources told her to call the NLRB, she 
chose not to, she said, because "that's not my job."  J.A. at 
86.

     The company contends that it would be wrong to rely on 
such testimony to uphold the election, given Star Baking's 
admonition that it is the Board's responsibility--not the em-
ployees'--to ensure that all eligible employees have the op-
portunity to vote.  But the Board's responsibility is only to 
ensure that employees have an opportunity to vote;  it cannot 
ensure that any individual employee takes advantage of that 
opportunity.  Even in manual elections, adequate notice of 
the time and place of voting is all the Board can require;  it 
cannot force an employee to go to the polling place.8  In this 
case, the Board provided those Antelope Valley employees 
who failed to receive mail ballots with the opportunity to vote 
by replacement ballot.  It is true, as the company contends, 

__________
     8 See Lemco, 283 N.LR.B. at 460 ("The fundamental purpose of a 
Board election is to provide employees with a meaningful opportuni-
ty to [vote]....  The law does not compel any employee to vote, 
and the law should not permit that right, to refrain from voting, to 
defeat an otherwise valid election.");  see also Waste Mgmt. of 
Northwest Louisiana, Inc., 326 N.L.R.B. 1389, 1389 (1998) ("When 
an employee does not vote for reasons that are beyond the control 
of a party or the Board, ... the failure to vote is not a basis for 
setting aside the election.");  National Van Lines, 120 N.L.R.B. 
1343, 1346 (1958) (finding that employees' failure to cast valid 
ballots was not due to lack of "an adequate opportunity ... , but 
rather was occasioned by their lack of diligence and interest in 
mailing their ballots on a date which would have assured their 
timely receipt").

that if such an employee failed to request a replacement 
ballot, he or she could not vote.  But neither can an employee 
who, despite adequate notice, fails to go to a manual polling 
location.  As the old adage goes, you can lead a horse to 
water ...

                                IV

     Finally, Antelope Valley contends that the NLRB should 
have utilized additional "procedures to ensure that all eligible 
voters had received their election ballots."  Pet'r Br. at 22.  
One possible procedure suggested by the company is the use 
of certified or registered mail.  Antelope Valley argues that 
the NLRB's failure to utilize such a procedure should invali-
date the election, notwithstanding that the company--before 
it knew how the election would turn out--stipulated to an 
election agreement that did not contemplate the use of such a 
device.

     This court is without authority to impose upon the NLRB 
the kind of election procedures that it may deem most 
appropriate.  As the Supreme Court has repeatedly noted, 
"Congress has entrusted the Board with a wide degree of 
discretion in establishing the procedure and safeguards nec-
essary to insure the fair and free choice of bargaining repre-
sentatives by employees."  NLRB v. A.J. Tower Co., 329 U.S. 
324, 330 (1946) (citing, e.g., Southern S.S. Co. v. NLRB, 316 
U.S. 31, 37 (1942)).9  For the reasons stated above, we 
conclude that the procedure employed in this case, a combina-
tion of mail ballots and notice of the opportunity to obtain 
replacements, was a reasonable method of ensuring the em-
ployees' right to a fair and free choice.  Accordingly, we have 

__________
     9 See also Kwik Care Ltd. v. NLRB, 82 F.3d 1122, 1126 (D.C. Cir. 
1996) ("As a general matter, the Board enjoys broad discretion in 
its administration of representation elections....  ");  C.J. Krehbiel 
Co. v. NLRB, 844 F.2d 880, 885 (D.C. Cir. 1988) ("The case for 
[judicial] deference is stron[g], as Congress has charged the Board, 
a special and expert body, with the duty of judging the tendency of 
electoral flaws to distort the employees' ability to make a free 
choice." (internal quotations omitted)).

no warrant for overturning it.  See B B & L, 52 F.3d at 369 
("We will uphold the Board's exercise of discretion unless its 
action is unreasonable, arbitrary or unsupported by the evi-
dence.");  see also NLRB v. Wackenhut Corp., 471 F.2d 761, 
762 (7th Cir. 1972) (holding that the Board has discretion in 
adopting election procedures and refusing to require it to poll 
all employees to determine whether each actually received a 
mail ballot).10

     Antelope Valley further contends that the Board erred in 
not vacating the election on the ground that the General 
Counsel failed to present testimony regarding the procedures 
the NLRB followed in preparing and mailing the ballots in 
this case--particularly testimony that the NLRB actually 
mailed the ballots to all employees on the Excelsior list.11  
But it is not the Board that bears the burden of demonstrat-
ing the validity of an election;  rather, it is "the party chal-
lenging the results of a Board-certified election [that] carries 
a heavy burden" of showing the election's invalidity.  Kwik 
Care Ltd. v. NLRB, 82 F.3d 1122, 1126 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  see 
C.J. Krehbiel Co. v. NLRB, 844 F.2d 880, 882 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  
Petitioner cannot meet its burden of establishing that the 
NLRB failed to mail out the ballots by showing that the Post 
Office failed to deliver ballots to a small number of employ-

__________
     10 In light of the replacement option provided in this case, we 
need not decide whether such an option is required for an election 
to be regarded as valid if a small but potentially dispositive number 
of employees fail to receive their initial mail ballots.  See J. Ray 
McDermott & Co. v. NLRB, 571 F.2d 850, 855 (5th Cir. 1978) 
(stating, in a case in which there apparently was no such option, 
that "[i]t cannot be said that an election by mail is per se invalid 
whenever a potentially decisive number of votes, no matter how 
small, is lost through the vagaries of mail delivery").

     11 The company also contends that the Hearing Officer improper-
ly denied its request to see the NLRB's case file so that it could 
challenge the mailing procedures followed by the agency.  Pet'r Br. 
at 25.  Examination of the hearing transcript, however, reveals that 
Antelope Valley merely requested production of a list of those 
ballots actually received, and did not request access to the entire 
file.  See J.A. at 15-16.

ees.12  It certainly cannot do so in a case in which the Board 
received ballots back from two thirds of the eligible voters.  
As the Hearing Officer correctly stated, "[w]ithout more than 
a mere unsubstantiated or non-specific assertion of [NLRB] 
Regional misconduct, lost mail ballots in and of themselves do 
not rebut the presumption that the Region has performed as 
it should."  Hearing Officer Op. at 13-14.  To the contrary, in 
such circumstances, the few substantiated cases of nonreceipt 
are readily explained as the product of the "vagaries of mail 
delivery," rather than of a flaw in the NLRB's mailing 
procedures.  J. Ray McDermott & Co. v. NLRB, 571 F.2d 
850, 855 (5th Cir. 1978).

     Finally, we note that Antelope Valley's failure to satisfy its 
burden of proof distinguishes this case from a Sixth Circuit 
case repeatedly cited by the company.  As Antelope Valley 
notes, in NLRB v. Pinkerton's, Inc., 621 F.2d 1322 (6th Cir. 
1980), the court did remand for an evidentiary hearing to 
determine whether the NLRB actually sent ballots to all 
employees.  In that case, however, the petitioner had estab-
lished an unusual pattern of nondelivery--those who failed to 
receive ballots all lived in the same region--that made the 
court "particularly skeptical of the regularity of the Board's 
procedures."  Id. at 1330.  Antelope Valley established no 
similar ground for skepticism here.  See also id. at 1324 
(acknowledging that "[t]he party objecting to the validity of 
an election must bear the heavy burden of demonstrating by 
specific evidence that the election was unfair").

                                V

     We conclude that the Board's decision in this case was 
consistent with precedent and supported by substantial evi-
dence, and that the election procedure it utilized was a 
reasonable method of ensuring the employees' right to a fair 
and free choice of their bargaining representative.  Accord-

__________
     12 Even the testimony of non-delivery was less than overwhelm-
ing.  Three of the four employees testified that they did not collect 
their own mail, but rather let others pick it up for them while they 
were on the road.  See J.A. at 40, 53, 62-63, 111-12.

ingly, we deny Antelope Valley's petition for review and grant 
the Board's cross-application for enforcement of its order.

                                                             