                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 2, 2001   Decided December 21, 2001 

                           No. 00-1328

                    Saba Partnership, et al., 
                    Appellants/Cross-Appellees

                                v.

            Commissioner of Internal Revenue Service, 
                     Appellee/Cross-Appellant

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-1385

            Appeals from the United States Tax Court 
                   (No. IRS-1470-97;  1471-97)

     Thomas C. Durham argued the cause for appellants/cross-
appellees.  With him on the briefs was Joel V. Williamson.

     Richard Farber, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellee/cross-appellant.  With him on 
the briefs was Edward T. Perelmuter, Attorney.  Stuart L. 

Brown, Attorney, Internal Revenue Service, entered an ap-
pearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Through an elaborate scheme involv-
ing partnerships with a foreign bank operating in a tax-free 
jurisdiction, a diversified U.S. company generated over $190 
million worth of tax losses while incurring an actual loss of 
only $5 million.  The Tax Court found that because certain of 
the partnerships' transactions lacked economic substance, 
they created no gains or losses for federal tax purposes.  At 
the same time, the Tax Court declined to address the govern-
ment's alternative contention that both partnerships were 
shams for federal tax purposes.  The partnerships, together 
with the company, now appeal, and the government cross-
appeals.  We vacate and remand to the Tax Court for recon-
sideration in light of our recent decision in ASA Investerings 
Partnership v. Commissioner, 201 F.3d 505 (D.C. Cir. 2000), 
where we invalidated what appears to be a similar--perhaps 
even identical--tax shelter on the grounds that the entire 
partnership, not merely the specific transactions at issue, was 
a sham for federal tax purposes.

                                I.

     This case involves the legality of a tax shelter marketed by 
Merrill Lynch to a small number of U.S. corporations.  De-
signed for corporations anticipating large capital gains, the 
shelter takes advantage of certain Internal Revenue Code 
provisions and related Treasury Department regulations that 
govern installment sales where the taxpayer lacks advance 
knowledge of the installment payments' value.  See 26 I.R.C. 
s 453;  Temp. Treas. Reg. s 15A.453-1(c)(3)(i) (1984).  To 
build such a shelter, the Merrill Lynch client forms a partner-
ship with a foreign corporation operating in a tax-free juris-
diction.  This partnership then buys and immediately sells a 
debt instrument on an installment basis.  Although the trans-
action is basically a wash, generating hardly any economic 
gain or loss, Merrill Lynch's lawyers' interpretation of the 

relevant provisions allows the partnership to claim a massive 
tax gain, which is allocated to the foreign partner, and a 
massive tax loss, which the U.S. corporation keeps for itself.  
A detailed description of this shelter and the code provisions 
on which it depends appears in ASA, 201 F.3d at 506-8.  In 
that case, we affirmed a Tax Court determination that anoth-
er Merrill Lynch client that had adopted the shelter, Allied-
Signal, had "not entered into a bona fide partnership" for 
federal tax purposes.  Id. at 515.

     The facts of this case appear similar to those of ASA.  In 
1990, appellant Brunswick Corporation, a diversified manufac-
turer, decided to divest itself of certain business groups.  
Because the sales would generate massive capital gains, Mer-
rill Lynch proposed that Brunswick generate compensatory 
paper losses by forming a partnership with a foreign bank.  
In an extensive memorandum, Judith P. Zelisko, an attorney 
and Brunswick's Director of Taxes, laid out step by step how 
Merrill Lynch's proposal would "generate sufficient capital 
losses to offset the capital gain which w[ould] be generated on 
the sale of [certain divisions]."  Saba P'ship v. Comm'r, 78 
T.C.M. (CCH) 684, 689.  Because of this document's signifi-
cance, we quote it in substantial part:

     Step 1:
     
     BC [Brunswick] and an unrelated foreign partner [FP] 
     would form a Partnership no later than March 1, 1990 
     with BC contributing $20 million in cash and the FP 
     contributing $180 million in cash.  The Partnership 
     would have a fiscal year-end of March 31st since that 
     would be the year-end of the FP, the majority Partner.
     
     Step 2:
     
     Partnership buys a private placement note for $200 
     million with the cash in the Partnership and holds the 
     note for one month.
     
     Step 3:
     
     Before March 31, 1990, the Partnership would sell the 
     $200 million private placement note for $160 million in 
     cash and five-year contingent note with an assumed fair 
     
     market value (fmv) of $40 million.  Under this contingent 
     note, payments would be made to the Partnership over a 
     five-year period equal to [a variable interest rate] times a 
     fixed notional principal....  
     
     The Partnership would recognize gain on the sale of the 
     private placement note calculated as follows:
     
          Cash                                    160.0      
          Basis                                     33.3    
          (1/6 of 200)        
                                              _________
          Gain                                    126.7     
                    
          BC's Gain                          12.67    
          FP's Gain                               114.03  
                                             _________
          Total Gain                              126.70    
     BC's share of the gain equals its 10% ownership in the 
     Partnership for a taxable gain to BC of $12.67 million in 
     1990.
     
     Step 4:
     
     In April 1990 or later, (i.e., until there has been some 
     movement in the value of the contingent note) BC buys 
     50% of FP's interest in the Partnership for $90 million, 
     assuming that the fmv of the contingent note is still $40 
     million.  With this purchase, BC's basis in its Partner-
     ship interest is $122.67 million calculated as follows:
     
          BC's initial investment            $20.0     million
          Gain                            12.67   
          Purchase of 50% of FP's       
          interest                                  90.00
                                             _________
                          122.67    

     Step 5:
     
     The Partnership distributes the contingent note to BC 
     assuming a fmv of $40 million.  In addition, the Partner-
     ship would distribute approximately $32.72 million in 
     cash to FP which is the equivalent cash distribution to 
     FP given its percentage ownership.
          Step 6:
     
     BC sells the contingent note for cash.  This sale of the 
     contingent note by BC generates the capital loss.
     
          BC's basis in the note                  $122.67    
          FMV of the note                        40.00 
                                             _________
          Capital loss                                82.67 
          Net Gain on sale of FP note            12.67 
                                              _________
          Net Capital loss                                      70.00    
     After the sale of the note, BC's tax basis in the Partner-
     ship is zero and the Partnership still has 127.28 in cash 
     (160-32.72).
     
     Step 7:
          In April 1991, the Partnership will be terminated ... 
     
Id. at 689-90.  The Zelisko memorandum also notes that 
Merrill Lynch would earn a fee of "5-10% of the tax savings";  
that the fee "would not be due if the tax law changed prior to 
implementation";  that "[l]egal fees for BC and operating 
expenses of the Partnership ... would be paid by BC";  and 
that the foreign partner would earn "40-75 basis points on 
the FP's equity investment."  Id.  Finally--and ironically--
the memorandum reminds Zelisko's superiors that "[t]here 
cannot have been any agreements, negotiations, or under-
standings of any kind among the Partners or their represen-
tatives regarding the possible liquidation of the Partnership 
or the assets to be distributed to each respective Partner 
upon termination and liquidation of the Partnership or the 
transactions described in Steps 4 and 5."  Id.

     To execute the scheme, Merrill Lynch enlisted the same 
Dutch bank, Algemene Bank Netherlands, N.V. (ABN), that 
had served as the foreign partner in the shelter at issue in 
ASA.  See ASA, 201 F.3d at 508.  Merrill Lynch drafted a 
"credit proposal" for ABN that, like the Zelisko memoran-
dum, outlined the partnership's investment steps, including 
(1) the purchase of highly rated private placement notes 
(PPNs);  (2) the sale of the PPNs for cash and contingent 
notes;  and (3) Brunswick's gradual buy-down of ABN's part-
nership interest.  Id. at 692.  In a separate memorandum to 
ABN, Merrill Lynch confirmed that "ABN will receive ... an 

upfront fee [of] around $600,000."  Id.  Previously, Merrill 
Lynch had assured ABN that in these types of deals, it would 
face "virtually no credit risk [since] the paper invested in 
[would] be of the highest credit quality and [would] have 
short term maturities," and that interest rate risk would be 
eliminated by a series of "perfect hedges."  "Legal and tax 
risk," Merrill Lynch assured ABN, "will be covered by opin-
ions of legal and tax counsel."  Id.

     Because Brunswick ultimately sold more assets than origi-
nally anticipated, it implemented the scheme outlined above 
on two separate occasions using two separate partnerships:  
Saba Partnership and Otrabanda Investerings Partnership.

                         Saba Partnership

     On February 26, 1990, Brunswick contributed $20 million, 
and ABN contributed $180 million to the newly formed Saba 
Partnership (Zelisko memorandum, Step 1).  Id. at 693.  
Saba immediately--in fact, the very same day--bought $200 
million worth of 5-year PPNs (Step 2).  Merrill Lynch then 
began to negotiate the sale of the notes and, on March 6, 
transmitted a summary of terms to two potential buyers.  On 
March 23, just prior to the close of Saba's first taxable year, 
Saba sold the PPNs, worth $200 million, for an immediate 
cash payment of $160 million and four indefinite debt instru-
ments, known as LIBOR (London Interbank Offering Rate) 
notes, worth approximately $38.5 million (Step 3).  Id. at 695.  
Saba could have reduced its $1.5 million loss by selling the 
PPNs to a money market fund and then purchasing LIBOR 
notes, but because such funds cannot issue LIBOR notes, 
Saba eliminated them from consideration.  Id.  Saba could 
also have eliminated the loss by investing in LIBOR notes 
directly instead of first purchasing, then immediately selling, 
PPNs.  Id. at 696.

     Because LIBOR varies, Saba could not determine with 
certainty the aggregate selling price of the PPNs and thus 
reported the sale as an installment sale.  Assuming it would 
receive payments over a period of six years (year of sale plus 
five years of LIBOR payments), Saba calculated its annual 
basis at $33,333,333, yielding a massive tax gain of 

$126,666,667, ninety percent of which it allocated to ABN, the 
foreign, tax-free "partner."  Id.  Pleased with the result, 
Brunswick's Vice-President of Finance, William R. McMana-
man, prepared a "Foreign Partnership Tax Update" predict-
ing that Brunswick would ultimately realize capital losses of 
$80 million from the Saba deal and nearly $60 million in its 
second, yet-to-be formed partnership, Otrabanda.  Id. at 696-
97.

     In July 1990, Brunswick purchased 50% of ABN's interest, 
giving Brunswick a 55% stake (Step 4).  Id. at 697.  Around 
the same time, it entered into a "consulting" agreement with 
ABN under which Brunswick paid ABN $750,000.  In August, 
Saba distributed the three LIBOR notes to Brunswick and 
cash to ABN (Step 5).  Id.  In determining the amount of 
cash owed to ABN, Saba valued the LIBOR notes in such a 
way as to eliminate ABN's portion of the $1.5 million loss 
from the sale of the PPNs.  In addition, Brunswick added a 
$535,000 "fee."  Id.  Brunswick then sold the three LIBOR 
notes at a slight discount for $26 million (Step 6).  Brunswick 
calculated the tax basis for all four notes as $166,666,667 
($200 million minus the already used basis of $33,333,333).  
Since it had only received three of the four LIBOR notes, 
Brunswick multiplied this number by 3/4 to obtain its actual 
basis of $125 million, which it then reduced to $123 million for 
reasons not here relevant.  Id. at 697-98.  Using this basis, 
Brunswick calculated its paper loss at $84 million (basis in the 
three notes minus the notes' sale price minus its small share 
of the paper gain reported by Saba from the sale of the 
PPNs), even though it actually lost probably no more than 
$2.5 million.  Id. at 698.

     In September, Brunswick purchased an additional partner-
ship share from ABN, bringing its total share to approximate-
ly 90%.  Id.  In June, Brunswick dissolved Saba and, after a 
series of complicated transactions not here relevant, ended up 
with the remaining LIBOR note, which it sold (Step 7).  Id. 
at 698-99.  After computing its tax basis as described above, 
Brunswick recorded a tax loss of $32 million, even though it 
actually lost only about $700,000.  Id. at 700.  Throughout all 

these transactions, Brunswick protected itself from LIBOR 
volatility by a series of hedges.  Id. at 701.

                Otrabanda Investerings Partnership

     In June 1990, Brunswick began discussing the possibility of 
forming another partnership.  Once again, Merrill Lynch, 
acting as Brunswick's agent, sent ABN a memorandum prom-
ising "total remuneration [of] $600,000" to ABN and outlining 
a specific "calendar" for the transaction, beginning with the 
purchase of PPNs and ending with a proposed termination of 
the partnership in July 1991.  Id. at 701-02.  With the 
confidence of one whose "[l]egal ... risk" is "covered by 
opinions of ... tax counsel," id. at 692, ABN's Risk Manage-
ment Department approved the transaction solely on the 
condition that ABN reserved the right to liquidate the portfo-
lio if its interest in the partnership was not reduced according 
to the proposed schedule, id. at 702.

     On June 25, ABN and Brunswick contributed $135 million 
and $15 million respectively to the newly formed Otrabanda 
Investerings Partnership.  Id. at 703.  Four days later, Otra-
banda bought four certificates of deposit for $100 million, 
selling them three weeks later for $80 million in cash and four 
LIBOR notes, which it then hedged.  Id. at 703-04.  Again, 
had Otrabanda invested directly in the LIBOR notes, it would 
have avoided the $750,000 loss attributable to the CDs' lack of 
liquidity.  Id.

     The remaining steps are familiar:  The use of LIBOR notes 
allowed the transaction to be reported as a six year "install-
ment sale," yielding an annual basis of $16,666,666 and con-
comitant paper gain of $63,333,333, the vast majority of which 
Saba allocated to ABN.  Id. at 705.  Following Brunswick's 
purchase of 50% of ABN's interest, Otrabanda distributed the 
LIBOR notes to Brunswick and an amount of cash to ABN 
equal to the fair value of the LIBOR notes plus ABN's share 
of the loss associated with the CDs' sale.  Id.  Brunswick 
sold the notes for only about $17.5 million.  Because it 
calculated its basis as $83,333,333, the sale yielded a tax loss 
of approximately $60 million (tax basis minus sales price of 

the notes and Brunswick's share of the original tax gain on 
the sale of the CDs).  In actuality, Brunswick lost only about 
$1.7 million--the difference between the value of the LIBOR 
notes and their sale price.  Id. at 705-06.  In December, 
Brunswick bought a further portion of Otrabanda bringing its 
total interest to approximately 90%, amended the agreement 
to give it total control over Otrabanda and paid ABN a 
$645,000 "control premium."  Id. at 706.  In June 1991, one 
month ahead of schedule, Brunswick terminated Otrabanda.  
Id.

     Based on the Saba and Otrabanda transactions, Brunswick 
claimed tax losses of nearly $195 million even though it 
actually lost only about $5 million.  These massive paper 
losses piqued the interest of the Commissioner, who proposed 
various adjustments to the partnerships' returns based on 
two alternative theories:  that the installment sale transac-
tions should be disregarded for federal tax purposes because 
they had no rational economic motivation except tax avoid-
ance--that is, they lacked "economic substance";  or that 
Brunswick formed Saba and Otrabanda solely for tax reasons 
and therefore both partnerships, in their entireties, should be 
disregarded as "shams" for federal tax purposes.  Id. at 710.

     Brunswick, as Saba and Otrabanda's "tax matters partner," 
filed a petition for readjustment in the Tax Court.  Because 
our opinion in ASA had not yet been released, the Tax Court 
followed the Third Circuit's opinion in ACM Partnership v. 
Commissioner, 157 F.3d 231 (3d Cir. 1998), which struck 
down a virtually identical Merrill Lynch tax shelter on the 
grounds that the installment sale transactions lacked econom-
ic substance.  Mirroring the Third Circuit's reasoning, the 
Tax Court held the installment sales in this case to be 
"economic shams."  Saba P'ship v. Comm'r, 78 T.C.M. (CCH) 
684, 722.

     Brunswick and the partnerships now appeal, arguing that 
the transactions in fact had economic substance.  The Com-
missioner, relying on ASA, cross-appeals the Tax Court's 
refusal to find Saba and Otrabanda invalid partnerships.

                               II.

     All parties agree that the sham transaction and sham 
partnership approaches yield different results.  See Appel-
lee's Br. at 27 n.12 ("alternative theor[y] would produce 
adjustments to the returns ... not identical to the adjust-
ments resulting from the Tax Court's decision");  Appellant's 
Reply Br. at 43 ("The Commissioner is asking this Court to 
reach a different result from the Tax Court's judgment.")  
Although the Commissioner seemed to concede at oral argu-
ment that under either approach, Brunswick could deduct 
actual losses from the transactions, we assume (without decid-
ing) that different adjustments would result from the two 
approaches.  Thus, we may not simply affirm on an alterna-
tive ground.  Cf. EEOC v. Aramark Corp., Inc., 208 F.3d 266, 
268 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("[B]ecause we review the district court's 
judgment, not its reasoning, we may affirm on any ground 
properly raised.").  At a minimum, we would simply remand 
to the Tax Court for reconsideration in light of ASA.

     Urging us to go further, the Commissioner argues that we 
should apply ASA, find the partnerships to be shams, and 
remand for the limited purpose of making any necessary 
adjustments.  In response, Brunswick argues that the ques-
tion of whether "an entity should be regarded as a partner-
ship for federal tax purposes is inherently factual."  Appel-
lant's Reply Br. at 38.  Although we agree that whether a 
valid partnership exists for tax purposes is a fact-intensive 
inquiry, it is a determination that we may make in cases 
where the Tax Court has "ma[d]e adequate fact findings."  
Transp. Mfg. & Equip. Co. v. Comm'r, 374 F.2d 173, 177 (8th 
Cir. 1967) (cited in Appellant's Reply Br. at 39).

     According to Brunswick, the Tax Court's findings are inad-
equate because of "significant differences" between the ac-
tions of Brunswick in this case and those of Allied Signal in 
ASA.  Appellant's Reply Br. at 44.  Though we agree that 
the differences Brunswick points to could be significant if 
they existed, we have our doubts that they do.  Brunswick 
claims that it "did not promise ABN a 'specified return,' " but 

the record demonstrates that Brunswick, through its agent 
Merrill Lynch, promised ABN $600,000 for participating in 
Saba and the same for participating in Otrabanda.  See supra 
at 5-6, 8.  Brunswick claims that it "did not agree to pay 
Saba's and Otrabanda's expenses," but the Zelisko memoran-
dum makes clear that Brunswick understood that it would 
pay "operating expenses." See supra at 5.  Brunswick claims 
that "ABN understood it would share in Saba's and Otraban-
da's losses," but record evidence demonstrates that Saba and 
Otrabanda eliminated ABN's share of the loss occasioned by 
the sale of the PPNs and CDs through the valuation of the 
LIBOR notes.  See supra at 7, 8.  Brunswick claims that 
"there were no agreements between the parties contrary to 
their written [partnership] agreement" like the "Bermuda 
Agreement" in ASA, but the record demonstrates not only 
that Merrill Lynch, Brunswick's agent, sent written proposals 
to ABN outlining the future actions of Saba and Otrabanda, 
but that ABN approved these proposals.  See supra at 5-6, 8.  
As far as we can tell, the only difference between this case 
and ASA is that Brunswick and ABN did not meet in 
Bermuda.

     In any case, ASA makes clear that "the absence of a nontax 
business purpose is fatal" to the argument that the Commis-
sioner should respect an entity for federal tax purposes.  
ASA, 201 F.3d at 512.  Here, the Tax Court specifically found 
"overwhelming evidence in the record that Saba and Otraban-
da were organized solely to generate tax benefits for Bruns-
wick."  Saba P'ship, 78 T.C.M. (CCH) at 718 (emphasis 
added).  Arguably, this broader finding subsumes any factual 
differences that might exist between this case and ASA.

     In the end, however, we will not, as the Commissioner 
urges, affirm on the basis of ASA.  Although the present 
record might strongly suggest that Saba and Otrabanda were 
sham partnerships organized for the sole purpose of generat-
ing paper tax losses for Brunswick, fairness dictates that we 
ought not affirm on this ground.  In particular, in presenting 
its case in the Tax Court, Brunswick may have acted on the 
mistaken belief that the Supreme Court's decision in Moline 
Properties, Inc. v. Commissioner, 319 U.S. 436 (1943), estab-

lished a two-part test under which Saba and Otrabanda must 
be respected simply because they engaged in some business 
activity, an interpretation that ASA squarely rejected, see 
ASA, 201 F.3d at 512 ("[C]ourts have understood the 'busi-
ness activity' reference in Moline to exclude activity whose 
sole purpose is tax avoidance....  Thus, what the petitioner 
alleges to be a two-pronged inquiry is, in fact, a unitary test 
... under which the absence of a nontax business purpose is 
fatal.").

     The Tax Court's judgment is vacated and the case remand-
ed for reconsideration in light of ASA.

                                                                 So ordered.

          