                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 9, 2002   Decided October 22, 2002 

                           No. 01-1198

                         WorldCom, Inc., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

                Verizon New England Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                     Nos. 01-1206 and 01-1209

                   Appeals of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Mark D. Schneider argued the cause for appellants and 
intervenor AT&T Corp.  With him on the briefs were Thom-

as F. O'Neil III, William Single IV, Karlen J. Reed, Assis-
tant Attorney General, Attorney General's Office of Common-
wealth of Massachusetts, Charles C. Hunter, Catherine M. 
Hannan, David W. Carpenter, Mark E. Haddad, and David 
L. Lawson.  Mark C. Rosenblum and Peter D. Keisler en-
tered appearances.

     James M. Carr, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief 
were John A. Rogovin, Deputy General Counsel, and John E. 
Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel.

     Michael E. Glover argued the cause for intervenors Veri-
zon New England Inc., et al.  With him on the brief were 
Mark L. Evans, Donna M. Epps, Colin S. Stretch, and Scott 
H. Angstreich.

     William P. Agee and Albert P. Halprin were on the brief 
for amicus curiae Massachusetts Department of Telecommu-
nications and Technology, urging affirmance.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  On January 16, 2001 
Verizon submitted an application to the Federal Communica-
tions Commission under s 271 of the Telecommunications Act 
of 1996, 47 U.S.C. s 271, seeking authority to offer long-
distance service to customers in Massachusetts.  The Com-
mission approved the application on April 16, 2001, just within 
the statutory 90-day time limit.  In Re Application of Veri-
zon, et al. for Authorization to Provide In-Region, Inter-
LATA Services in Massachusetts, 16 FCC Rcd 8988 (2001) 
("Order").  WorldCom, AT&T and a number of similarly 
situated firms acting through a trade association ("appellants" 
or "WorldCom") challenge the approval.  The parties' main 
dispute revolves around the Commission's conclusion that 
Verizon's rates for unbundled network elements ("UNEs") 

complied with the "TELRIC" standard (total-element long 
run incremental cost).  Appellants' challenge in essence at-
tacks as unreasonable the Commission's use in combination of 
two devices that it had employed separately, one in its s 271 
approval for Oklahoma, which we upheld in Sprint Comm. Co. 
v. FCC, 274 F.3d 549 (D.C. Cir. 2001), and the other in its 
s 271 approval for New York, which we upheld in AT&T 
Corp. v FCC, 220 F.3d 607 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  We are not 
persuaded.  As for the two remaining issues, one requires a 
remand because the relevant record is not materially distin-
guishable from that in Sprint;  we lack jurisdiction over the 
other.

                             *  *  *

     Because our opinions in AT&T and Sprint set out the 
statutory background in some detail, our treatment here will 
be brief.  The decree settling the AT&T antitrust litigation, 
the Modification of Final Judgment ("MFJ"), see United 
States v. American Telephone and Telegraph Co., 552 
F. Supp. 131 (D.D.C. 1982), aff'd sub nom. Maryland v. 
United States, 460 U.S. 1001 (1983), split the sale of long-
distance services from the sale of local telephone services, so 
that the Bell Operating Companies (spun off from AT&T by 
the MFJ) could provide local service but were barred from 
offering long-distance service in their local markets.  But 
s 271 of the 1996 Act allows those firms--now, together with 
their successors, commonly known as incumbent local ex-
change carriers or "ILECs"--to secure FCC approval to sell 
long-distance service to customers in the region for which 
they are the dominant local-service providers.  To receive 
s 271 approval an ILEC must show (among many other 
things) compliance with a list of fourteen conditions, termed 
the "competitive checklist," designed to ensure that an ILEC 
will be permitted to sell long-distance service in its local 
region only when it has opened up the local service market to 
competition.  47 U.S.C. s 271(c)(2)(B).

     One of the fourteen items on the checklist requires an 
ILEC to offer access to "network elements" needed by 

competitors to provide telecommunications service.  See id. 
at s 251(c)(3) (incorporated into the competitive checklist by 
s 271(c)(2)(B)(ii)).  These elements, the unbundled network 
elements or UNEs referred to earlier, must be offered to 
competitive local exchange carriers ("CLECs") at rates that 
are "establish[ed]" by state regulatory agencies pursuant to a 
"pricing methodology" prescribed by the FCC.  See AT&T 
Corp. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 525 U.S. 366, 383 (1999).  The 
methodology chosen by the Commission is called TELRIC, 
which requires that rates be based on "the cost of operating a 
hypothetical network built with the most efficient technology 
available."  Id. at 374 n.3.  See also Verizon Communica-
tions, Inc. v. FCC, 122 S. Ct. 1646 (2002) (upholding the 
TELRIC standard).

     Application of the TELRIC standard has proved complex, 
involving detailed fact-finding over years of litigation in state 
agencies.  This complexity has two important consequences 
for this case.  First, because the FCC has only 90 days to 
approve or reject a s 271 application, it cannot independently 
determine the TELRIC compliance of an ILEC's UNE rates.  
Rather, the FCC defers to the determinations of the state 
agencies who "possess[ ] a considerable degree of expertise" 
and who typically perform "a significant amount of back-
ground work" during the rate determinations.  AT&T, 220 
F.3d at 616.  Thus, the FCC need only ensure that the state 
proceedings "comply with basic TELRIC principles" and are 
not infected with clear factual errors so "substantial that the 
end result falls outside of the range that the reasonable 
application of TELRIC principles would produce."  Id. at 
615-16.  Second, the Commission may base its finding of 
TELRIC compliance on a comparison of the disputed rates 
with those of a neighboring state which it had already ap-
proved under s 271, provided that the applicant can demon-
strate that local costs were at or above those in the bench-
mark state.  See Joint Application by SBC Communications, 
Inc. et al. for Provision of In-Region InterLATA Services in 
Kansas and Oklahoma, 16 FCC Rcd 6237 (2001) at p p 82-87 
(determining that the Oklahoma loop charges were TELRIC-

compliant based on a comparison with previously approved 
Texas loop charges), aff'd, Sprint, 274 F.3d at 561.

     The Massachusetts s 271 controversy began when Verizon 
filed an initial application in September 2000.  Possibly be-
cause of various criticisms, including FCC concern over its 
UNE pricing, it withdrew the application in December.  But 
before doing so it filed a tariff lowering its UNE rates to 
levels substantially equivalent to the rates offered by Bell 
Atlantic (Verizon's name before its merger with GTE) in New 
York, which had already secured Commission approval under 
s 271.  See AT&T, 220 F.3d at 611-16.

     These New York rates had themselves been the subject of 
challenge.  CLECs had offered evidence--both before the 
New York Public Service Commission ("NYPSC") and the 
FCC (during the s 271 proceeding)--that Bell Atlantic had 
understated the size of the discounts it received on certain 
switch purchases, with the result that its UNE rates might in 
fact not comply with TELRIC.  The NYPSC re-opened its 
proceedings to inquire into the claims, but the Commission 
nonetheless approved the s 271 application.  In AT&T we 
rejected the CLECs' attack on the approval, finding that such 
newly discovered evidence was not in itself enough to upset 
an otherwise valid approval.  220 F.3d at 617-18.  In a move 
loosely paralleling that of the NYPSC, the Massachusetts 
Department of Telecommunications and Energy ("DTE") in 
January 2002 embarked on its scheduled, quinquennial review 
of Verizon's UNE rates.  Thus, as in New York, at the times 
the relevant s 271 applications were pending before the FCC, 
the disputed UNE rates were under challenge and review in 
the state agency with immediate authority.

     WorldCom's leading claim is even if the New York rates 
were acceptable at the time, their age and their errors made 
them inadequate as benchmarks, so that the Massachusetts 
s 271 approval was arbitrary and capricious.  In addition, 
they say that it was arbitrary and capricious for the FCC to 
dismiss their argument that the Massachusetts UNE rates 
created a "price squeeze," i.e., were so high that a CLEC 
could not use UNEs for profitable sale of local service.  

Finally, WorldCom argues that the s 271 application was 
fatally defective because, at the time it was filed, Verizon was 
not offering its advanced services at resale discounts, in 
contravention of item 14 on the competitive checklist, see 
s 271(c)(2)(B)(xiv).

          1. Reasonableness of the New York Benchmark

     WorldCom does not claim that there is anything inherently 
flawed in the Commission's use of benchmarking (which we 
upheld in Sprint), even where the previously approved rates 
had been seriously called into question, as was true of the 
rates approved in the New York s 271 process (which we 
upheld in AT&T).  Rather, it contends that the Commission's 
deference under AT&T is owed to a process, not to a result;  
deference by the Commission is therefore inappropriate 
where the rates under review were adopted by a state agency 
(that of Massachusetts) that did not conduct its own fact-
finding.  Second, WorldCom argues that if the FCC chooses 
to use a benchmark to evaluate the UNE rates before it in 
the s 271 proceeding, it must ensure that the chosen bench-
mark is reasonable, based on all available evidence.

     WorldCom's first point completely overlooks the facts of 
Sprint.  There the ILEC had simply given a certain class of 
Oklahoma charges "an arbitrary 25% 'haircut,' " 274 F.3d at 
558, which had the effect of bringing them into line with rates 
approved by the Commission for Texas, id. at 561.  We see 
no principled distinction between Oklahoma's "process," ac-
cepting arbitrarily trimmed rates that matched ones approved 
in Texas (and blessed by the Commission under s 271) and 
Massachusetts's similar adoption of ones matching those ap-
proved in New York (and similarly blessed by the Commis-
sion).

     Moreover, many of the elements of the "process" that 
merited deference under AT&T are present here, both in 
Massachusetts process itself and the Commission's clear rec-
ognition of the link between the ongoing New York proceed-
ings and the Massachusetts rates.  WorldCom points to the 
critical role of the "active review and modification of Bell 
Atlantic's proposed [UNE] prices."  In re Application by Bell 

Atlantic New York to Provide In-Region, InterLATA Ser-
vice, 15 FCC Rcd 3953 (2000), at p 238.  But such active 
review is present here as well.  The NYPSC is itself continu-
ing to review its own UNE prices, and as the FCC stated in 
the Order, New York's rate revisions could "undermine Veri-
zon's reliance on those [old] rates in Massachusetts and its 
compliance with the requirements of section 271," if the 
revisions were not also adopted in Massachusetts.  16 FCC 
Rcd 8988, at p 30.  In addition, the Commission noted that 
DTE itself was "endeavoring to reset UNE rates" and ob-
served that if "prices are not set in accordance with our rules 
and the Act, [the Commission] retain[s] the ability ... to take 
appropriate enforcement action."  Id.  In light of these pre-
cautions, it was perfectly reasonable for the Commission to 
review the UNE rates in Massachusetts under the same 
deferential standard as it used in evaluating rates for New 
York and Oklahoma.

     But WorldCom also argues that the Commission's chosen 
benchmark was unsuitable, having become radically detached 
from TELRIC.  The causes of such detachment, according to 
WorldCom, range from the age of the rates (rates that passed 
muster in the December, 1999 s 271 proceeding for New 
York were more than a year older in April 2001), the flaws 
that had infected the rates from the beginning, and additional 
evidence brought to bear against them not present in the 
New York determination.

     At some point, WorldCom's argument plainly must become 
a winner.  In a market with falling costs, ancient UNE rates 
cannot serve as a valid benchmark.  Nor could ones that had 
been convincingly shown, for example, to have been based on 
fraudulent ILEC submissions.  Moreover, WorldCom is sure-
ly right to suggest that a challenger might tender evidence of 
benchmark unreasonableness so strong as to preclude FCC 
approval without a hearing.

     To the extent, however, that WorldCom argues simply that 
the Commission could have chosen a better benchmark, it 
poses the wrong issue.  The FCC need not choose the 
"optimal" benchmark, only a reasonable one.  Nor can World-

Com expect the s 271 process to grow into a full-scale rate-
making on the part of the FCC, if for no other reason than 
the time constraints imposed by the 90-day limit.  The FCC 
is thus under no duty to provide a detailed, point-by-point 
explanation of why it rejected the claim that use of the 
benchmark was improvident.  Rather, the record need only 
show that the FCC reasonably concluded that it had, in light 
of appellants' claims and proffered evidence, reasonable 
grounds to be satisfied that the disputed rates were unlikely 
to exceed the range of TELRIC compliance.  As we held in 
AT&T, 220 F.3d at 616, and reiterated in Sprint, 275 F.3d at 
555, TELRIC is not a single rate but a ratemaking methodol-
ogy that may yield a rather broad range of rates.  We believe 
that here the Commission's review of the new evidence was 
enough.

     WorldCom, for instance, points to comparative studies that 
show that other states have lower UNE rates than New York.  
But if TELRIC implies a range of rates--a point on which 
appellants themselves rely in pressing their price squeeze 
argument--then such variation by no means shows a lack of 
TELRIC compliance.  WorldCom also provides an alternative 
cost study in support of their position, but this study was 
conducted in 1996, was rejected by DTE when presented to it 
in 1996, and does not appear to have ever been accepted by 
the FCC.  At best, this study proves that the Commission 
and appellants have different opinions on the best way to 
determine UNE prices;  our deference, of course, is owed to 
the Commission.

     Appellants also make much of the fact that the New York 
rates were the oldest UNE rates in the nation, and suggest 
that they were therefore outdated.  In addition, they point to 
evidence of a decline in switch costs over time.  While the 
New York rate may have exceeded theoretically perfect 
TELRIC levels when the Massachusetts Order was issued, 
such a lag does not render a rate invalid.  Indeed, when 
element costs are falling, such temporary deviations, or regu-
latory lags, are both unavoidable and perhaps even desirable.  
In AT&T we recognized that a state's TELRIC rates could 
not always reflect the most recently available information, 

since rate determinations consume substantial periods of time 
and cannot be constantly undertaken.  220 F.3d at 617-18.  
Indeed, a process of Penelope-like unraveling and reinvention 
would, like hers, prove endless.  And in upholding TELRIC, 
the Supreme Court affirmatively invoked the likelihood of a 
regulatory lag, saying that such a lag would prevent TELRIC 
prices from dropping so low as to unduly tempt CLECs to 
rely on ILEC-supplied UNEs rather than build their own 
facilities.  Verizon, 122 S. Ct. at 1669-70.

     So the mere age of a rate doesn't render the FCC's 
reliance on it unreasonable;  we can reverse the Commission's 
judgment only if it sufficiently disregarded the issue of the 
rate's age so as to adopt rates that were unreasonably 
outdated.  This, we are satisfied, the Commission did not do.  
While it is true that the Commission made no explicit findings 
that the New York rates were in line with current costs, it 
adopted what is likely a far more workable approach to the 
problem of timeliness--namely, reliance on the state's own 
processes of rate revision and correction.  As noted above, 
the Commission observed that Verizon's s 271 compliance in 
Massachusetts would be undermined if its UNE rates fell out 
of line with TELRIC levels, as determined by the active rate 
review processes under way in New York and Massachusetts.  
16 FCC Rcd 8988, at p p 29, 30, 33, 35.  Unless these determi-
nations were themselves unsupported or arbitrary and capri-
cious--and we see no evidence that they are--nothing else is 
required of the Commission on this issue.

     Apart from suggestions that the New York rates were no 
longer current, WorldCom points to additional flaws in the 
rates themselves.  To a large extent these claims simply 
duplicate the assertions of inaccuracy that were at issue in 
AT&T.  To that extent, obviously, appellants are simply 
inviting us to reject the conclusion we reached there--that 
the process of administrative correction under way in New 
York was enough to assure adequate TELRIC compliance for 
purposes of s 271--an invitation we could not accept even if 
we thought it wise (which we don't).  In fact, it turns out here 
that in January 2002, after the Commission granted the 
Massachusetts s 271 approval, the NYPSC issued an order in 

large measure accepting the CLECs' position on the switch 
discounts, resolving several other issues in their favor, and 
requiring a reduction of the New York rates by more than 
50%.  See Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to 
Examine New York Telephone Company's Rates for Unbun-
dled Network Elements, Order on Unbundled Network Ele-
ment Rates, Case 98-C-1357 (NYPSC Jan 28. 2002).  And 
the Massachusetts DTE followed suit with an order broadly 
accepting the CLECs' claims and in all likelihood leading to a 
comparable reduction.  See Investigation by the Department 
of Telecommunications and Energy on its Own Motion in 
the Appropriate Pricing, D.T.E. 01-20 (released July 11, 
2002).  These findings, obviously unavailable to the Commis-
sion at the time of its decision, seem more to establish the 
effectiveness of the process of agency correction on which it 
relied--rough though it may be--rather than a basic flaw in 
its approach.

     WorldCom tries to distinguish our ruling in AT&T by 
noting that when AT&T was decided, the flaws at issue were 
thought to be small and difficult to recalculate, whereas they 
are now known to be large and easily recalculable.  We note, 
however, that WorldCom has not even tried to take us 
through the math on this calculation;  more tellingly, its claim 
relies on data collected by the Commission for the purposes 
of implementing its duties as to the Universal Service Fund--
information that the FCC insists is unreliable for the determi-
nation of UNE rates.  In AT&T, we held that this single 
errant cost input value did not justify a finding that basic 
TELRIC principles had been violated, and the proffer of 
additional evidence that is at best uncertain and highly con-
testable is not enough to justify a different conclusion.

     More importantly, though, this attempted distinction miss-
es the central point of our prior holding in AT&T:  that it is 
reasonable for the FCC to rely on the states' periodic rate 
revision process as a means of correcting flaws in adopted 
rates.  Indeed, if there now exists a database of switch 
purchases that provides greater accuracy for use in the 
TELRIC cost model, as WorldCom claims, it seems fair to 
assume that this new information was incorporated in the new 

rates promulgated by NYPSC and DTE, or will be if World-
Com seeks judicial review or invokes the FCC's own monitor-
ing process under 47 U.S.C. s 271(d)(6).  WorldCom may 
disagree with the wisdom of the strategy the Commission 
adopted here, and may be skeptical that the states' rate 
revision processes will keep their rates within the range of 
TELRIC compliance, but it hasn't demonstrated that the 
strategy is unreasonable.

     WorldCom also notes that the New York rate revision 
procedure, unlike the one recently undertaken in Massachu-
setts, ordered refunds to correct for possibly incorrect cost 
inputs.  But we didn't rely on the refund procedure in our 
decision in AT&T, and for good reason:  state rate-setting 
procedures are complex systems aimed at balancing the com-
peting interests of customers and investors, and we will not 
upset that balance ad hoc by requiring refunds (or requiring 
the Commission to do so) unless they are clearly necessary to 
render the rates TELRIC-compliant.  Such was not the case 
in AT&T, and it is not the case here.  As for the last attempt 
to distinguish AT&T--the claim that retail rates are so low in 
Massachusetts that these UNE rates would prove to be a 
greater entry barrier to CLECs than they did in New York--
we note that this issue properly relates to WorldCom's price 
squeeze argument discussed below.

          2. Possible Price Squeeze and the Public Interest

     Appellants argue, as did their counterparts in Sprint, 274 
F.3d at 554-56, that the FCC failed to consider their claim 
that the ILEC's UNE rates would create a "price squeeze," 
i.e., prices for CLECs' inputs so high as to largely disable 
them from competing profitably in the local market with the 
ILEC, the supplier of those inputs.  See, e.g., FPC v. Con-
way Corp., 426 U.S. 271 (1976) (requiring agency to consider 
price-squeeze challenges to an electric utility's proposed 
wholesale rates).  Indeed, the FCC's justifications for not 
considering this issue--briefly, that the "price-cost squeeze" 
is irrelevant because s 271 directs the Commission only to 
examine costs rather than profits;  that compliance with the 
competitive checklist is enough to prove that the market has 

been opened to competitive entry;  that any deficiencies in 
actual local competition may well be due to individual ILEC 
strategies;  and that the matter may turn largely on the level 
of purely local rates that are entirely under the authority of 
state regulators--are virtually identical to the rationales we 
found inadequate in Sprint.  Compare Order, 16 FCC Rcd 
8988, at p p 41, 234-35, with Sprint, 274 F.3d at 554-56.  The 
rationales are no more convincing here than there.

     The only apparent difference between the Order here and 
the Kansas/Oklahoma Order remanded in Sprint is that here 
the record indicates a higher volume of competitive entry.  
See Order, 15 FCC Rcd 8988, at p 41 & n.112.  But this 
evidence alone, unanalyzed, is not enough to discharge the 
Commission's duty to assure that ILEC entry to the long-
distance market is in the public interest.  After all, classic 
price squeeze cases have never turned on a finding that 
competition by the input-purchasing firms was absolutely 
precluded.  See, e.g., Anaheim v. FERC, 941 F.2d. 1234, 1238 
(D.C. Cir. 1991) (describing price squeeze inquiry as deter-
mining whether the challenged conduct "has exerted any 
anticompetitive effects" (emphasis added)).  Because of the 
range of TELRIC-compliant UNE rates, a set of fully compli-
ant rates might--under some analyses and policy judgments, 
not addressed by the Commission in this record--impede 
local competition enough to render a s 271 approval in con-
travention of the "public interest."  Accordingly, we remand 
the case for further consideration in the light of Sprint.

          3. Provision of Advanced Services at Wholesale Rates

     Appellants' final argument is that Verizon failed to satisfy 
checklist item No. 14, see s 271(c)(2)(B)(xiv), in that it was 
not, on the date of its application on January 16, 2001, 
offering CLECs DSL and other advanced services at whole-
sale rates.  In so doing Verizon had relied on a justification 
that the Commission had formerly embraced, but that this 
court rejected in Association of Communications Enterprises 
v. FCC, 235 F.3d 662 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  That opinion was 
issued on January 9, 2001, but the mandate issued only on 

March 6, 2001.  In reliance on this delay in the mandate, the 
Commission held that it would not consider Verizon's failure 
to provide the services at wholesale rates, saying that Verizon 
should not be faulted for complying "with a Commission order 
in effect at the time of the application."  Order p 219 & n.707.

     It is undisputed that three days before the issuance of the 
Order here, Verizon (actually, its affiliate) had filed a tariff 
that brought it into full compliance with checklist item 14.  At 
oral argument counsel for appellants admitted that the issue 
currently has no practical significance.  Although the issue 
was discussed at oral argument in the context of possible 
mootness, it appears that nothing has happened between the 
initial filing of the suit and oral argument that might affect 
the significance of Verizon's delay.  Thus we conclude that 
any Commission error never inflicted an injury sufficient to 
give WorldCom standing to bring the issue.  WorldCom's 
half-hearted attempt to make out a theory that the issue was 
"capable of repetition, yet evading review" is therefore inap-
posite, as that familiar exception to mootness cannot confer 
standing on a claim when injury in fact was missing at the 
outset.  Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Envtl. Services, 
528 U.S. 167, 191 (2000).  In any case, the issue here does not 
even qualify as "evading review" since the issue is clearly 
capable of remedy if Verizon were to retract its resale 
discounts in this case, or were to withhold resale discounts in 
other states with respect to which it files a s 271 application.  
Thus, no matter whether the issue is a matter of standing, 
mootness or both, we are sure that the complete want of 
effect in the real world deprives us of jurisdiction over the 
intriguing question of how the distinction between opinion 
and mandate might play out in this context.

                             *  *  *

     We remand the price squeeze issue to the FCC for further 
consideration;  we dismiss the checklist item 14 issue for want 
of jurisdiction;  and in all other respects we affirm the Com-
mission Order.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                                   