                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 19, 2002    Decided January 31, 2003 

                           No. 01-1405

       Beverly Health & Rehabilitation Services, Inc. and 
            Beverly Enterprises--Pennsylvania, Inc., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

     District 1199P, Service Employees International Union, 
                            AFL-CIO, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Thomas P. Dowd argued the cause for the petitioners.

     Usha Dheenan, Attorney, National Labor Relations Board, 
argued the cause for the respondent.  Arthur F. Rosenfeld, 
General Counsel, John H. Ferguson, Associate General Coun-
sel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, 
and Meredith Jason, Attorney, were on brief.

     Craig Becker argued the cause for the intervenor.  Judith 
Scott was on brief.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Beverly Health 
& Rehabilitation Services, Inc., which operates approximately 
950 nursing homes nationwide, and its subsidiary Beverly 
Enterprises--Pennsylvania (collectively Beverly) seek review 
of a decision of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB 
or Board).  The Board concluded that Beverly committed 
various unfair labor practices (ULPs) at 20 nursing homes 
Beverly operates in Pennsylvania in violation of the National 
Labor Relations Act (Act), 29 U.S.C. ss 151 et seq.  See 
Beverly Health & Rehab. Servs., Inc., 335 N.L.R.B. No. 54 
(Aug.  27, 2001) (NLRB Dec.).  In its decision, the Board 
directed Beverly to post two separate remedial notices:  one 
at all of the Pennsylvania nursing homes involved in this 
proceeding and a second at all of Beverly's nursing homes 
nationwide.  Beverly challenges seven of the Board's ULP 
findings as well as the nationwide scope of the remedy.  For 
the reasons set forth below, we conclude the petition should 
be granted as to two ULPs-those based on Beverly's refusal 
to rehire striking employees and its videotaping of picketing 
employees.  In all other respects, the petition for review 
should be denied.1

__________
     1 With respect to the ULP findings that Beverly does not contest, 
the Board is entitled to summary enforcement.  International 
Union of Petroleum & Indus. Workers v. NLRB, 980 F.2d 774, 778 
(D.C. Cir. 1992) (citing Retail Clerks Union, Local 1401 v. NLRB, 
463 F.2d 316, 320 (D.C. Cir. 1972)).

                                I.

     In the fall of 1994 Beverly and District 1199P of the Service 
Employees International Union, AFL-CIO (Union) were ne-
gotiating new collective bargaining agreements for employees 
at the 20 Pennsylvania nursing homes in this case.  At the 
time, bargaining units at all but three of the facilities were 
covered by agreements set to expire on November 30, 1994, 
units at two other homes were covered by agreements set to 
expire on December 31, 1994 and the remaining unit was 
newly certified and not yet covered by an agreement.  Nego-
tiations continued until Spring 1996.

     Beginning on February 13, 1996 the Union's locals filed a 
series of ULP charges, all of which were ultimately consoli-
dated into one complaint.  On November 26, 1997 the ALJ 
issued a decision finding Beverly committed numerous ULPs 
and ordering Beverly to cease and desist and to post notices 
at all of the nursing homes involved.  NLRB Dec. at 41.  The 
ALJ specifically reserved for a supplemental proceeding the 
determination "whether remedies should extend to any or all 
of the interrelated Beverly Companies."  Id.  He issued a 
supplemental decision on November 30, 1999 which recom-
mended a single cease-and-desist order to be posted at all of 
Beverly's facilities nationwide.  NLRB Dec. at 43-59.  Bever-
ly filed exceptions to the ALJ's decisions on December 28, 
1999.

     The Board issued a decision dated August 27, 2001 in which 
it "affirm[ed] the judge's rulings, findings, and conclusions."  
NLRB Dec. at 1.  The Board revised the remedy to require 
two separate notices, one addressing the particular ULPs in 
this case to be posted only at the 20 subject Pennsylvania 
facilities (and corporate offices overseeing them), id. at 14-17 
(App. A), and a broader one to be posted company-wide, id. at 
17-18 (App. B).

     Beverly filed a petition for review on September 9, 2001.  
The Board filed a cross-application for enforcement on No-
vember 8, 2001.

                               II.

     Beverly challenges seven of the ULP findings as well as the 
company-wide scope of the remedy.  "We will affirm the 
judgment of the Board unless, 'upon reviewing the record as 
a whole, [this Court] conclude[s] that the Board's findings are 
not supported by substantial evidence, or that the Board 
acted arbitrarily or otherwise erred in applying established 
law to the facts of the case.' "  Tradesman Int'l, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 275 F.3d 1137, 1141 (D.C. Cir.  2002) (quoting Inter-
national Union of Electronic, Elec., Salaried, Mach. & Fur-
niture Workers v. NLRB, 41 F.3d 1532, 1536 (D.C. Cir. 
1994)).  We apply this standard to each of Beverly's conten-
tions seriatim.

            A. Refusal to Reinstate Striking Employees

     First, Beverly contests the ALJ's finding, summarily af-
firmed by the Board, that Beverly violated the Act by failing 
to promptly reinstate 450 employees after a three-day strike 
the Union began on April 1, 1996.  Beverly contends the 
strike was unlawful because the Union failed to comply with 
the statutory notice requirement in section 8(g) of the Act, 29 
U.S.C. s 158(g).  We agree and, accordingly, conclude that 
Beverly was under no duty to rehire the workers who partici-
pated in the unlawful strike.

     Section 8(g) provides:

     (g) Notification of intention to strike or picket at any 
health care institution

          A labor organization before engaging in any strike, 
     picketing, or other concerted refusal to work at any 
     health care institution shall, not less than ten days prior 
     to such action, notify the institution in writing and the 
     Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service of that inten-
     tion, except that in the case of bargaining for an initial 
     agreement following certification or recognition the no-
     tice required by this subsection shall not be given until 
     the expiration of the period specified in clause (B) of the 
     last sentence of subsection (d) of this section. The notice 
     shall state the date and time that such action will com-
     
     mence. The notice, once given, may be extended by the 
     written agreement of both parties.
     
29 U.S.C. s 158(g).  On March 14 and 15, 1996 Union locals 
sent notices to fifteen facilities that they intended to strike at 
7:00 a.m. on March 29.  On March 27, however, the Union 
sent a second notice purporting to extend the strike deadline 
71 hours to 6:00 a.m. on Monday April 1.  NLRB Dec. at 37.  
In a letter dated March 28, 1996 Beverly responded that it 
considered the March 27 notification a new notice requiring 
an additional 10 days before the Union workers could lawfully 
strike under section 8(g).

     Before the ALJ Beverly again asserted the strike was 
unlawful under section 8(g).  The ALJ rejected Beverly's 
defense because the Board's "clear and consistent precedent," 
tracing to its pre-Chevron decision in Greater New Orleans 
Artificial Kidney Center, 240 N.L.R.B. 432 (1979), construed 
section 8(g) to permit a union to unilaterally extend a strike 
deadline for up to 72 hours.  We review the board's construc-
tion of section 8(g) under the familiar Chevron analysis:

     If ... " 'Congress has directly spoken to the precise 
     question at issue,' " we "must give effect to Congress's 
     'unambiguously expressed intent.' "  Secretary of Labor 
     v. [Fed. Mine Safety & Health Review Comm'n], 111 
     F.3d 913, 917 (D.C. Cir.1997) (quoting Chevron USA, Inc. 
     v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 
     837, 842-43, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 2781, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984)).  
     "If 'the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the 
     specific issue,' we ask whether the agency's position rests 
     on a 'permissible construction of the statute.' "  Id. (quot-
     ing Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 2782, 81 
     L.Ed.2d 694).
     
National Multi Housing Council v. EPA, 292 F.3d 232, 234 
(D.C. Cir. 2002) (quoting Cyprus Emerald Resources Corp. v. 
Fed. Mine Safety & Health Review Comm'n, 195 F.3d 42, 45 
(D.C. Cir. 1999)).  We conclude section 8(g) manifests an 
"unambiguously expressed intent" that precludes the Board's 
interpretation.

     Section 8(g) expressly states that before commencing a 
strike at a health care institution a union "shall, not less than 
ten days prior to such action, notify the institution in writing" 
and that the "notice shall state the date and time that such 
action will commence."  The meaning of this mandatory 
language could not be plainer or the Congress's intent in 
enacting it clearer.  The notice must provide ten days notice 
of a strike specifying the day and time it is to occur.  Neither 
the initial notices the locals sent on March 14-15, 1996 nor 
the "extension" sent on March 27 satisfy this requirement.  
Although the former provided adequate notice of a strike to 
commence on April 29, as it turned out the strike did not 
begin until three days after that date;  the extension, on the 
other hand, accurately identified the date of the strike but did 
not afford the requisite ten days' notice.  Nor do either fall 
within the single statutory exception to the otherwise rigid 
notice requirement:  that "[t]he notice, once given, may be 
extended by the written agreement of both parties."

     Despite the plain meaning of the statute, the Board con-
tends that it is somehow ambiguous because it does not 
expressly state that agreement of the parties is the only 
means to obtain an extension.  No such express provision is 
necessary.  If the Congress had intended to allow either 
party to extend the notice unilaterally, it could easily have 
said so--but it did not.  Instead the Congress carved out but 
a single express exception--when both parties consent in 
writing--an exception that would be unnecessary if either 
party could unilaterally extend the notice at will.  This is a 
case where "the cannons [sic] of avoiding surplusage and 
expressio unius are at their zenith" because "they apply in 
tandem."  Independent Ins. Agents, Inc. v. Hawke, 211 F.3d 
638, 645 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (citing Halverson v. Slater, 129 F.3d 
180, 184-86 (D.C. Cir. 1997)).  The Board's ambiguity argu-
ment therefore fails.

                 B. Denial of Access to Workplace

     Second, Beverly challenges the Board's finding that it 
committed a ULP when Wayne Chapman, Beverly's Senior 

Regional Director of Associate Relations, directed that the 
Union be denied access to Beverly's facilities, including bulle-
tin boards, in a December 1, 1994 memorandum, although 
such access had been a term of the expired contracts.  We 
conclude this finding should be upheld.

     In Litton Fin. Printing Div. v. NLRB, 501 U.S. 190 (1991), 
the United States Supreme Court stated:  "The Board has 
determined, with our acceptance, that an employer commits 
an unfair labor practice if, without bargaining to impasse, it 
effects a unilateral change of an existing term or condition of 
employment."  501 U.S. at 198 (citing NLRB v. Katz, 369 
U.S. 736 (1962)).  This is precisely what Beverly did in this 
case.  Nor does the denial of access fall into any of the four 
established exceptions to the unilateral change rule enumerat-
ed in Litton:  arbitration clauses, no-strike clauses, union 
security clauses and dues check-off provisions.  Id. at 199-
200.

     Beverly suggests that the Court in Litton excluded con-
tract terms from the rule because they affect the relationship 
between the employer and the union, as opposed to the 
relationship between the employer and the employees, and 
and that we should therefore except the present term as well.  
The Litton Court, however, drew no such distinction.  Equal-
ly misplaced is Beverly's reliance on cases holding that unions 
do not ordinarily have a right to trespass.  See, e.g., NLRB v. 
Babcock & Wilcox Co., 351 U.S. 105 (1956);  Lechmere, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 502 U.S. 527, 538-39 (1992);  United Food and Com-
mercial Workers v. N.L.R.B., 74 F.3d 292, 300 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  None of those cases involved a contractual right to 
access.  In sum, it was not arbitrary, capricious or otherwise 
contrary to law for the Board not to exempt union access 
provisions from the unilateral change doctrine.

                   C. Management Rights Clause

     Third, Beverly challenges the Board's finding that it com-
mitted a ULP by implementing various changes that it claims 
were authorized by the expired management rights clause.  
The Board asserts, inter alia, that Beverly is barred from 

challenging the ULP here because the issue was already 
conclusively decided by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in 
Beverly Health & Rehab. Servs. v. NLRB, 297 F.3d 468 (6th 
Cir.  2002).  We agree.

     As we have previously stated:

     [T]he standards for establishing the preclusive effect of an 
earlier holding are:

     First, the same issue now being raised must have been 
     contested by the parties and submitted for judicial deter-
     mination in the prior case.  Second, the issue must have 
     been actually and necessarily determined by a court of 
     competent jurisdiction in that prior case....  Third, 
     preclusion in the second case must not work a basic 
     unfairness to the party bound by the first determination.  
     An example of such unfairness would be when the losing 
     party clearly lacked any incentive to litigate the point in 
     the first trial, but the stakes of the second trial are of a 
     vastly greater magnitude.
     
Hall v. Clinton, 285 F.3d 74, 82 n. 9 (D.C. Cir. 2002) (quoting 
Yamaha Corp.  of Am. v. United States, 961 F.2d 245, 254 
(D.C. Cir. 1992) (alteration original), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 
108 (1993)).  This case satisfies all three requirements.  
First, the Sixth Circuit had before it the same management 
rights clause at issue here at two of the same facilities--
Grandview and Caledonia.  Second, the Sixth Circuit decided 
to "affirm the Board's conclusion that the management-rights 
clause [there] did not continue after the termination of the 
contract."  297 F.3d at 483.  Third, Beverly had every incen-
tive to--and did--litigate the issue before the Sixth Circuit so 
that there is no unfairness in holding Beverly to the result 
reached there.2

__________
     2 It is true, as Beverly observes, that the Supreme Court has 
recognized "an exception to the applicability of the principles of 
collateral estoppel for 'unmixed questions of law' arising in 'succes-
sive actions involving unrelated subject matter.' "  United States v. 
Stauffer Chem. Co., 464 U.S. 165, 171 (1984) (quoting Montana v. 
United States, 440 U.S. 147, 162 (1979);  citing Allen v. McCurry, 

           D. Supervisory Status of Licensed Practical 
                         Nurses at Haida Manor

     Fourth, Beverly challenges the Board's determination that 
the licensed practical nurses (LPNs) at Beverly's Haida Man-
or facility are not supervisors under the Act and, specifically, 
that they did not supervise the work of "certified nurse 
assistants" (CNAs).  The Board determined Beverly "ha[d] 
not met its burden of establishing that the LPNs are supervi-
sors" because "the judge's extended fact-findings ... confirm 
that, contrary to the Respondent's contentions, the LPNs 
exercised only 'routine' authority that did not require the use 
of independent judgment in directing the work of other 
employees within the meaning of Sec. 2(11)."  NLRB Dec. at 
1 n.3.  We uphold the Board's determination.

       Section 2(11) of the Act defines "supervisor" as follows:

     The term 'supervisor' means any individual having au-
     thority, in the interest of the employer, to hire, transfer, 
     suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, re-
     ward, or discipline other employees, or responsibly to 
     
__________
449 U.S. 90, 95 n.7 (1980);  United States v. Moser, 266 U.S. 236, 242 
(1924)).  The Court has also narrowly limited the exception:

     "[W]hen the claims in two separate actions between the same 
     parties are the same or are closely related ... it is not 
     ordinarily necessary to characterize an issue as one of fact or of 
     law for purposes of issue preclusion....  In such a case, it is 
     unfair to the winning party and an unnecessary burden on the 
     courts to allow repeated litigation of the same issue in what is 
     essentially the same controversy, even if the issue is regarded 
     as one of 'law'."
     
Id.  (quoting Restatement (Second) of Judgments s 28 comment b 
(1982);  ellipsis original;  footnote omitted).  Here, where the legal 
issue is identical and the factual settings so closely related, the 
exception simply does not apply.  Cf. id at 172 ("Any factual 
differences between the two cases, such as the difference in the 
location of the plants and the difference in the private contracting 
firms involved, are of no legal significance whatever in resolving the 
issue presented in both cases.").

     direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively 
     to recommend such action, if in connection with the 
     foregoing the exercise of such authority is not of a 
     merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of 
     independent judgment.
     
29 U.S.C. s 152(11).  The ALJ expressly found that "LPNs 
have no involvement in many decisions typically reserved to 
supervisors," citing specific testimony in the record to show 
that LPNS neither trained individuals to become CNAs nor 
oriented new CNAs, that they exercised no authority over the 
CNAs' work, overtime or shift assignments, time off, griev-
ances, lay-offs and recalls, discipline or hiring (at least not 
"before the spring of 1996" and "[e]ven then, ... the LPNs 
did not hire CNAs or make effective recommendations as to 
the hiring of CNAs").  NLRB Dec. at 33-34.  The ALJ 
further found, again citing detailed evidentiary support, that 
LPNs "provide only routine direction to the CNAs and do not 
responsibly direct the work of the CNAs."  Id.  at 35.  Given 
these findings and the record evidence supporting them, the 
ALJ reasonably determined, and the Board reasonably af-
firmed the determination, that what authority the LPNs 
exercised was "of a merely routine or clerical nature" and did 
not "require[ ] the use of independent judgment" so as to 
make them statutory supervisors.3

__________
     3 At the time of the ALJ's decision the Board endorsed an 
"independent judgment" test that excluded "ordinary professional 
or technical judgment in directing less-skilled employees to deliver 
services in accordance with employer-specified standards."  See 
NLRB v. Kentucky River Cmty. Care, 532 U.S. 706, 724 (2001).  In 
Kentucky River the United States Supreme Court expressly reject-
ed the Board's test, concluding it "insert[ed] a startling categorical 
exclusion into statutory text that does not suggest its existence."  
Id. at 714.  In affirming the ALJ's determination below, the Board 
properly considered Kentucky River and concluded that, under the 
Supreme Court's interpretation of the statutory terms, the ALJ's 
"extended fact-findings" supported his conclusion that the LPNs 
"exercised only 'routine' authority that did not require the use of 
independent judgment."  NLRB Dec. at 1-2 n. 3.

                         E. HMO Coverage

     Fifth, Beverly challenges the Board's finding that it com-
mitted a ULP when it unilaterally implemented HMO cover-
age in place of the Union Health and Welfare Fund (Union 
plan) previously offered at five facilities.  We again uphold 
the Board's finding.

     The collective bargaining agreements required Beverly to 
provide employees with alternative health plans:  Beverly's 
own and an HMO.  Because no satisfactory HMO was avail-
able at five sites, the parties reached a grievance settlement 
agreement requiring that the Union plan be available for one 
year, until November 30, 1995, as an alternative at the five 
sites.  On November 28, 1995 the Union received a letter 
from Beverly announcing that as of January 1, 1996 specific 
HMOs would replace the Union plan at the five sites.  The 
Union responded in a letter dated December 5, 1996 with a 
"demand" that Beverly "bargain in good faith over these 
issues."  JA 295.  In a December 8, 1996 letter, which 
Beverly describes as a response to the December 5 letter, 
Pet'r's Br. at 45-46 (although the letter purports to be in 
response to a December 6 letter and does not mention health 
plans), Senior Regional Director Chapman complained that 
the Union was continuing to "bypass the facilities' negoti-
ators, and the facility administrators."  JA 158.  In a letter 
dated December 11 (expressly "in response to [the Union's] 
letter of December 5"), Beverly asserted the change in cover-
age did not "violate[ ] any contractual obligation or labor law."  
JA 296.  Beverly subsequently implemented the change.

     The ALJ found that Beverly "promptly rejected the re-
quest and proceeded to implement the replacement HMO 
plan on January [sic]."  NLRB Dec. at 22.  The ALJ further 
found this was a ULP because, although Beverly "had a right 
to terminate the [Union] plan on November 30, 1995," pursu-
ant to the settlement agreement, it was "not free thereafter 
unilaterally to implement a replacement plan in the face of a 
timely union request for bargaining on the matter."  Id. at 21 
(citing Carpenter Sprinkler Corp., 238 N.L.R.B. 974 (1978), 
enforced in relevant part, 605 F.2d 60 (2d Cir. 1979)).  Bever-

ly challenges the ALJ's ULP finding on the sole ground that 
the evidence does not support the ALJ's finding that Beverly 
rejected the Union's December 5 bargaining demand.  The 
ALJ's finding to the contrary, however, is a fair inference 
from Chapman's December 11 letter, which maintained Bev-
erly was free to unilaterally implement the coverage change 
despite the Union's bargaining demand, and from Beverly's 
subsequent implementation of the change.

                          F. Videotaping

     Sixth, Beverly challenges the Board's determination that it 
committed a ULP when it videotaped leafleting picketers 
outside Beverly's Fayette facility.  The ALJ provided the 
following account of the episode:

     Early in the afternoon of Sunday, March 31, and just 
     prior to the strike, about 18 employees participated in 
     leafleting on a road leading up to the Fayette facility. 
     While doing so, two security guards approached the 
     group.  One of them told Union Organizer Tammy Miller 
     that Administrator Jim Filippone wanted the group to 
     move down the road because they were on facility prop-
     erty.  As he did this, the other guard stood nearby busily 
     engaged in videotaping the group.  When Miller replied 
     that they had a right to be there according to township 
     records, the guards left to report back to Filippone. 
     Later that day, Filippone, after obtaining clarification 
     from township officials, told the employees that they 
     need not move.
     
NLRB Dec. at 26.  The ALJ concluded the videotaping was a 
ULP because:

     Photographing employees engaged in lawful picketing 
     tends to intimidate by implanting fear of future reprisals 
     and is deemed surveillance violative of Section 8(a)(1), 
     absent some legitimate justification.  Athens Disposal 
     Co., 315 NLRB 87 (1994);  Waco, Inc., 273 NLRB 746, 
     747 (1984).  None is shown here.  Accordingly, I find a 
     violation.
     
Id.  Beverly acknowledges that such videotaping is generally 
unlawful but argues it offered a legitimate justification which 
the ALJ arbitrarily ignored.  We agree.

     The ALJ's own description of the events contradicts his 
assertion that Beverly offered no justification.  His account, 
as well as Fillipone's hearing testimony, manifests that Filli-
pone first ordered the picketers to depart because he believed 
they were trespassing on Beverly's property, a justification 
that has been recognized by the Board.  See Ordman's Park 
& Shop, 292 N.L.R.B. 953, 956 (1989) ("It is undisputed that 
during the course of the picketing Respondents took photo-
graphs of nonemployee [sic], paid pickets in order to preserve 
evidence of alleged trespass.  The Board has held that where 
photographs are taken for the purpose of gathering evidence, 
and there is no showing of coercion of the employees, such 
photographing is not unlawful.  Roadway Express, 271 
NLRB 1238 (1984)).  When Filipone got a "clarification from 
the township" that the leafleting site was subject to township 
control under an easement, he testified at the hearing, he 
immediately dropped his opposition to the picketers' pres-
ence.  JA 1247.  Faced with Beverly's explanation, the ALJ 
should have made a determination, supported by factual 
findings, whether it was a "legitimate justification" under 
Board precedent.  See Timken Co., 331 N.L.R.B. No.  86 
(Jul.  13, 2000);  2000 WL 981649, *21 ("The test of validity of 
such conduct is whether there was proper justification and 
whether it reasonably tends to coerce employees.")  (citing F. 
W. Woolworth Co., 310 N.L.R.B. 1197, 1204 (1993);  Athens 
Disposal Co., 315 N.L.R.B. 87, 98 (1994);  Dayton Hudson 
Co., 316 N.L.R.B. 477 (1995);  Parsippany Hotel Manage-
ment Co., 319 N.L.R.B. 114 (1995)).  Instead he ignored it.

              G. Advertising for Replacement Workers

     Seventh, Beverly challenges the Board's finding that it 
committed a ULP when, after receiving the strike notice, it 
advertised for replacements to work at its Grandview facility 
at higher rates of pay than it had been paying its union 
employees.  We uphold the Board's finding.

     Beverly argues that under Board precedent it is free to set 
the terms and conditions of employment for striker replace-
ments.  The Board acknowledged this general right but 
observed in its decision that an employer "may not exercise 
that right in a manner designed to undermine the Union" and 
concluded that here, "in the context of" Beverly's other 
"unfair labor practices before and shortly after it placed the 
ads, including unilateral actions that disparaged the Local 
Union's representative role and discriminatory treatment of 
two Grandview Manor union activists," and "given the Re-
spondent's corporatewide and centralized policy of hostility to 
its employees' rights under the Act,"4 "the unexplained and 
publicized offer of higher wages to strike replacements can 
only be seen as designed further to undermine the Local 
Union in the eyes of the employees it represented."  NLRB 
Dec. at 4.  The Board's determination that advertising higher 
pay rates for replacement workers can constitute an unfair 
labor practice under certain circumstances is supported by its 
precedent.  See Service Elec. Co., 281 N.L.R.B. 633, 639 n.11 
(1986) (acknowledging that "the ability to set employment 
terms for replacements is a necessary incident of the underly-
ing right to hire replacements" but noting that "if the struck 
employer is exercising that right in a manner designed to 
accomplish an illegal objective, i.e., to undermine the bargain-
ing representative, then there would be a basis for finding a 
violation");  Workroom for Designers, 274 N.L.R.B. 840, 856 
(1985) ("[T]o advertise a willingness to pay nonstriking em-
ployees more than the employer had paid the strikers clearly 
has a tendency to interfere with, restrain, and coerce employ-
ees in the exercise of their statutory rights, in violation of 
Section 8(a)(1) of the Act.").  In light of the circumstances 
cited by the Board and Beverly's failure below to offer a 
lawful justification for the higher wages, the Board's finding 
of unlawful motive was not arbitrary or capricious.

                     H. Corporate-Wide Remedy

     Finally, Beverly challenges the corporate-wide scope of the 
remedial order, asserting that, at most, it should apply only to 

__________
     4 See infra Part II(H).

Beverly's facilities in Pennsylvania, where all of the ULPs 
here occurred.  We conclude that the broad, company-wide 
remedy is adequately supported and is therefore entitled to 
enforcement.

     "To offset companywide effects caused by extensive unlaw-
ful conduct, courts and the Board have expanded remedial 
measures beyond the actual locations at which unfair labor 
practices were found.  In certain cases, remedies designed to 
facilitate union communication and dissipate harmful effects 
have been applied companywide."  United Steelworkers of 
Am. v. NLRB, 646 F.2d 616, 635-36 (D.C. Cir. 1981).  "Fac-
tors that are helpful in deciding whether an order is too broad 
include (1) the number of violations as compared to the 
number of unaffected parties and facilities, (2) the types of 
violations, (3) the corporate control over, or causation of, the 
unfair labor practices, and (4) the publicity of the unfair labor 
practices among the employees."  Beverly Cal. Corp. v. 
NLRB, 227 F.3d 817, 846 (7th Cir. 2000) (citing Torrington 
Extend-A-Care Employee Ass'n v. NLRB, 17 F.3d 580, 586 
(2d Cir. 1994);  Blount Brothers Corp. v. NLRB, 571 F.2d 4, 
4-5 (7th Cir. 1978)).  The Board below ordered a corporate-
wide remedy based on (1) Beverly's geographically-broad 
history of widespread ULPs, see Beverly Cal. Corp., 326 
N.L.R.B. 232 (1998), enforced in part, vacated in part and 
remanded, 227 F.3d 817 (7th Cir. 2000);  Beverly Cal. Corp., 
326 N.L.R.B. 153 (1998), enforced, 227 F.3d 817 (7th Cir. 
2000);  Beverly Enters., 310 N.L.R.B. 222 (1993), enforced in 
part and denied in part, Torrington Extend-A-Care Em-
ployees Ass'n v. NLRB, 17 F.3d 580 (2d Cir. 1994);  (2) the 
direct involvement here of both corporate and regional man-
agement;5  and (3) Beverly's centralized structure for dealing 

__________
     5 The Board asserted:  "High-ranking corporate and regional 
officials who played prominent roles in directing, approving, or 
knowingly failing to prevent unlawful actions included Beverly 
President Bill Mathies;  Vice President for Labor and Employment 
Donald Dotson;  Region 1 (Northeast) Vice President of Operations 
Claude Lee;  Region 1 Director for Associate Relations Wayne 
Chapman;  and Region 1 Labor Relations Manager Ron St. Cyr."  
NLRB Dec.  at 5.

with labor issues.  These factors are supported by the evi-
dence which reveals that Beverly's Labor and Employment 
Vice President Donald Dotson kept close oversight of all 
regional labor developments (and in fact made the decision to 
deny the Union access to Beverly's facilities) and that region-
al officers, in particular Chapman, were extensively involved 
in the ULPs at issue.  The Seventh Circuit found that "the 
fact that most strongly supports the Board's chosen remedy" 
is "the ubiquitous nature of the area personnel at local 
facilities whenever labor problems arose"--"[i]n case after 
case, at facility after facility, the Board saw regional manag-
ers coming in to ensure that Beverly's overall corporate 
policy was implemented."  Beverly Cal. Corp. v. NLRB, 227 
F.3d at 847.6  The same holds true here.

     For the reasons set forth above, the petition for review is 
granted and the cross-application for enforcement is denied 
as to the ULP findings based on the refusal to rehire striking 
employees--given that the strike notice was inadequate--and 
on the videotaping of picketing employees.  In all other 
respects the petition is denied and the cross-application is 
granted.

                                                                 So ordered.

__________
     6 We note that, by fashioning separate Pennsylvania and corpo-
rate postings, the Board adequately addressed the Seventh Circuit's 
concern, regarding the order that circuit confronted, "that much of 
it is nothing more than a laundry list of the particular violations 
committed at individual facilities" and its direction to the Board on 
remand "to go through the order in the first instance and decide 
which parts are properly directed to the corporation as a whole and 
which to particular facilities."  227 F.3d at 847.

                                      