                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

             Submitted on the Briefs January 27, 2000

                      Decided March 31, 2000

                           No. 99-7091

                     Ronald D. Young, et al, 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                  Washington Gas Light Company, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv03129)

     Ronald H. JaraShow filed the brief for appellants.

     Robert N. Eccles and Valerie G. Roush were on the brief 
for appellee.

     Before Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg, Circuit Judge, and 
Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the court filed by Senior Judge Buckley.

     Buckley, Senior Judge:  Ronald Young and sixteen other 
former employees of Washington Gas Light Company claim 
that the company breached its fiduciary duties under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act by failing to 
disclose, prior to their retirement, that the company was 
considering implementation of a "one-time-only" voluntary 
separation incentive program.  The district court dismissed 
the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction based on its 
finding that the claims did not arise under the Act.  We 
affirm.

                          I. Background

     The Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
("ERISA"), 29 U.S.C. ss 1001-1461 (1994), is the statute 
regulating employee pension and welfare benefit plans.  An 
"employee welfare benefit plan" is defined as

     any plan, fund, or program which ... is ... established 
     or maintained by an employer ... to the extent that such 
     plan, fund, or program was established or is maintained 
     for the purpose of providing for its participants or their 
     beneficiaries [specified benefits].
     
Id. s 1002(1).  Such plans may include those that provide 
severance benefits.  See id. s 1002(1)(B) (employee welfare 
benefit plans include those that provide any benefit specified 
in 29 U.S.C. s 186(c), which includes severance benefits, 29 
U.S.C. s 186(c)(6));  see also Fort Halifax Packing Co. v. 
Coyne, 482 U.S. 1, 7 n.5 (1987) ("Section 1002(1)(B) has been 
construed to include severance benefits paid out of general 
assets, as well as out of a trust fund.").  ERISA imposes 
specified duties on ERISA plan administrators with respect 
to the plan and its participants and their beneficiaries.  See 
29 U.S.C. s 1104.

     Young and the other appellants (collectively, "Young") were 
employed as first line supervisors or managers with Washing-

ton Gas Light Company ("Washington Gas") prior to their 
respective retirements during a period from January 1 
through June 1, 1996.  As such, they participated in Washing-
ton Gas's regular retirement plan, which is subject to ERISA 
("ERISA retirement plan").  In 1995, Washington Gas began 
work on a plan to restructure the company; and, on June 28, 
1996, it formally announced the plan, which included a retire-
ment incentive program called "Voluntary Separation Pay 
Window Program" ("Window Program" or "Program").  The 
Program offered employees classified as "first line supervi-
sors or above" a one-time opportunity to receive specified 
severance benefits upon voluntary separation from the com-
pany.

     Such employees were qualified to receive those benefits if 
they (1) elected to receive separation pay under the Program;  
(2) had thirty years of service with the company or a combi-
nation of age and service totaling ninety as of December 31, 
1996;  (3) submitted a separation pay election form during a 
twelve-day "window" beginning July 8, 1996;  (4) remained in 
active employment until the separation date without being 
terminated for cause;  and (5) signed a waiver of claims 
against the company.  The company would select a separation 
date no later than March 31, 1997 for each of the electing 
employees.  Any employee who met the Program's require-
ments would receive, upon separation from the company, a 
lump-sum payment equal to fifty-two weeks of base pay 
together with the option to participate in a three-day out-
placement services program.

     According to their complaint, Young and his fellow appel-
lants retired under Washington Gas's ERISA retirement plan 
between January 1, 1996 and June 1, 1996 while the restruc-
turing of the company was under consideration but before the 
final plan and the accompanying Window Program had been 
announced.  During that period, Washington Gas was aware 
that normal attrition among its first line supervisors and 
managers would not be sufficient to accomplish its restructur-
ing goals and that it would have to implement a retirement 
incentive program in order to encourage the desired number 
of voluntary separations.  Before retiring, each of the appel-

lants asked the company whether such a program was being 
considered;  and in each case, the company replied that none 
was.

     Young contends that Washington Gas was under an obli-
gation to inform first line supervisors and managers consider-
ing retirement during the period between January 1, 1996 
and the announcement of the Window Program that the 
company did not anticipate that normal attrition by retire-
ment would meet the levels desired for restructuring and that 
a retirement incentive program was under consideration.  
Because that information was withheld, Young brought this 
suit alleging that the company had breached its fiduciary 
duties under ERISA.  Although Young also asserted various 
District of Columbia common law claims, federal jurisdiction 
depends on whether he has alleged a claim cognizable under 
ERISA.

     District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson held that the 
Window Program was not a "plan" governed by ERISA;  and, 
because in the absence of a federal claim, he had no basis for 
exercising jurisdiction over the District of Columbia claims, 
he dismissed the suit for lack of federal jurisdiction.  Young 
v. Washington Gas Light Co., No. 97-3129, order (D.D.C. 
Apr. 28, 1999).  Young filed a timely appeal, and we have 
jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 1291.

                           II. Analysis

     We accept Young's factual allegations as true and review de 
novo the dismissal of his complaint for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction.  Moore v. Valder, 65 F.3d 189, 196 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).

     Young asserts two bases for claiming that Washington Gas 
violated its obligations under ERISA.  First, he maintains 
that the Window Program was itself a plan subject to ERISA 
and that Washington Gas breached its fiduciary duty in its 
role as administrator of that plan.  Second, he claims that 
Washington Gas breached its fiduciary duty under its ERISA 
retirement plan by failing to inform him and the other 

appellants that it was considering implementation of the 
Window Program.  Neither argument has merit.

A.   Jurisdiction based upon Window Program

     ERISA does not specify what constitutes a "plan" within 
the meaning of the statute.  The Supreme Court, however, 
has made clear that not every grant of an employee benefit is 
governed by ERISA.  The Court noted that the statute's 
focus was "on the administrative integrity of benefit plans--
which presumes that some type of administrative activity is 
taking place," Fort Halifax Packing, 482 U.S. at 15, and 
concluded that ERISA only applies "with respect to benefits 
whose provision by nature requires an ongoing administrative 
program to meet the employer's obligation."  Id. at 11.  As a 
consequence, ERISA is not implicated by "[t]he requirement 
of a one-time, lump-sum payment triggered by a single event" 
because "[t]o do little more than write a check hardly consti-
tutes the operation of a benefit plan."  Id. at 12.  Therefore, 
whether a benefit is regulated by ERISA turns on the nature 
and extent of the administrative obligations that the benefit 
imposes on the employer.

     Although Fort Halifax Packing has not yet been applied by 
this court, the decisions of other circuits agree with the 
proposition

     that an employee benefit may be considered a plan for 
     purposes of ERISA only if it involves the undertaking of 
     continuing administrative and financial obligations by the 
     employer to the behoof of employees or their beneficia-
     ries.
     
Belanger v. Wyman-Gordon Co., 71 F.3d 451, 454 (1st Cir. 
1995);  see, e.g., Delaye v. Agripac, Inc., 39 F.3d 235, 237 (9th 
Cir. 1994);  Kulinski v. Medtronic Bio-Medicus, Inc., 21 F.3d 
254, 257-58 (8th Cir. 1994);  Angst v. Mack Trucks, Inc., 969 
F.2d 1530, 1538, 1540 (3d Cir. 1992).

     Under the Window Program, the determinations of eligibili-
ty and the amount of the benefits to be paid were purely 
mechanical and were based on one triggering event:  the 
eligible employee's election to retire pursuant to the terms of 

the Program.  Washington Gas was only required to make 
the straightforward factual determination of whether the 
employee had met each of the conditions specified in the 
Program, such as the requirements that the employee submit 
an election form and meet certain length-of-service criteria, 
and then to calculate the amount of the separation payment 
by multiplying the employee's base pay rate by fifty-two.  
These are not the kinds of administrative decisions that 
require ERISA's protection.  See, e.g., Velarde v. PACE 
Membership Warehouse, Inc., 105 F.3d 1313, 1316-17 (9th 
Cir. 1997) (plan offering different benefits to those terminated 
for cause or not for cause "failed to rise to the level of 
ongoing particularized discretion required to transform a 
simple severance agreement into an ERISA employee bene-
fits plan");  Belanger, 71 F.3d at 452, 455 (plan allowing age-
qualified workers to receive variable payment based on years 
of service required only mechanical decision making and was 
not governed by ERISA).

     As Young points out, the Window Program required one 
discretionary act on the part of Washington Gas, namely the 
selection of a specific separation date on or before March 31, 
1997 for each of the electing employees.  The exercise of this 
limited discretionary right, however, did not create a need for 
an ongoing administration of the benefit;  therefore, it did not 
bring the Program under ERISA.  Cf. Delaye, 39 F.3d at 237 
(severance payments to be made over the course of up to 24 
months "does not rise to the level of an ongoing administra-
tive scheme");  Angst, 969 F.2d at 1539 (obligation to make 
one-time lump-sum termination payment and to continue 
employee's existing benefits for one year not an ERISA plan 
because obligation to provide continuing benefits "did not 
require the creation of a new administrative scheme, and did 
not materially alter an existing [one]").  Therefore, applying 
the test established in Fort Halifax Packing, we conclude 
that the Window Program was not subject to ERISA.  Ac-
cordingly, this claim cannot serve as the basis for federal 
jurisdiction over Young's complaint.

B.   Jurisdiction based upon ERISA retirement plan

     The ERISA retirement plan administered by Washington 
Gas also fails to provide the district court with jurisdiction 
over Young's claims.  The fiduciary responsibilities of an 
ERISA plan administrator are detailed in section 1104 of the 
Act, as codified, which reads, in relevant part, as follows:

     [A] fiduciary shall discharge his duties with respect to a 
     plan solely in the interest of the participants and benefi-
     ciaries and--
     
          (A) for the exclusive purpose of:
          
          (i) providing benefits to participants and their benefi-
          ciaries;  and
          
          (ii) defraying reasonable expenses of administering the 
          plan....
          
29 U.S.C. s 1104(a)(1)(A) (emphasis added).  There is nothing 
in the section to suggest that an ERISA plan administrator 
has a fiduciary duty to disclose information unrelated to the 
plan even if an employee might consider that information 
important to his decision to retire.  Nor can we find any 
section of the statute that requires disclosures unrelated to 
the plan;  indeed, the disclosure requirements are limited to 
information about the plan itself.  See, e.g., id. s 1021 (requir-
ing disclosure of summary plan description, terminal reports, 
failure to meet minimum funding standards, and transfer of 
excess pension assets).

     Although the Supreme Court has stated that the federal 
courts, in interpreting the fiduciary standards imposed by 
ERISA, will "develop a federal common law of rights and 
obligations under ERISA-regulated plans," Varity Corp. v. 
Howe, 516 U.S. 489, 497 (1996) (internal quotation and cita-
tion omitted), none of the cases dealing with a plan adminis-
trator's duties under ERISA have required him to assume 
responsibilities that are unrelated to the plan itself.  The 
authorities upon which Young relies only serve to underscore 
this point, as each concerns a plan administrator's fiduciary 
duty when he seeks to modify an existing ERISA plan or to 
substitute a new plan for one already in place.  See, e.g., 

Varity Corp, 516 U.S. at 502-03 (plan administrator breached 
fiduciary duty by misrepresenting to plan participants that 
benefits would be unchanged by switch from ERISA plan to a 
new plan);  Ballone v. Eastman Kodak Co., 109 F.3d 117, 121, 
124 (2d Cir. 1997) (company has fiduciary duty to inform 
ERISA plan beneficiaries that it is considering implementa-
tion of new severance plan which would replace former 
ERISA plan);  Eddy v. Colonial Life Ins. Co. of America, 919 
F.2d 747, 750, 752 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (ERISA fiduciary had duty 
to inform plan beneficiary of available continuation options 
under plan once company terminated group plan).

     In contrast to the situations presented in these cases, the 
Window Program did not replace, amend, or supplement 
Washington Gas's ERISA retirement plan;  it merely created 
one-time benefits that were in addition to, and independent 
of, those to which the company's employees continued to be 
entitled under its ERISA retirement plan.  Therefore, be-
cause Washington Gas had no fiduciary duty under its 
ERISA retirement plan to inform Young that a retirement 
incentive program was under consideration, this claim also 
failed to provide the district court with jurisdiction over this 
suit.

     Nevertheless, because the district court dismissed only the 
ERISA claims with prejudice, Young is free to pursue his 
common law claims in the appropriate court.

                         III. Conclusion

     Because Young has failed to allege a claim under ERISA, 
the decision of the district court dismissing this action for 
lack of subject matter jurisdiction is

                                                        Affirmed.

                                                              