                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 10, 2001      Decided June 8, 2001 

                           No. 01-5029

      Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

    Tommy G. Thompson, in his official capacity as Secretary, 
              United States Department of Health and
                     Human Services, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv02990)

     Allen R. Snyder argued the cause for appellant.  With him 
on the briefs were Darrel J. Grinstead and Jeffrey Pariser.

     Ronald A. Shems argued the cause for appellee State of 
Vermont Agency of Human Services.  With him on the brief 

were Susan R. Harritt and Rebecca Ellis, Assistant Attor-
neys General, State of Vermont.

     Scott R. McIntosh, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for the federal appellees.  With him on the 
brief were Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney at the time the 
brief was filed, and Barbara C. Biddle, Attorney.

     G. Steven Rowe, Attorney General, and Paul Stern, Deputy 
Attorney General, State of Maine, were on the brief for 
amicus curiae State of Maine in support of appellee.

     Before:  Sentelle, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The Medicaid statute requires phar-
maceutical manufacturers to rebate a portion of the price of 
their drugs as a condition for participating in Medicaid.  In 
this case, pharmaceutical manufacturers challenge the De-
partment of Health and Human Service's approval of a Ver-
mont demonstration project requiring the manufacturers to 
rebate a portion of the price of drugs purchased directly by 
certain individuals who are not otherwise covered by the 
state's Medicaid program.  Because Congress imposed the 
rebate requirement in order to reduce the cost of the Medic-
aid program, and because no Medicaid funds are expended 
under the Vermont demonstration project and thus no Medic-
aid savings produced by the required rebates, we conclude 
that the Department lacked authority to approve the project.  
We therefore reverse the district court's decision to the 
contrary and remand for further proceedings.

                                I

     Funded jointly by the federal government and the states, 
Medicaid pays medical expenses for low-income people.  
Medicaid services are provided pursuant to plans developed 
by the states and approved by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services.  42 U.S.C. s 1396a(a)-(b).  States pay doc-
tors, hospitals, pharmacies, and other providers of medical 
goods and services according to established rates.  The feder-
al government then pays each state a statutorily established 

share of "the total amount expended ... as medical assis-
tance under the State plan."  Id. s 1396b(a)(1).  Medicaid 
beneficiaries cannot be required to contribute more than a 
"nominal" amount toward the cost of the benefits they re-
ceive.  Id. s 1396o.

     Pharmaceutical manufacturers participating in Medicaid re-
bate to the states a portion of the price of drugs purchased 
for Medicaid purposes.  Manufacturers do this because the 
Medicaid statute, id. ss 1396-1396u, permits the federal gov-
ernment to reimburse states only for drugs purchased from 
manufacturers who have agreed to pay statutorily specified 
rebates.  Id. s 1396r-8(a)(1).  Rebates equal the number of 
units of a drug provided by a state's Medicaid program times 
the greater of (1) the difference between the average price of 
the drug and the lowest price its manufacturer gives any 
wholesaler, provider, health maintenance organization, non-
profit, or governmental entity, or (2) 15.1 percent of the 
average manufacturer price.  See id. s 1396r-8(c)(1).  If the 
average price of a manufacturer's drug has increased faster 
than the consumer price index, the manufacturer must pay an 
additional rebate for each unit of the drug equal to the 
difference between the average price of the drug and the 
price of the drug on July 1, 1990 (or the day the drug first 
entered the market) adjusted to the consumer price index.  
Id. s 1396r-8(c)(2).  So calculated, rebates ensure that states 
get at least the best prevailing wholesale price--and possibly 
even a much better price--for drugs they purchase for Medic-
aid beneficiaries.  In language central to this case, section 
1396r-8 provides that rebate agreements shall require manu-
facturers to pay rebates on drugs for which "payment was 
made under the State plan."  Id. s 1396r-8(b)(1)(A).

     The Social Security Act, of which the Medicaid statute is a 
part, authorizes HHS to approve experimental "pilot" or 
"demonstration" projects that the Secretary determines are 
"likely to assist in promoting the objectives of [Medicaid]."  
Id. s 1315(a).  Although the Act authorizes the Secretary to 
waive certain Medicaid requirements for such demonstration 
projects, it does not authorize him to waive any requirements 
of section 1396r-8's rebate provision or the requirement that 

Medicaid beneficiaries contribute no more than a "nominal" 
amount to the cost of medical benefits they receive.  See id. 
s 1315(a)(1).

     For several years, Vermont has administered demonstra-
tion projects that extend pharmaceutical benefits to classes of 
individuals not otherwise covered by Medicaid.  By letter 
dated March 17, 2000, Vermont sought HHS approval to 
"extend the Medicaid ... rebate structure" to nearly 70,000 
new demonstration project beneficiaries, thus requiring phar-
maceutical manufacturers to pay rebates on drugs purchased 
by this group.  Known as the Pharmacy Discount Program, 
or "PDP," the expanded services would be funded as follows:  
Pharmacies would charge new beneficiaries the Medicaid 
price of a given drug minus the estimated average rebate 
Vermont receives for all drugs (approximately eighteen per-
cent in 2000).  Vermont would pay the pharmacies the eigh-
teen percent and then bill manufacturers for that amount.  
As a result, PDP benefits would be paid not with funds 
appropriated by Congress and the states for Medicaid ser-
vices, but by beneficiaries (eighty-two percent) and drug 
manufacturers (eighteen percent).  By letter dated November 
3, 2000, HHS approved the PDP.

     Appellant, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers 
of America, whose members have entered into Medicaid 
rebate agreements and so would be required to pay rebates 
under the PDP, filed suit in the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia claiming that the program violat-
ed two provisions of the Medicaid statute.  First, the manu-
facturers argued that because the federal government and 
Vermont pay nothing under the PDP, the program violates 
the provision under which pharmaceutical manufacturers owe 
rebates only for drugs "for which payment was made under 
the State plan."  Id. s 1396r-8(b)(1)(A).  Second, pointing out 
that program beneficiaries would pay for approximately 
eighty-two percent of the price of their prescriptions, the 
manufacturers argued that the PDP violates the requirement 
that states charge Medicaid beneficiaries no more than a 
"nominal" amount.  Id. s 1396o.  Seeking a preliminary in-
junction, the manufacturers argued that if they refused to 

make payments under the PDP, HHS could terminate their 
eligibility to participate in the entire Medicaid program, but if 
they made such payments, Vermont's sovereign immunity 
would preclude them from recovering their money should 
they ultimately prevail in the litigation.

     The HHS Secretary, along with the Secretary of Vermont's 
Agency of Human Services, who intervened as a defendant, 
responded that "payment" means payment, and that even 
though Vermont is reimbursed by manufacturers, it has still 
made a payment under the ordinary understanding of that 
word.  As to the manufacturers' nominal copayment claim, 
the HHS Secretary argued that the manufacturers lacked 
standing to represent the interests of PDP beneficiaries.  The 
Secretary did not deny that manufacturers refusing to make 
PDP rebate payments risked losing Medicaid eligibility na-
tionwide, nor did the Vermont Secretary deny that sovereign 
immunity would bar recovery of any rebates paid.

     On January 17, 2001, sixteen days after Vermont began 
implementing the PDP, the district court, concluding that the 
manufacturers were unlikely to succeed on the merits, denied 
their request for a preliminary injunction.  Pharm. Research 
& Mfrs. of Am. v. United States, No. 2000-2990 (D.D.C. Jan. 
17, 2001) (order denying preliminary injunction);  see also 
Pharm. Research & Mfrs. of Am. v. United States, 135 
F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2001).  Renewing the arguments they 
made in the district court, the manufacturers appeal.

                                II

     According to the Vermont Secretary of Human Services, 
"[p]rescription drug prices can place an enormous burden on 
working Vermonters."  Intervenor's Br. at 58. "The unin-
sured and under-insured," she explains, "are often unable to 
obtain drugs because of the high cost....  Without the 
assistance of the PDP, these individuals might forego obtain-
ing these medicines, reduce the amount or frequency of their 
prescriptions for financial reasons, or elect to obtain medi-
cines by sacrificing other necessities."  Id. (internal quotation 
omitted).  Our task, however, is neither to evaluate the PDP's 

policy justification nor to determine whether the program 
best serves the pharmaceutical needs of the poor.  Cf. Robert 
Pear, States Creating Plans to Reduce Costs for Drugs, N.Y. 
Times, Apr. 23, 2001, at A1 (describing various state programs 
to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs).  
We face a straightforward legal issue:  Did the Department 
exceed its statutory authority by authorizing Vermont to 
require pharmaceutical manufacturers to make rebates under 
the PDP?

     The manufacturers argue that the Department lacked au-
thority to approve the PDP because, as they interpret the 
statute, the payments Vermont makes to pharmacies are not 
"payment[s] ... made under the State plan."  As they see it, 
Vermont merely acts as a conduit for money received from 
drug manufacturers, which could not possibly be what Con-
gress meant by "payment":

     [T]he only plausible reading of the "payment" require-
     ment is that the State must make an actual outlay of 
     funds....  Had Congress wanted Medicaid rebates to be 
     triggered by loans, pass-throughs, or individual beneficia-
     ries' outlays, it would have said as much.  The Act 
     cannot reasonably be interpreted such that the only 
     "payment ... under a state plan" necessary to justify a 
     manufacturer rebate is the manufacturer rebate itself.
     
Appellant's Opening Br. at 22.  The HHS Secretary responds 
that Vermont does make payments:  it pays approximately 
eighteen percent of the price of drugs purchased by PDP 
beneficiaries.  Citing a dictionary, the Secretary argues that 
"[t]o say that Vermont is not making a 'payment' to pharma-
cies when it pays them for the drugs they dispense to PDP 
participants is to abandon any ordinary understanding of the 
meaning of 'payment.' "  Appellees' Br. at 24.  The fact that 
Vermont gets reimbursed, the Secretary asserts, does not 
mean that Vermont's outlays of funds are not payments:  "if 
an automobile owner pays a garage to repair the owner's car, 
the owner has made a payment to the garage;  if the owner 
later receives a check from his insurance company that covers 

the cost of the repairs, it hardly follows that he no longer has 
made any payment."  Id. at 25.

     To resolve this debate, we proceed in accordance with 
Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 
Inc., asking first "whether Congress has directly spoken to 
the precise question at issue."  467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984).  If it 
has, "that is the end of the matter;  for the court, as well as 
the agency, must give effect to the unambiguously expressed 
intent of Congress."  Id. at 842-43.  If we find the statute 
either silent or ambiguous with respect to the precise ques-
tion at issue, we proceed to the second step of Chevron 
analysis, asking "whether the agency's answer is based on a 
permissible construction of the statute."  Id. at 843.  At this 
stage of Chevron review, we afford substantial deference to 
the agency's interpretation of statutory language.  Id. at 844.  
Of course, not all agency interpretations of statutes warrant 
Chevron deference.  See Christensen v. Harris County, 120 
S.Ct. 1655, 1662 (2000) ("Interpretations such as those in 
opinion letters--like interpretations contained in policy state-
ments, agency manuals, and enforcement guidelines, all of 
which lack the force of law--do not warrant Chevron-style 
deference.") (internal citations omitted).  In this case, howev-
er, we need not decide whether the Department's approval of 
the PDP would be entitled to Chevron deference, for using 
traditional tools of statutory interpretation--text, structure, 
purpose, and legislative history, see Bell Atl. Tel. Cos. v. FCC, 
131 F.3d 1044, 1047 (D.C. Cir. 1997)--we conclude that Con-
gress has "directly spoken to the precise question at issue"; 
that is, whether "payment" includes expenditures that are 
fully reimbursed by manufacturer rebates.

     We agree with the Secretary that our inquiry begins with 
the words of the statute.  But a word's "ordinary understand-
ing" is not always controlling.  Words draw meaning from 
context.  Consider Article III, Section 1 of the Constitution:  
"Judges ... shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour."  
Although the dictionary includes "conformity with ... the 
norms of good manners or social decorum" among its defini-
tions of "behavior," Webster's Third New International 
Dictionary 199 (1993), no one would suggest that judges be 

removed for failing to observe Emily Post's standards of 
etiquette--the use of "behaviour" in the context of judges' 
qualifications for office rules out such an interpretation.  In-
deed, just last week the Supreme Court emphasized that 
statutory terms can have a narrower meaning in context than 
the same words have in common usage.  See Buckhannon 
Bd. & Care Home, Inc. v. W. Va. Dep't of Health & Human 
Res., No. 99-1848, 2001 WL 567728 (U.S. May 29, 2001) 
(interpreting the word "prevailing" in the statutory term 
"prevailing party" to have a narrower meaning than it has in 
Webster's);  cf. K Mart Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 486 U.S. 281, 
319 (1988) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in 
part) ("While looking up the separate word 'foreign' in a 
dictionary might produce the reading the majority suggests, 
that approach would also interpret the phrase 'I have a 
foreign object in my eye' as referring, perhaps, to something 
from Italy.").

     So too here.  Although as the Secretary's car repair exam-
ple illustrates, the word "payment" is broad enough to include 
reimbursed expenditures, consideration of the word's con-
text--the statute's purpose and legislative history--reveals a 
far narrower meaning.  Properly understood, "payment" here 
means only payments with state or federal funds appropriat-
ed for Medicaid expenditures;  absent such payments, phar-
maceutical rebates would not contribute to reducing the cost 
of the taxpayer-funded Medicaid program, and the legislative 
history makes quite clear that Congress's purpose in requir-
ing rebates was to do just that.  Senator Pryor, sponsor of 
the rebate provision, explained in his statement introducing 
the bill that rebates are designed to stop pharmaceutical 
manufacturers from "bankrupting the coffers of the State 
Medicaid drug programs."  136 Cong. Rec. 24,145 (1990).  The 
provision "requires drug manufacturers to offer substantial 
discounted prices to the Medicaid Program ... [b]ecause 
there is no logical reason why, in an era of severe budget 
constraints and social needs, the Medicaid Program should be 
denied access to [the] same generous discounts" hospitals and 
HMOs receive.  Id.  Rebates, the Senator estimated, would 

"achieve in excess of $2.5 billion in savings" over five years.  
Id.

     The House Report on the bill likewise demonstrates that 
Congress required rebates in order to reduce Medicaid ex-
penditures:  "[T]he bill is framed to achieve significant Medic-
aid savings...."  H.R. Rep. No. 101-881, at 98 (1990).  Re-
sponding to projections that federal Medicaid payments for 
prescription drugs would reach $2.8 billion in 1991, the House 
Report declared that "Medicaid, the means-tested entitlement 
program that purchases basic health care for the poor, should 
have the benefit of the same discounts on single source drugs 
that other large public and private purchasers enjoy."  Id. at 
96.

     This legislative history demonstrates that Congress im-
posed the rebate requirement for two overlapping reasons:  to 
reduce the cost of Medicaid and to prevent pharmaceutical 
manufacturers from charging the government and taxpayers 
above-market prices for Medicaid drugs.  Understood within 
this context, "payment" excludes situations where no govern-
ment funds are spent;  otherwise, manufacturers could be 
required to pay rebates that neither "achieve significant 
Medicaid savings" nor prevent pharmaceutical companies 
from "bankrupting the coffers of the State Medicaid drug 
programs."  Because Vermont's PDP payments are fully 
reimbursed by manufacturer rebates, and because the rebates 
produce no savings for the Medicaid program, the state's 
payments to pharmacies are not "payments" within the mean-
ing of the statute.

     An additional feature of the Medicaid statute reinforces our 
view that when Congress said "payment," it meant payment 
with funds appropriated for Medicaid purposes.  Section 
1396r-8(a)(4) provides that if a state had a rebate agreement 
with a manufacturer before the federal rebate requirement 
took effect, that agreement would "be considered to be ... in 
compliance" with the Medicaid statute if "such agreement 
provide[d] for a minimum aggregate rebate of 10 percent of 
the State's total expenditures under the State plan for cover-
age of the manufacturer's drugs."  42 U.S.C. s 1396r-8(a)(4).  

This provision makes sense only if a state's expenditures for 
drugs are determined by the price of the drugs, not by the 
amount of expected rebates.  If, as in the PDP, the amount of 
a state's expenditures were determined by the size of the 
rebates the state expected, section 1396r-8(a)(4)'s minimum 
would be entirely circular--it would require the rebate to be 
at least ten percent of the state's expenditures, and those 
expenditures would be equal to the rebate, suggesting that 
the rebate would have to be at least ten percent of itself.  
This provision, in other words, does not contemplate that 
expenditures would be set at the amount of the rebates a 
state receives;  rather, it assumes a net expenditure of funds 
appropriated for Medicaid purposes in an amount determined 
independently of the amount of the rebates.

     The HHS Secretary argues that even if the PDP involves 
no "payment[s]" within the meaning of the statute, Congress 
gave the Department, as part of the power to approve 
demonstration projects, authority to regard "costs of such 
project[s] which would not otherwise be included as expendi-
tures ... as expenditures under the State plan."  Id. 
s 1315(a)(2)(A) (emphasis added).  Yet in its March 17 letter 
seeking approval of the PDP, Vermont assured the Depart-
ment that "there will be no ... cost to the program."  
Because manufacturer rebates reimburse Vermont for all 
PDP payments, the only cost the state arguably incurs is 
"forgone interest" from "the significant delay between the 
time that Vermont pays pharmacies and the time that it 
receives corresponding rebates."  Appellees' Br. at 25;  
Pharm. Research & Mfrs. of Am., 135 F. Supp. 2d at 14 
("[T]he state could have earned interest on the funds if they 
were collected from taxpayers but not advanced to the phar-
macies on behalf of the manufacturers.").  Even assuming the 
Department may regard the cost of foregone interest as an 
expenditure or payment, however, here it is not a payment 
for pharmaceuticals.  Under the PDP, Vermont makes pay-
ments to pharmacies and incurs the interest cost in order to 
trigger the rebate requirement.  Put another way, Vermont's 
foregone interest cost is the cost of extending the manufac-
turers' rebate obligations to drug purchases made by individ-

uals not otherwise covered by the state's Medicaid program.  
Yet the statute requires rebates only for "drugs ... for which 
payment was made under the State plan."  42 U.S.C. 
s 1396r-8(b)(1)(A) (emphasis added).  The Department has 
no statutory authority to treat the cost of providing rebate 
benefits to non-Medicaid Vermonters as payment for outpa-
tient drugs.

     Perhaps Congress could require manufacturers to pay re-
bates when no funds appropriated for Medicaid purposes 
were actually expended.  Perhaps Congress could authorize 
HHS to accomplish directly what it has done indirectly 
through the PDP--require pharmaceutical manufacturers to 
provide substantial discounts to individuals not otherwise 
covered by state Medicaid programs.  But because it has 
done neither, and because Vermont makes no "payments" 
within the meaning of section 1396r-8, the Department lacked 
authority to approve the PDP.

     In reaching this conclusion, we recognize that nothing in 
the statute's language or legislative history suggests that 
Congress considered the possibility of requiring rebates 
where no Medicaid funds are expended.  But because we 
think it so obvious that Congress's purpose in requiring 
manufacturer rebates was to reduce the cost of the Medicaid 
program, we think that Congress's silence cannot provide a 
basis for allowing the Department to extend the rebate 
requirement to situations where, as here, rebates produce no 
Medicaid savings.  Determining how to fund pharmaceutical 
benefits for the poor and whether their cost should be shared 
by pharmaceutical manufacturers is a responsibility that, 
absent express congressional direction to the contrary, must 
be left to Congress.

                               III

     Having no need to consider the manufacturers' alternative 
argument that the PDP also runs afoul of the statute's 
"nominal" copayment requirement, we reverse the decision of 

the district court and remand for further proceedings consis-
tent with this opinion.

                                                            So ordered.

                           