                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 1, 2000    Decided January 26, 2001 

                           No. 97-1557

              Wisconsin Valley Improvement Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

          United States Department of the Interior and 
                   Department of Agriculture, 
                           Intervenors

                    Consolidated with 99-1511

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Naikang Tsao argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Michael D. Fischer and Bradley D. 
Jackson.

     Larry D. Gasteiger, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the briefs was John H. Conway, Acting Solicitor.

     Ronald M. Spritzer, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for intervenors.  With him on the briefs 
were Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, and John 
T. Stahr, Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Wisconsin Valley Improvement 
Company ("WVIC" or "the company") petitions for review of 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ("FERC") orders 
imposing conditions on its license to operate a hydropower 
project.  In addition to charging WVIC an annual fee for 
"use" of submerged federal lands, the licensing order requires 
petitioner to implement a "wild rice enhancement plan."  
FERC imposed the latter condition at the instance of interve-
nors United States Forest Service and Department of the 
Interior ("the agencies"), which hold federal lands overflowed 
by WVIC's reservoir.  Petitioner argues, inter alia, that the 
conditions imposed exceed the scope of FERC's authority 
under the Federal Power Act ("FPA"), 16 U.S.C. s 791a et 
seq. (1994), as they govern areas that are not part of any 
"reservations" of the United States.  Petitioner further ar-
gues that the enhancement plan is arbitrary and capricious as 
the required reduction in reservoir's water level would not 
result in wild rice growth, and challenges the requirement 
that it pay fees for its "use" of the submerged agency land.  
We conclude that FERC lawfully could require the wild rice 
implementation plan under the FPA and further, since it is 
impossible to confine reductions in the water level to federally 
controlled land, that FERC was entitled to impose water-level 
conditions on the entire project.  We further hold that the 

agencies' decisions concerning the wild rice plan were not 
arbitrary and capricious, but that FERC's decision to charge 
annual fees was.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     Subchapter I of the FPA, 16 U.S.C. ss 791a-823a (1994), 
confers on FERC the authority to award licenses for the 
operation of hydropower projects on the navigable waters of 
the United States.  In particular, FPA s 4(e) requires FERC 
to include in licenses for projects that operate "within" a 
"reservation" of the United States, any "such conditions as 
the Secretary of the department under whose supervision 
such reservation falls shall deem necessary for the adequate 
protection and utilization of such reservation."  Id. s 797(e).  
That is, if a FERC-licensed project is located "within" an 
agency-supervised "reservation," that agency may require 
FERC to impose conditions on the manner in which the 
licensee may operate it.  The FPA further defines "reserva-
tion" to include "national forests, tribal lands embraced within 
Indian reservations, military reservations, and other lands 
and interests in lands owned by the United States, and 
withdrawn, reserved, or withheld from private appropriation 
and disposal under the public land laws;  also lands and 
interests in lands acquired and held for any public purposes;  
but shall not include national monuments or national parks."  
Id. s 796(2) (emphases added).

     For the better part of a century, WVIC has operated a 
project--known as the Wisconsin River Headwaters Sys-
tem--consisting of dams and reservoirs on the Wisconsin and 
Tomahawk Rivers.  WVIC was chartered by Wisconsin's 
legislature in 1907.  In the same year, the company acquired 
the Lac Vieux Desert reservoir, a natural drainage lake on 
the Wisconsin-Michigan border that had been dammed for 
logging operations in 1870.  Since 1907, WVIC has operated 
the reservoir and dam with the principal intent of producing 
hydroelectric power, as well as providing flood control.  The 
company in 1937 replaced Lac Vieux Desert's nineteenth-
century logging dam with a concrete reservoir dam.  And in 

1959, WVIC acquired from FERC's predecessor agency, the 
Federal Power Commission, a 50-year license for its project 
(the project was licensed in 1959, but its license was retroac-
tive to 1943).  At the time, the company was not charged fees 
for "using, enjoying, or occupying" the nearby federally 
owned lands that its reservoir overflowed.

     WVIC sought to renew its license in 1991.  During the 
relicensing proceedings, the agencies submitted to FERC, 
pursuant to FPA s 4(e), a number of conditions that would 
restrict the manner in which WVIC could operate its project.  
Those conditions were appropriate, the agencies explained, 
because WVIC's reservoir overflows 617.3 acres of the Nicolet 
and Ottawa National Forests, under the Forest Service's 
jurisdiction, and one-half acre of the Lac Vieux Desert Indian 
Reservation, administered by the Interior Department.  See 
Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 80 FERC p 61,054, 
61,170 (1997).  After administrative hearings over a five-year 
period, FERC on July 18, 1996 issued an order that granted 
WVIC's license application and included the agencies' pro-
posed conditions, three of which the company now challenges.  
See Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 76 FERC p 61,050 
(1996).

     First, and most important, is Article 114, which requires 
WVIC to implement at Lac Vieux Desert what FERC styles 
a ten-year "wild rice enhancement plan."  The company is 
obliged to reduce the reservoir's maximum water level by 
about nine inches, and to contribute $200,000 toward the 
planting and monitoring of wild rice.  See id. at 61,257-59.  
The agencies asserted that their "wild rice enhancement 
plan" was necessary to reverse the depletion of wild rice at 
the reservoir.  Although rice had once been abundant at Lac 
Vieux Desert, they explained, it had almost completely disap-
peared by the 1950s.  The agencies attributed that decline to 
the high water that resulted when WVIC rebuilt the reser-
voir's dam in 1937, and correspondingly concluded that de-
creasing the reservoir's water level would create conditions 
favorable to the self-sustaining growth of wild rice.  See Final 
Environmental Impact Statement at 3-37, 4-74 to 4-76, app. 
J (June 1996).  WVIC estimates that, in addition to the 

$200,000 rice expenditure, it will suffer $400,000 in lost hydro-
power revenues over the ten-year period.  See Petitioner's 
brief at 54;  WVIC Response to Draft Environmental Impact 
Statement at 5-3 to 5-4 (April 13, 1995).

     In addition, FERC included in WVIC's new license two 
provisions--Articles 201 and 202--that require the company 
to pay annual fees to the United States for its use of 
submerged federally-owned land.  See Wisconsin Valley Im-
provement Co., 76 FERC at 61,237.  Such payments are 
required, FERC submits, by FPA s 10(e), which obliges a 
licensee to "pay to the United States reasonable annual 
charges in an amount to be fixed by the Commission ... for 
recompensing it for the use, occupancy, and enjoyment of its 
lands or other property."  16 U.S.C. s 803(e) (1994).

     WVIC sought an administrative rehearing and petitioned 
for review in this Court.  Although FERC subsequently 
issued several orders that modified its initial 1996 ruling, see 
Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 80 FERC p 61,054 
(1997);  Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 87 FERC 
p 62,251 (1999);  Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 89 
FERC p 61,057 (1999), it left intact the portions challenged 
here.  WVIC's first petition for review, case number 97-1557, 
was consolidated with its present petition by a January 10, 
2000 order of this Court.

                          II. DISCUSSION

A.   FPA s 4(e)

     This Court reviews FERC's orders--including conditions 
prescribed by agencies pursuant to FPA s 4(e)--under the 
Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), 5 U.S.C. s 551 et seq. 
(1994), which obliges us to reverse any agency action that is 
"arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not 
in accordance with law."  Id. s 706(2)(A);  see Sithe/Indepen-
dence Power Partners v. FERC, 165 F.3d 944, 948 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).  As pertinent here, the APA's prohibition on arbitrary 
and capricious agency action requires us to decide whether 
FERC correctly concluded that the lands flooded by WVIC's 

reservoir are part of a "reservation" of the United States 
within the meaning of the FPA.

     1.   Existence of s 4(e) authority
          
     WVIC argues that FERC cannot impose the conditions 
submitted by the agencies under s 4(e) as the facts of the 
present licensing procedure do not come within the rationale 
of that section.  As petitioner views it, the mandatory condi-
tioning authority under that section, giving as it does carte 
blanche authority to impose conditions on projects located 
within federal reservations, see Escondido Mut. Water Co. v. 
La Jolla Band of Mission Indians, 466 U.S. 765 (1984), could 
not have been intended to provide that sort of authority to 
otherwise uninvolved agencies over the regulation of license 
projects no more connected to reservation land than WVIC is 
to the lands under consideration.  WVIC argues that its 
project cannot be "within" the relevant reservations because 
"[t]he Agencies have no protectable property interests that 
conflict with WVIC's prescriptive water rights, and its opera-
tion of the Reservoir does not depend on the use or occupan-
cy of any federal property right."  Petitioner's brief at 11.  
That is a non sequitur.

     The question whether WVIC owns flowage easements over 
the lands is irrelevant to whether the lands themselves are 
part of a federal reservation.  As we stated above, the FPA 
defines the term "reservation" to include "national forest, 
tribal lands embraced within Indian reservations, military 
reservations, and other lands and interests in lands owned 
by the United States, and withdrawn, reserved, or withheld 
from private appropriation and disposal under the public land 
laws;  also lands and interests in lands acquired and held for 
any public purposes;  ... not includ[ing] national monuments 
or national parks."  16 U.S.C. s 796(2) (emphases added).  
By the terms of the statute, the United States need not even 
hold land in fee simple absolute for it to operate a "reserva-
tion."  It is enough that the government own an "interest" in 
the land.  See Escondido, 466 U.S. at 781 ("There is no doubt 
that 'reservations' include 'interests in lands owned by the 
United States....' ").  And on the record before us, there 

can be no dispute that the United States owns at least an 
"interest" in the lands flooded by WVIC's reservoir, perhaps 
even the fee simple, whether or not subject to a prescriptive 
easement by WVIC.

     Indeed, FERC consistently has affirmed its jurisdiction 
over land that the federal government owns subject to a 
citizen's easement.  In South Carolina Elec. & Gas Co., 75 
FERC p 61,308 n.9 (1996), FERC reasoned that "even if we 
assume that SCE&G holds the easements it describes, that 
fact does not make the land in question any less a reservation 
for purposes of section 4(e) of the FPA," since "the term 
['reservation'] is not limited to fee title."  And in Town of 
Estes Park, 75 FERC p 61,245 (1996), the Commission con-
cluded that "if the federal government holds fee title to 
certain lands, the lands qualify as lands owned by the United 
States for FPA purposes, even if someone else has a continu-
ing right to use them pursuant to an easement."

     But while the question of whether WVIC holds flowage 
easements is immaterial to the lands' status as federal "reser-
vations," it remains quite relevant to the possibility that 
FERC's licensing order has "taken" the company's property 
in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  See U.S. Const. amend. 
V ("[N]or shall private property be taken for public use 
without just compensation.").  If WVIC does indeed own 
easements to flow the agencies' lands, and if FERC's order 
has prevented it from using its property rights, the govern-
ment may well have affected an unconstitutional taking.  See 
National Wildlife Federation v. ICC, 850 F.2d 694, 703 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988) (recognizing that property rights in easements "do 
implicate the takings clause");  cf. Nollan v. California Coast-
al Comm'n, 483 U.S. 825, 831 (1987):

     Had California simply required the Nollans to make an 
     easement across their beachfront available to the public 
     on a permanent basis in order to increase public access 
     to the beach ... we have no doubt there would have 
     been a taking.  To say that the appropriation of a public 
     easement across a landowner's premises does not consti-
     tute the taking of a property interest but rather ... "a 
     
     mere restriction on its use," is to use words in a manner 
     that deprives them of all their ordinary meaning.
     
(citation omitted).

     Both FERC and the agencies deny that WVIC has any 
cognizable property interest in the flooded lands, and re-
peatedly insist that the company has not demonstrated that it 
owns any recorded easements.  Quite the contrary, they point 
out, for the government has introduced evidence that "only 
7.63% of the total quantified National Forest System land 
within the Project is burdened with recorded flowage rights."  
Intervenors' brief at 14 n.5 (emphasis added);  see also Re-
spondent's brief at 16.

     Of course, formal recordation is only one way--not, crucial-
ly, the exclusive way--by which a party in Wisconsin or 
Michigan may establish a flowage easement.  Rather, both 
jurisdictions recognize that one may obtain an easement to 
flow water over another's land through prescription.  See, 
e.g., Chippewa & Flambeau Improvement Co. v. R.R. 
Comm'n, 159 N.W. 739, 745 (Wis. 1916);  Cook v. Grand River 
Hydroelectric Power Co., 346 N.W.2d 881, 884 (Mich. Ct. App. 
1984).  WVIC's inability to point to recorded flowage ease-
ments is hardly the "fatal flaw" FERC takes it to be.  Re-
spondent's brief at 20.

     But while WVIC may be able to advance a colorable 
Takings-Clause claim, it is not within our jurisdiction to 
adjudicate it.  It is fixed law that, "[i]f there is a taking, and a 
claim for just compensation, then that is a Tucker Act matter 
to be pursued in the Court of Federal Claims, and not before 
us."  Transmission Access Policy Study Group v. FERC, 225 
F.3d 667, 690 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  So far as the underlying 
questions of which property interests are owned by which 
parties, neither FERC nor this Court have jurisdiction to try 
title.  Either the state courts or the United States District 
Court of appropriate jurisdiction acting pursuant to the Quiet 
Title Act, 28 U.S.C. s 2409a (1994), could adjudicate the 
factual questions such as whether WVIC's operations have 
been sufficient to give rise to prescriptive easements, and 
apply the appropriate law.  If WVIC proves successful in its 

title actions, it could potentially pursue a takings claim in the 
Court of Federal Claims, which has exclusive jurisdiction over 
such actions.  28 U.S.C. s 1491 (1994).  None of this, howev-
er, prevents either FERC or this Court on review from 
applying the conditions sought by the affected agencies.  We 
therefore cannot grant a petition for review on that basis.

     2.   Scope of s 4(e) authority
          
     Slightly more complicated than whether FERC has authori-
ty under s 4(e) to impose license conditions, is the extent of 
that authority.  The parties dispute whether the FPA--under 
which FERC must attach license conditions to projects locat-
ed "within any reservation" of the United States, 16 U.S.C. 
s 797(e) (1994) (emphasis added)--permits FERC to pre-
scribe conditions with respect to the entire Lac Vieux Desert 
project, or only as to those portions of the project that 
actually occupy reservation lands.  The agencies propose that 
the government's "section 4(e) conditioning authority applies 
to the license, and therefore to all of the project works 
covered by that license, so long as ... part of the licensed 
project is within the reservation."  Intervenors' brief at 18 
(emphasis added).  WVIC responds with what it supposes is 
a reductio ad absurdum, and points out that the agencies' 
interpretation would permit FERC to impose project-wide 
license conditions "if any portion of the project touches a 
reservation (even if the overlap is the size of a postage 
stamp)."

     We need not, however, decide the precise scope of the 
government's power to prescribe conditions for projects locat-
ed "within" reservations.  Rather, we resolve this issue on the 
narrow ground that on the facts of this case it would be 
impossible to attach a condition as to the reservation lands 
without simultaneously imposing it with respect to the entire 
project.  As FERC points out, there simply is no way to 
require WVIC to reduce the water level of Lac Vieux Desert 
only over federal lands.  A lake can have only one level.  See 
Respondent's brief at 32 n.8 ("As the condition imposes 
maximum water levels on the entire project reservoir, it is 

unclear how WVIC could be required to limit the maximum 
water level on only those portions of the project reservoir 
occupying the reservations, without affecting the water level 
throughout the project reservoir.").  WVIC does not dispute 
that FERC could not reduce the level of the water that 
overflows the reservation lands without lowering the entire 
reservoir, and we therefore find that its order requiring 
WVIC to do so was not arbitrary and capricious.

     Besides requiring WVIC to reduce the water level at Lac 
Vieux Desert, FERC's "wild rice enhancement plan" further 
calls for the company to fund the agencies' efforts to plant 
wild rice.  Unlike changes in water level, it is possible to 
confine rice-planting to the federally owned reservations.  
Hence the rationale that permits the reduction of the reser-
voir's water level over non-reservation lands--that the gov-
ernment cannot lower the water over reservation lands with-
out doing so as to the entire reservoir--would not justify a 
requirement that rice be planted on non-reservation lands.  
But it appears that the agencies have imposed no such 
condition.  FERC's order calls for rice to be planted, not 
throughout the Lac Vieux Desert reservoir, but only on 
reservation lands--for example at Misery Bay and the suit-
ably-named Rice Bay, both of which are on Forest Service or 
Indian Reservation land.  See Final Environmental Impact 
Statement at 4-76 to 4-77 (June 1996).  "In any event," 
FERC explains, "it is clear that the planned wild rice seeding 
is to occur on both the Indian and Forest Service reserva-
tions," and FERC has given no indication that it will require 
the planting of rice on non-reservation lands.  Wisconsin 
Valley Improvement Co., 76 FERC p 61,050, 61,227 (1996).

     3.   Conclusion
          
     In sum, FERC has the authority to attach conditions to 
WVIC's license to operate a project at Lac Vieux Desert, 
because the agencies own at least an "interest" in the lands 
flowed by the reservoir.  The lands therefore are part of a 
"reservation" within the meaning of FPA s 4(e).  FERC's 
s 4(e) authority extends to areas outside the reservation's 
geographic boundaries, because it is impossible to lower the 

water level over the federal lands without reducing the entire 
reservoir.

B.   The "wild rice enhancement plan"

     We review FERC and the agencies' decision to require that 
WVIC undertake a "wild rice enhancement plan" under the 
APA's arbitrary-and-capricious standard.  See 5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A) (1994).  A party seeking to have a court declare 
an agency action to be arbitrary and capricious carries "a 
heavy burden indeed." Transmission Access Policy Study 
Group v. FERC, 225 F.3d 667, 714 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  We will 
not substitute our own judgment for that of the agency, but 
will examine only "whether the decision was based on a 
consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has 
been a clear error of judgment," Citizens to Preserve Overton 
Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402, 416 (1971), whether the 
agency's policy choice is supported by "substantial evidence," 
and "whether there is a rational connection between the facts 
and the choice made."  Bangor Hydro-Electric Co. v. FERC, 
78 F.3d 659, 663 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     At first blush, this case seemingly requires that we review 
two distinct actions:  first, the agencies' conclusion that the 
"wild rice enhancement plan" would lead to the revitalization 
of wild rice at Lac Vieux Desert;  and second, FERC's 
decision to include that condition in WVIC's project license.  
In fact only the agencies' action is relevant to our inquiry.  
FPA s 4(e) obliges FERC to include the conditions that are 
prescribed by agencies that have jurisdiction over reservation 
lands:  Project licenses "shall be subject to and contain such 
conditions as" the agencies deem necessary.  16 U.S.C. 
s 797(e) (1994) (emphasis added).  FERC has no discretion 
to decide whether or not to include a proposed condition in a 
project license;  if an agency proposes a condition, FERC 
must include it.  The Commission was not acting arbitrarily 
and capriciously when it included the agencies' wild-rice 
condition;  it simply was following the law.

     Therefore, we review only the underlying decision of the 
agencies, and in that analysis must determine whether it was 
arbitrary and capricious for the agencies to conclude that (1) 

high water levels were responsible for the decline of wild rice 
at Lac Vieux Desert;  (2) WVIC's 1937 construction of a 
reservoir dam caused those high water levels;  (3) a reduction 
in water level will create conditions favorable to self-
sustaining wild rice growth;  and (4) the use of "detritus 
mats" would be an effective way of reintroducing wild rice to 
the reservoir.  We conclude--given "the very limited scope of 
our review," Transmission Access, 225 F.3d at 713--that the 
evidence before the agencies adequately supports each of 
their four conclusions.

     First, the agencies' conclusion that an increase in Lac 
Vieux Desert's water depth was responsible for the decline in 
wild rice was not arbitrary and capricious.  The agencies 
concede that a number of factors influence the success of wild 
rice, but point to abundant evidence indicating that water 
depth is the most important.  To be sure, their experts 
appear to disagree on just how deep water threatens rice 
growth:  one suggests that deep water does not allow enough 
sunlight to penetrate for photosynthesis to occur, while anoth-
er proposes that deep water drowns the rice.  But the crucial 
point is that the agencies have based their policy choice on 
substantial evidence.

     Relatedly, it was not arbitrary and capricious for the 
agencies to conclude that WVIC's 1937 construction of a 
reservoir dam--which replaced a nineteenth-century logging 
dam--was responsible for so increasing the lake's depth as to 
kill off the then-extant wild rice.  WVIC correctly points out 
that Lac Vieux Desert had been dammed for some 60 years 
before the rice began to decline in the 1940s.  But it wrongly 
insinuates that, because wild rice thrived alongside the log-
ging dam, the new dam cannot have been responsible for rice-
killing high water.  That argument fails to take account of the 
crucial difference between logging dams and reservoir dams:  
While WVIC's reservoir dam maintains water depth at a 
constant level, the logging dam was used to build up a head of 
water that, when released, drove accumulated logs down-
stream.  As Wisconsin's Supreme Court has explained:

     A log-driving dam is not built for storage purposes or for 
     keeping a constant head of water during the year, but for 
     the raising of a head of water in the early spring and 
     immediately using such water in successive rapid minia-
     ture floods during the spring months.  The reservoir 
     dam is built for the purpose of storing up a great 
     quantity of water during the spring and conserving it for 
     gradual depletion during the summer season.  In the one 
     case the normal situation is that the dam is empty at the 
     beginning of the summer and so remains, while in the 
     other case it is full at the beginning of the summer and 
     remains so subject only to slow reduction when it be-
     comes necessary to supplement the natural flow of the 
     river which has become lessened by long-continued dry 
     weather.
     
Chippewa & Flambeau Improvement Co. v. R.R. Comm'n, 
159 N.W. 739, 745 (Wis. 1916).  In fact, the two types of dams 
"are practically the antitheses of each other."  Id.

     As the agencies point out, because the logging dam would 
have been opened in the spring, Lac Vieux Desert would have 
returned to its normal depth by June and July, just in time 
for the crucial "floating leaf stage" of wild rice growth.  See 
Intervenors' brief at 35-36.  The nineteenth-century reser-
voir dam would not have produced the consistent flooding the 
agencies propose was responsible for destroying Lac Vieux 
Desert's rice crop.  It therefore was eminently reasonable for 
them to conclude that WVIC's reservoir dam produced the 
high water that in turn caused the decline in wild rice, even 
though WVIC's old logging dam resulted in no similar reduc-
tion.

     Third, the agencies's conclusion that reducing Lac Vieux 
Desert's water level will enable the reservoir once again to 
sustain wild rice was not arbitrary and capricious.  If high 
water is the principal factor inhibiting the growth of wild rice, 
it follows that reducing the reservoir's depth will create 
conditions more favorable to rice growth.  WVIC attempts to 
cast doubt on the agencies' conclusion by pointing to another 
factor that, it submits, would continue to inhibit rice even if it 

is made to reduce the reservoir's water level.  The company 
proposes that Lac Vieux Desert will remain inhospitable to 
wild rice due to the continued presence of highly flocculent 
sediments which, it argues, will expose fragile rice shoots to 
destructive wind and wave action.  But the company cannot 
explain why the reservoir's sediments did not inhibit rice 
growth before the 1940s.  In addition, the agencies have 
introduced evidence demonstrating other highly flocculent 
lakes--including the Pat Shay and Kaine lakes--have been 
reseeded successfully.

     Finally, it was not arbitrary and capricious for the agencies 
to conclude that the use of artificial "detritus mats"--layers 
of floating vegetative residue on which, it is supposed, rice 
can grow--would be an effective way of reintroducing wild 
rice to Lac Vieux Desert.  WVIC has introduced evidence 
from a scientific expert that such detritus mats simply do not 
exist.  The foundational assumption of the detritus-mat theo-
ry, WVIC's expert explained, is that several years' worth of 
undecomposed straw would amass on the lake's surface and 
provide a bed for rice growth.  But it would be impossible for 
vegetative detritus to accumulate given that "[m]ost of this 
straw is swept to shore before germination of the seed the 
next spring."

     Given the presence of disputing expert witnesses, this 
controversy parallels one described by the Supreme Court as 
"a classic example of a factual dispute the resolution of which 
implicates substantial agency expertise."  Marsh v. Oregon 
Natural Resources Council, 490 U.S. 360, 376 (1989).  We in 
this case, as the Supreme Court in that one, "must defer to 
'the informed discretion of the responsible federal agencies.' " 
Id. at 377 (quoting Kleppe v. Sierra Club, 427 U.S. 390, 412 
(1976)).  Like the Supreme Court in Marsh, we hold that the 
agency's decision concerning the evidence before it "involves 
primarily issues of fact."  Id.  Accordingly, we hold that that 
decision was not arbitrary and capricious, and we cannot set 
it aside.

     Here, the agencies had before them evidence that 10-14 
inch-thick layers of vegetative detritus have been discovered 

on the bed of the Wisconsin River.  It may be true, as WVIC 
argues, that because the detritus was found submerged on 
the river's bed, and not on its surface, it would be unlikely to 
support rice growth.  If we were to decide the question as an 
original matter, we might well agree.  But it is not our role to 
engage in the de novo weighing of evidence.  As we recently 
emphasized, "[i]t is not enough for petitioners to convince us 
of the reasonableness of their views;  ... those arguments 
should be presented to FERC, whose commissioners are 
appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate with 
the expectation that they, not Article III courts, will make 
policy judgments."  Transmission Access Policy Study 
Group v. FERC, 225 F.3d 667, 714 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  The 
agencies here have based their policy choice on substantial 
scientific evidence and that is enough to survive arbitrary-
and-capricious review, whatever may be this Court's views as 
to the persuasiveness of that evidence.

     In sum, because the agencies have relied upon sufficient 
expert evidence to establish "a rational connection between 
the facts and the choice made," Bangor Hydro-Electric Co. v. 
FERC, 78 F.3d 659, 663 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 1996), it was not 
arbitrary and capricious for them to require WVIC to under-
take a "wild rice enhancement plan."  To be sure, WVIC has 
submitted evidence that casts some doubt on the soundness of 
the agencies' conclusions.  But as the Supreme Court empha-
sized in Marsh, we are not called upon to weigh competing 
experts' opinions "as an original matter."  Marsh, 490 U.S. at 
378.  We only inquire whether the agencies have based their 
policy choices on reasonable expert evidence.  They have 
done so here.

C.   Usage fees under FPA s 10(e)

     In addition to obliging WVIC to implement a "wild rice 
enhancement plan" pursuant to FPA s 4(e), FERC's order 
also charges the company annual fees for its "use" of the 
reservation lands flooded by its reservoir.  See Wisconsin 
Valley Improvement Co., 76 FERC at 61,237.  FERC im-
posed that condition pursuant to FPA s 10(e), which estab-
lishes that a "licensee shall pay to the United States rea-

sonable annual charges in an amount to be fixed by the 
Commission for the purpose of reimbursing the United 
States ... for the use, occupancy, and enjoyment of its 
lands or other property."  16 U.S.C. s 803(e) (1994).  
WVIC challenges the usage-fee condition by claiming that it 
does not, in fact, "use, occupy, or enjoy" any federal prop-
erty, since it holds easements entitling it to flow water over 
the agencies' lands--and, indeed, acquired those easements 
many years before the agencies came to own the burdened 
land.  In essence, the company attempts to defeat the 
s 10(e) conditions with the same argument it advanced 
against the s 4(e) conditions.

     Though, as we already have explained, the issue whether 
WVIC owns rights to flow water over the agencies' lands is 
immaterial to the lands' status as federal "reservations," it 
remains relevant to the subsequent question of whether the 
agencies may impose annual charges for the company's use of 
federal lands pursuant to FPA s 10(e).  And, again as we 
have already explained, WVIC has not yet demonstrated that 
it has flooded the agencies' lands pursuant to its own flowage 
easements.  However, WVIC's failure conclusively to estab-
lish that it owns the asserted easements does not end our 
inquiry.  This Court must further determine whether the 
agencies have proffered a satisfactory explanation for now 
deciding to assess s 10(e) usage fees, given that WVIC's old 
license included no such charges.

     Section 706(2)(A) of the APA requires agencies to, among 
other things, "consider the relevant factors and draw a ration-
al connection between the facts found and the choice made."  
Missouri Public Serv. Comm'n v. FERC, 215 F.3d 1, 3 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000) (citation and quotation marks omitted).  In particu-
lar, an agency acts arbitrarily and capriciously when it 
abruptly departs from a position it previously held without 
satisfactorily explaining its reason for doing so.  "Indeed, 
where an agency departs from established precedent without 
a reasoned explanation, its decision will be vacated as arbi-
trary and capricious."  ANR Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 71 F.3d 
897, 901 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  see also AT & T v. FCC, 974 F.2d 
1351, 1355 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (faulting the FCC for failing to 

explain why it "changed the original price cap rules" and 
concluding that the Commission's "Reconsideration Order is 
arbitrary and capricious for want of an adequate explana-
tion").  As the Supreme Court has put it, "an agency chang-
ing its course must supply a reasoned analysis...."  Motor 
Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 
U.S. 29, 57 (1983) (citation omitted).

     The requirements imposed by FERC's order mark a sharp 
departure from WVIC's 1959 license, which contained no 
obligation to reimburse the federal government for flooding 
its lands.  In its 1959 licensing order, the Commission found 
that the company's project occupied lands of the United 
States.  See Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 21 FPC 785, 
788 (1959).  It concluded, however, that it could not impose 
usage fees until then-ongoing land studies revealed the extent 
of the United States' property rights.  See id.  ("However, 
land studies, now in progress, must be completed before we 
can make a final determination as to the amount of lands of 
the United States occupied by the project and as to the 
amount of annual charges due the United States for the use, 
occupancy and enjoyment of such lands.").

     FERC no longer holds that it may impose user fees only 
after a land study establishes the extent of the United States' 
property interests.  Its new position is that it may charge 
such fees "unless and until [WVIC's property] rights are 
confirmed by an appropriate state or federal authority."  
Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co., 80 FERC p 61,054, 
61,174 (1997).  Whereas the United States formerly bore the 
burden of establishing that WVIC "used, occupied, or en-
joyed" various of its property interests, FERC's new license 
places the burden on the company to demonstrate that it does 
not use the government's land.  FERC has offered no expla-
nation--far less a "reasoned" one--for this abrupt departure.  
Because it has failed to do so, we find that FERC's sudden 
imposition of usage fees under FPA s 10(e) was arbitrary and 
capricious.

     We therefore grant WVIC's petition for review, in part, and 
remand to FERC with instructions that the Commission 

remove the usage-fee provisions from the company's project 
license.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     With one exception, we uphold FERC's licensing orders.  
FPA s 4(e) authorized FERC to attach "wild rice enhance-
ment" conditions to WVIC's project license because the Unit-
ed States owned at least an "interest" in the flooded lands.  
FERC further was entitled to impose those conditions with 
respect to the entire project, as it would be impossible to 
reduce the reservoir's water level over just the federally 
controlled land.  The agencies reasonably concluded that a 
reduction in the reservoir's water level would allow wild rice 
again to flourish.  However, it was arbitrary and capricious 
for FERC to begin charging WVIC fees for "using, occupy-
ing, and enjoying" submerged federal lands, without provid-
ing any explanation for its sudden change in policy.  The 
petition for review is granted in part and denied in part, and 
we remand to FERC so that it may eliminate the usage-fees 
requirement from WVIC's project license.

                                                                 It is so ordered.

                                  