                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 10, 1999   Decided January 7, 2000 

                           No. 98-1480

               Contractor's Sand and Gravel, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

      Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission and 
                       Secretary of Labor, 
                           Respondents

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
         Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission

     C. Gregory Ruffennach argued the cause for petitioner. 
With him on the briefs were Ronald E. Meisburg and Wil-
liam K. Doran.

     Jack Powasnik, Attorney, U.S. Department of Labor, ar-
gued the cause for respondent. With him on the brief was W. 
Christian Schumann, Counsel.  Norman Michael Gleich-
man, General Counsel, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Contractor's Sand and Gravel, 
Inc. ("CSG") petitions for review of a Federal Mine Safety 
and Health Review Commission ("FMSHRC") decision vacat-
ing an Administrative Law Judge's ("ALJ") award of attor-
neys fees and expenses against the Secretary of Labor arising 
out of an underlying proceeding in which CSG had successful-
ly defended against citations and civil penalty assessments for 
alleged violations of Mine Safety Regulations.  The Commis-
sion responds both that it has the jurisdiction to review the 
award and that the award was improper because the conduct 
of the Secretary in the underlying litigation was "substantial-
ly justified."  While we agree with the Commission that it 
had jurisdiction to review the award, we agree with petitioner 
that the conduct of the Department of Labor in the underly-
ing Mine Act proceedings was not substantially justified.  
Therefore, for the reasons more fully set out below, we allow 
the petition for review.

                    I. Underlying Proceedings

     A. The MSHA Citations

     In March of 1993, Inspector Ann Frederick of the Mine 
Safety and Health Administration ("MSHA"), purporting to 
act under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 
("Mine Act"), 30 U.S.C. s 801 et seq., issued numerous cita-
tions against petitioner Contractor's Sand & Gravel, Inc. and 
its general manager Eric Shoonmaker.  While most citations 
were dismissed or otherwise disposed of, the one underlying 
the present proceeding resulted in substantial administrative 
litigation.  This citation charged violation of 30 C.F.R. 
s 56.12025, which requires that "[a]ll metal enclosing or 
encasing electrical circuits shall be grounded or provided with 
equivalent protection."  The citation specifically alleged that 
the grounding system employed by petitioner for its crusher 
was not in compliance with law and constituted "an unwar-
rantable failure by [the] operator to comply with the stan-
dards" of the Mine Act.  Secretary of Labor v. Contractors 

Sand and Gravel Supply, Inc., 18 F.M.S.H.R.C.  384, 385 
(ALJ 1996) (quoting citation).  The citation did not allege that 
the device was not grounded, but only that the method of 
grounding--that is the use of the frame of the equipment as 
the conduit to the ground--"has been forbidden for over 
fifteen years."  Id.  In fact, neither section 56.12025, nor the 
Secretary's regulatory definition applicable to the grounding 
requirement of section 56.12025, nor any other statute or 
regulation forbade frame grounding and never had.  The 
regulatory definition simply defines "electrical grounding" as:  
"to connect with the ground to make the earth part of the 
circuit."  30 C.F.R. s 56.2 (1999).

     After testing confirmed that its method of grounding com-
plied with the regulatory definition, CSG declined to modify 
the structure to comply with the Secretary's instructions, and 
proceeded to contest the citation.  A second MSHA inspector 
issued a closure order closing the entire crushing plant until 
such time as the crushing operation was properly grounded 
with a fourth wire.  Only after CSG incorporated a second 
grounding system according to the dictates of the inspectors 
did MSHA lift the closure order.  On May 27, 1993, MSHA 
assessed a $7,000 civil penalty against CSG and a $6,000 civil 
penalty against Shoonmaker personally, in contrast with the 
Secretary's average penalty proposal of $66 and previous high 
penalty proposal of $81.  At no time during the entire pro-
ceeding did the inspectors or any other emissary of the 
Secretary conduct any test to determine whether the frame 
grounding employed by CSG in fact complied with the regula-
tory definition.  CSG and Shoonmaker contested the exces-
sive penalty assessments as well as the underlying violation.  
The Secretary then initiated civil penalty proceedings against 
both before the FMSHRC.

     In the Mine Act proceeding, the Secretary initially ad-
vanced a position similar to the one that Frederick had 
articulated in the citation, that is, she maintained that 30 
C.F.R. s 56.12025 prohibited frame grounding.  Specifically, 
the Secretary alleged:

          The grounding system set up by [CSG] did not con-
     form to MSHA standards or to standards recognized in 
     the building and construction industries.  The use of 
     feeder and stacker frames as grounding is prohibited by 
     the National Electrical Code....
     
          The use of structural frames as grounding conductors 
     is not recognized by MSHA....
     
Subsequently, in response to a pre-hearing order by the ALJ, 
and in apparent recognition that section 56.12025 does not 
contain any provision forbidding frame grounding, that the 
regulations have never adopted the National Electrical Code, 
and that the Secretary's inspectors had never conducted any 
inspection to determine compliance with the actual require-
ments of the actual regulatory scheme, the Secretary changed 
her position and alleged that MSHA would establish a viola-
tion of section 56.12025 "by showing that the stacker and 
crusher conveyor motors were not properly grounded.  Spe-
cifically ... that these two motors did not have a ground lead 
or 'fourth wire' ... [leaving] the motors without a proper and 
effective ground...."

     Just as the regulations did not forbid frame grounding, 
neither did they affirmatively require "fourth wire ground-
ing."  Therefore, CSG moved for a summary decision from 
the ALJ.  The Secretary opposed that motion and filed a 
cross-motion for summary disposition, arguing that a reason-
ably prudent person would infer the Secretary's contended 
requirements and prohibitions from the cited sections and 
that the Secretary's "interpretation" was therefore entitled to 
"deference."

     The ALJ recognized the single issue before him as being 
whether CSG's use of frame grounding to create a path for 
the electrical current to the ground violated section 56.12025.  
He further recognized that the cited regulation did not pro-
hibit frame grounding and that the Secretary had never 
undertaken any rulemaking to extend an interpretation of the 
grounding requirement forbidding frame grounding, or con-
versely requiring some other method.  CSG entered the 
battle of summary decision motions armed with evidence that 
its method did in fact meet the ground requirement set forth 

in the regulatory and definitional sections of Part 56.  The 
Secretary came with no evidence whatsoever that the ground-
ing method did not meet the regulatory requirements nor any 
other evidence that CSG or Shoonmaker had otherwise violat-
ed the cited regulations, or any other.  There being no 
dispute as to any material fact, the ALJ entered summary 
decision in CSG's favor.  See Contractors, 18 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 
389.  Specifically, the ALJ found that CSG "complied with 
the requirement of the cited standard by intentionally 
grounding the stacker conveyor and crusher discharge con-
veyor motors by using the stacker and crusher frames as 
conductors in carrying ground fault current to the earth."  
Id. at 387.  The ALJ went on to note that Part 56 "clearly 
provides that 'electrical grounding means to connect with the 
ground to make earth part of the circuit.' "  Id. at 387-88 
(quoting 30 C.F.R. s 56.2).  As CSG's evidence of compliance 
with the regulation was uncontested, there was nothing else 
to be heard.  The Secretary did not appeal.

     B. The EAJA Proceedings

     After prevailing in every respect in the MSHA proceeding, 
CSG sought an award of its costs and its fees under the 
Equal Access to Justice Act ("EAJA"), 5 U.S.C. s 504.  The 
Secretary resisted the award, asserting that MSHA's position 
"was substantially justified" as contemplated in 5 U.S.C. 
s 504(a)(1).  The ALJ rejected the substantial justification 
claim and entered a fees and costs award in favor of CSG.  
See Contractor's Sand and Gravel, Inc. v. Secretary of Labor, 
18 F.M.S.H.R.C. 1820 (ALJ 1996).  The Secretary appealed 
the ALJ's award to the Federal Mine Safety and Health 
Review Commission.  On August 22, 1998, the Commission in 
a 3-to-2 decision reversed the ALJ and vacated his award of 
attorneys fees and expenses to CSG.  See Secretary of Labor 
v. Contractors Sand and Gravel, Inc., 20 F.M.S.H.R.C. 960 
(1998).  The present petition brings that decision of the 
Commission before us for review.

                           II. Analysis

     The EAJA provides, in pertinent part, that a "prevailing 
party other than the United States" in "an adversary adjudi-

cation" is entitled to an award from the agency that conduct-
ed the adjudication of fees and expenses incurred in connec-
tion with the proceeding.  5 U.S.C. s 504(a)(1).  CSG sought 
and received an EAJA award from the ALJ.  The Adminis-
tration did not and does not contest CSG's status as a 
prevailing party, but both before the ALJ and the Commis-
sion and now before this court, resisted the award on the 
basis of further language in section 504(a)(1) that conditions 
the entitlement of the prevailing party by stating that the 
award is to be made "unless the adjudicative officer of the 
agency finds that the position of the agency was substantially 
justified or that special circumstances make an award unjust."  
Id.  The Secretary argued and the Commission held that the 
Administration's position was "substantially justified" within 
the meaning of the EAJA.  See Contractors, 20 F.M.S.H.R.C. 
at 967.  CSG's petition brings before us the Commission's 
reversal of the ALJ's award.  CSG argues that the Commis-
sion had no jurisdiction to review the award of the ALJ, and 
further that, even if the Commission had jurisdiction, it erred 
in reversing the ALJ's award.  While we reject the petition-
er's jurisdictional argument, we agree that the Commission 
erred on the merits, and therefore allow the petition for 
review.

     A. The Commission's Jurisdiction

     Before reaching the merits of CSG's petition, we first 
consider CSG's argument that the Commission did not have 
jurisdiction to review the ALJ's determination that the Ad-
ministration's underlying conduct lacked substantial justifica-
tion.  CSG argues that its view is compelled by the language 
of 5 U.S.C. s 504(a)(1) to the effect that the Agency is to 
enter an EAJA award in favor of the prevailing party in an 
adversary adjudication "unless the adjudicative officer of the 
agency finds that the position of the agency was substantially 
justified."  (emphasis added).  CSG argues that this "plain 
language" commits the substantial justification issue to the 
ALJ and that the Commission was therefore without authori-
ty to review it.  The respondents contend that the statute 
clearly contemplates agency review of the adjudicative offi-
cer's decision.  We agree.

     As respondents point out, although the statute contains the 
language recited by petitioner, that language does not compel 
the finality that petitioner attaches to it.  In fact, the statute 
goes on to provide:

     The decision of the adjudicative officer ... shall be made 
     part of the record containing the final decision of the 
     agency and shall include written findings and conclusions 
     and the reason or basis therefor.  The decision of the 
     agency on the application for fees and other expenses 
     shall be the final administrative decision under this sec-
     tion.
     
5 U.S.C. s 504(a)(3).

     As the respondents argue, this language is far more consis-
tent with a congressional contemplation of an administrative 
law judge decision subject to the normal agency review than 
it is with an ALJ decision legislatively vested with administra-
tive finality.  Concededly, it is true as petitioner argues that 
the statute could literally encompass a model in which the 
ALJ's decision would be final on the discrete question of 
substantial justification, and would then become part of the 
record upon which the final administrative decision designat-
ed in subsection (a)(3) would rest, but in which the other 
elements of the fee award not committed to the ALJ would be 
finally determined only by the highest agency decision maker.  
However, the language is equally consistent with the model 
forwarded by respondents in which the Commission not only 
makes the final decision as to all other elements, but reviews 
along with those elements the substantial justification finding 
entered by the ALJ in the first instance.

     Granted, we are not bound to defer to the agency's con-
struction.  The rule of Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 837 (1984), does not 
apply.  This is a statute of general application and not one 
committed to administration by the Commission or the Secre-
tary.  We therefore make this choice between or among 
possible alternatives as a classic question of law committed to 
the court for decision, not the agency.  See, e.g., Scheduled 
Airlines Traffic Offices, Inc. v. Dep't of Defense, 87 F.3d 1356, 

1361 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  However, without deference, we find 
the Commission's interpretation to be the more compelling on 
the jurisdictional question.  There is nothing extraordinary 
about an administrative agency reviewing the findings of its 
ALJ.  Indeed, that is the normal procedure.  (It would be so 
extraordinary for a finding to be committed to an ALJ 
without review that CSG has been able to offer no example.)  
We think it unlikely that if Congress intended to adopt such 
an extraordinary departure from the norm it would do so by 
implication.  We therefore agree with the Commission that 5 
U.S.C. s 504(a)(3) commits to its review the decision of the 
ALJ.

     B. The Merits

     The majority of the Commission in its 3-to-2 decision 
reversing the ALJ's award of fees to CSG began by faulting 
the approach of the ALJ in determining whether the Admin-
istration's position had been justified.  According to the Com-
mission "the judge's failure to independently review the 
Secretary's position in the EAJA proceeding and apply a 
distinct analysis under the appropriate EAJA standard was 
erroneous and in itself, precludes affirmance of the judge's 
determination."  Contractors, 20 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 968 (em-
phasis in original).  The Commission in this criticism address-
es the ALJ's statement that " '[i]n the underlying proceeding, 
I clearly indicated that the Secretary's position was unreason-
able....  I again find that the Secretary's legal theory was 
not reasonable and that there was no reasonable connection 
between the Secretary's legal theory and the undisputed 
facts.' "  Id. (quoting Contractor's, 18 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 1822 
(emphasis added by the Commission)).  We would state at the 
outset that we are a bit baffled by the Commission's approach 
to its review of the ALJ's decision.  The language of the ALJ 
italicized by the Commission demonstrates on its face that he 
did precisely what the Commission suggested he had not 
done.  That is, he reviewed for the second time an Adminis-
tration position he had already found unreasonable and found 
that it still was.  As we have stated before, "[i]n some cases, 
the standard of review on the merits is so close to the 
reasonableness standard applicable to determining substantial 

justification that a losing agency is unlikely to be able to show 
that its position was substantially justified."  F.J. Vollmer Co. 
v. Magaw, 102 F.3d 591, 595 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  In F.J. 
Vollmer Co., an agency's application of its own regulation had 
been held to be unreasonable.  In the subsequent EAJA 
review, a district judge concluded that the government sus-
tained its burden of establishing that its action had been 
substantially justified.  We reversed, suggesting that it would 
be neither surprising nor erroneous that a judge's conclusion 
at the second stage would be consistent with his conclusion at 
the first.  Just so here.

     To say that the Commission erred in its approach to the 
ALJ's decision under review, does not, of course, answer our 
question as to whether it erred in the merits review before it 
and now before us.  That review is governed by a principle 
stated in Cinciarelli v. Reagan, 729 F.2d 801 (D.C. Cir. 1984):  
"Once a plaintiff has been shown to be a prevailing party, the 
burden is on the government to show that its litigation 
position was substantially justified on the law and the facts."  
Id. at 806.  The Commission divided that inquiry into its two 
component parts and expressly held that "the Secretary's 
position had a reasonable basis in law," Contractors, 20 
F.M.S.H.R.C. at 969, and that "the Secretary's position had a 
reasonable basis in fact," id. at 973.

     The Commission first expressed the reasonable proposition 
that "[w]e begin our analysis of whether the Secretary's 
position was substantially justified by examining whether her 
position had a reasonable basis in law."  Id. at 969.  Unfortu-
nately, the Commission's application of its approach was not 
equal to the correctness of its statement.  The Commission's 
determination that the Secretary's position had a reasonable 
basis in law is based entirely on an analysis which examines 
the purpose of the regulations in terms of the overriding 
objective of safety in the mine, and then goes on to conclude 
that the Secretary, by presenting evidence that frame 
grounding was not the safest way to ground equipment, 
therefore had established a substantial justification in law.  
This erroneous application echoes the fundamental error of 
the MSHA's acts in the underlying controversy, and we might 

add recreates the fundamental error about which we have 
cautioned this and other agencies on prior occasions in other 
contexts.

     What the Secretary successfully defended before the Com-
mission and what we reject here is precisely the same sort of 
arbitrary overreach we previously rejected in Secretary of 
Labor v. FMSHRC, 111 F.3d 913 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  In that 
case, the Administration had sought to enforce a citation 
against a mine operator for collections of trash outside the 
active workings of a mine as violative of a regulatory scheme 
which by its terms "forbid[ ] accumulations of combustible 
materials in active workings."  Id. at 918 (citing 30 C.F.R. 
s 75.400).  Nothing about the rules promulgated by the 
Secretary forbade the outside accumulation by the regulated 
mine.  The Commission, acting far more lawfully than in the 
case before us, rejected the Secretary's attempt to penalize 
accumulations not violating the rules.  Before the Commis-
sion and before us, the Secretary urged the dangerousness of 
collections of trash outside active workings.  Although we 
reversed a portion of the Commission's decision on other 
grounds, we upheld its rejection of the Secretary's argument 
on this point saying "[i]f collections of trash outside active 
workings can be both permissible and hazardous, the fault lies 
neither with the Mine Safety Act nor with the Commission's 
legal reasoning, but with the Secretary's ... regulation," 
which did not forbid the relevant collections.  Id. at 918.  
Just so here.

     As the dissenting Commissioners pointed out, the ALJ 
properly noted that "under the plain meaning of section 
56.12025, the Secretary failed to establish that CSG violated 
the regulation."  Contractors, 20 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 979 (Riley 
& Verheggen, Comm'rs, dissenting) (citing 18 F.M.S.H.R.C. 
at 387-88).  The regulation required that the equipment be 
grounded.  The Secretary offered no evidence--none whatso-
ever--that the motors in question were not in fact grounded 
as required by the regulation.  The regulatory definition of 
grounding simply defines "electrical grounding" as "to con-
nect with the ground to make the earth part of the circuit."  
30 C.F.R. s 56.2.  The Administration not only did not prove 

any failure to make the earth part of the circuit but offered 
no evidence whatsoever on the subject and indeed did not 
conduct any testing to determine whether CSG was in compli-
ance or not.  CSG offered undisputed evidence that it was.

     To excuse its noncompliance, the Administration does as it 
did in the trash collection case we discussed above:  that is, it 
discusses the safety implications of the practice which it 
purports to punish.  This discussion would be well and good if 
the MSHA were engaged in a rulemaking to outlaw frame 
grounding or to require fourth-wire grounding.  But, as the 
dissenting Commissioners pointed out, in at least two of its 
uninterrupted prior losses on this same controversy, Adminis-
trative Law Judges have advised the Secretary that " ' "[i]f 
the Secretary believes frame grounding should be prohibited, 
the Secretary should initiate appropriate rulemaking to 
achieve this goal." ' "  Contractors, 20 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 983 
(Riley & Verheggen, Comm'rs, dissenting) (quoting Secretary 
of Labor v. F. Palumbo Sand & Gravel, 19 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 
1440, 1444 (ALJ 1997) (quoting Contractors, 18 F.M.S.H.R.C. 
at 388)).  The dissenting Commissioners agree.  So do we.  
Nonetheless, the Secretary has not.  It is not substantially 
justifiable for an agency to persistently prosecute citizens for 
violating a regulation that does not exist.

     To track again the dissenting Commissioners, we note that 
while a " 'string of losses' " is not determinative, it " 'can be 
indicative' that an agency's position lacks substantial justifica-
tion."  Contractors, 20 F.M.S.H.R.C. at 983 (Riley & Verheg-
gen, Comm'rs, dissenting) (quoting Pierce v. Underwood, 487 
U.S. 552, 569 (1988)).  Here, as the ALJ noted, every time 
the Secretary has presented the theory that the use of a 
particular grounding method other than that preferred by the 
Secretary is violative of the regulation, the responsible Ad-
ministrative Law Judge has considered that theory not rea-
sonable.  See Secretary of Labor v. Tide Creek Rock, Inc., 18 
F.M.S.H.R.C. 390, 396-97 (ALJ 1996);  Secretary of Labor v. 
Mulzer Crushed Stone Co., 3 F.M.S.H.R.C. 1238 (ALJ 1981);  
McCormick Sand Corp. v. Secretary of Labor, 2 
F.M.S.H.R.C. 21 (ALJ 1980).  Again, if all of these ALJs are 
unwilling to buy the Secretary's expansive theory that the 

commendable goal of promulgating safety permits the Secre-
tary to prosecute activity which violates no existing rule, it is 
time for the Secretary to repair to rulemaking, not to bring 
one more unsupportable citation.  The bringing of one more 
is not substantially justified.

     The Secretary's only other theory to sustain the Commis-
sion's conclusion of substantial justification is to advance the 
proposition that the Secretary's interpretation of the ground-
ing rule as requiring certain types of grounding and outlaw-
ing others not mentioned anywhere in the rules is an inter-
pretation of longstanding.  In support of this, neither the 
Secretary nor the Commission majority have been able to 
point to any interpretation at any time, yet they continue to 
insist in the words of the citation served on petitioners, that 
"[f]rame grounding has been forbidden for fifteen years."  
The best support the Secretary can offer for this proposition 
is the declaration of a single engineering employee of MSHA 
who declared that in his tenure with the Administration the 
Administration had never allowed the frames of mining equip-
ment to serve as equipment grounding conductors.  It is not 
at all clear how the Secretary or the Commission concludes 
that the testimony of a witness as to what his agency will 
allow determines the standard of law against which citizens 
can be forced to defend.  Be that as it may, even assuming 
that his understanding constituted agency policy, this would 
not create sufficient grounds for substantial justification.  As 
we stated in F.J. Vollmer Co., "we do not see how merely 
applying an unreasonable statutory interpretation for several 
years can transform it into a reasonable interpretation."  102 
F.3d at 598.  Even more, we do not see how grafting onto the 
plain language of a regulation a prohibition neither stated nor 
implied in that regulation can convert the enforcement of that 
imaginary rule into a substantially justified governmental act.

     We note only in passing that the Commission's assertion 
that the Secretary's position had a reasonable basis in fact 
need not delay us, as we have demonstrated in the discussion 
of the law that the Secretary's position had no basis in fact.  
The fact that CSG was employing frame grounding is irrele-

vant to substantial justification once it is established that the 
use of that methodology is not a per se violation.  The failure 
of the Secretary to conduct testing, let alone offer evidence 
that the testing demonstrated a violation of the real regula-
tion, finishes the possibility that some reasonable basis in fact 
existed.  Furthermore, having dispensed with the reasonable 
justification on the basis of law, we need not demonstrate that 
the Secretary's actions fail the substantial justification stan-
dard on other grounds as well.  See Air Transport Ass'n of 
Canada v. FAA, 156 F.3d 1329, 1332 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (per 
curiam) (rejecting a government argument that a claimant 
should be denied an EAJA award where the government's 
approach "was substantially unjustified on only one of several 
possible bases").

     Like the ALJ and the dissenting Commissioners, we have 
no occasion to consider whether the extraordinarily large 
fines imposed were independently substantially justified, giv-
en the substantial unjustification of the underlying citations.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the reasons set forth above, we reverse the decision of 
the Commission, and order that the award determined by the 
ALJ be restored to petitioner.  We remand this case for 
further proceedings to determine the amount of an award to 
compensate petitioner for the costs of pursuing the petition 
for review in this court.

                                                      So ordered.

                   