                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 9, 2000    Decided August 3, 2001 

                           No. 99-1505

                  Kirby Produce Company, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

           United States Department of Agriculture and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the
             United States Department of Agriculture

     Paul T. Gentile argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs was Kevin P. Claffey.

     Stephen M. Reilly, Attorney, U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were James Michael Kelly, Associate General Counsel, 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, and Margaret M. Breinholt, 
Acting Assistant General Counsel.

     Before:  Williams and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Kirby Produce Company, Inc. 
petitions for review of an order of the Department of Agricul-
ture, which revoked its license as a merchant of perishable 
agricultural products for not promptly paying for fruit and 
vegetable shipments, in violation of the Perishable Agricultur-
al Commodities Act (PACA), 7 U.S.C. s 499a et seq.  The 
Agriculture Department revoked Kirby's license without a 
hearing, concluding that there was no dispute of material fact 
warranting a hearing.  Because the grounds upon which the 
Department made that conclusion were arbitrary and capri-
cious, we grant the petition and remand for further proceed-
ings.

                                I

     PACA regulates "the shipment of perishable agricultural 
commodities in interstate and foreign commerce through a 
system of licensing and administrative supervision of the 
conduct of licensees."  Quinn v. Butz, 510 F.2d 743, 746 (D.C. 
Cir. 1975).  Every "commission merchant" of such commodi-
ties must be licensed by the Secretary of Agriculture.  See 7 
U.S.C. s 499c.1  PACA licensees are forbidden to engage in 
specified unfair practices, including the failure to "make full 
payment promptly in respect of any transaction" in a perisha-
ble agricultural commodity.  7 U.S.C. s 499b(4).  "Full, 
prompt payment" means payment within ten days after the 
date the produce is accepted, unless otherwise agreed to in 
writing before the time of sale.  7 C.F.R. s 46.2(aa)(5), (11).  
If the Secretary determines that a licensee has violated the 
prompt payment requirement, the Secretary may suspend the 
offender's PACA license, and, if the violation was flagrant or 
repeated, may revoke it.  7 U.S.C. s 499h(a).

__________
     1  A "commission merchant" is "any person engaged in the 
business of receiving in interstate or foreign commerce any perisha-
ble agricultural commodity for sale, on commission, or for or on 
behalf of another."  7 U.S.C. s 499a(5).

     Although the Secretary is statutorily authorized to revoke a 
license for flagrant violations, Department of Agriculture 
policy during the relevant time period permitted a licensee to 
avoid revocation by making full payment prior to the date set 
for a hearing on the violations.  Such payment would convert 
a "no-pay" case into a "slow-pay" case, and would result in 
license suspension rather than revocation.  See In re Kirby 
Produce Co., 58 Agric. Dec. 1011 (1999) (citing In re Gilardi 
Truck & Transp., 43 Agric. Dec. 118 (1984)).2

     In March 1996, various creditors, including PACA credi-
tors, filed suit against Kirby in the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee, seeking payment 
for produce debts worth $2.3 million.  In June 1996, the 
district court issued an order, consented to by all parties, that 
established a payment arrangement and claims procedure.  
The order did not require payment by a date certain.  See 
Brown's Produce v. Kirby Produce Co., No. 3:96-cv-526 
(E.D. Tenn. June 25, 1996).

     On October 20, 1997, the Agriculture Department's Agricul-
tural Marketing Service (the "Service") filed an administra-
tive complaint, charging Kirby with violating PACA by failing 
promptly to make full payment for approximately $1.6 million 
in fruits and vegetables from August 1995 through July 1996.  
The complaint sought revocation of Kirby's license for willful, 
flagrant, and repeated violations.  Kirby's amended answer 
denied the complaint's material allegations, and the Service 
requested a hearing.  The Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) 
scheduled one for January 13, 1999.

     On November 10, 1998, Kirby's attorney filed a motion with 
the ALJ, seeking an adjournment of the hearing until Kirby 
paid its judgment creditors pursuant to the June 1996 order 
in the Brown case.  The motion advised the ALJ of the 
Brown order and attached a copy.  It also noted that "the 
payment of all produce debt prior to the hearing substantially 

__________
     2  The Department has since changed its standard for no-pay 
cases.  For all complaints filed after January 25, 1999, a case is 
deemed no-pay if the alleged debts remain unpaid by the earlier of:  
(a) the hearing date, or (b) 120 days after the filing of the complaint.  
See In re Scamcorp, Inc., 57 Agric. Dec. 527, 562 n.13 (1998).

reduces the potential sanction which may be imposed upon 
the Respondent," and concluded that "[f]ailure to grant this 
motion for adjournment will frustrate the order ... and 
prejudice Respondent's position at the time of the hearing."  
App. at 20.

     Shortly thereafter, the Agricultural Marketing Service filed 
a motion with the ALJ, seeking a decision on its complaint 
without a hearing.  The Service contended that Kirby's con-
sent to the Brown order constituted an admission of all 
material facts in the complaint.  It argued that this admis-
sion, coupled with Kirby's apparent inability to pay prior to 
the hearing date, justified a decision without a hearing.  
Kirby objected on the grounds that the Brown order was an 
admission of nonpayment only as of June 1996, and that it 
still had the right to demonstrate full payment before the 
January 1999 hearing date.

     On December 31, 1998, the ALJ canceled the hearing and 
revoked Kirby's license, concluding that Kirby's motion and 
attachments had admitted "all the material allegations of fact 
contained in the complaint."  On May 28, 1999, Kirby appeal-
ed to the Agriculture Department's Judicial Officer, to whom 
the Secretary has delegated authority for final decisionmak-
ing in adjudicatory proceedings.  See 7 C.F.R. s 2.35.  Kirby 
contended, inter alia, that it had in fact made full payment by 
January 13, 1999, the date for which the hearing had been 
scheduled.  Notwithstanding that it had violated PACA by 
failing to pay promptly, Kirby argued that its full payment by 
the date of the hearing converted the case into a slow-pay 
case for which revocation was unwarranted.

     The Judicial Officer issued his decision on July 12, 1999.  
He began by "agree[ing] with Respondent's contention that if 
Respondent paid all of its produce sellers by the date of the 
hearing, this case would be a 'slow-pay' case," and Kirby 
would suffer suspension rather than revocation.  In re Kirby 
Produce Co., 58 Agric. Dec. at 1011. However, instead of 
adjudicating whether Kirby had in fact paid by January 13, 
1999, the Officer determined that Kirby's consent to the 
Brown order constituted an admission that it had failed to 

pay promptly, and that Kirby's motion for a continuance of 
the hearing constituted an admission that the company would 
not be able to pay by the hearing date.  The Judicial Officer 
concluded that these admissions eliminated any issue of mate-
rial fact and justified revocation of Kirby's license without a 
hearing.  Thereafter, Kirby sought reconsideration, which the 
Judicial Officer denied.  Kirby now petitions for review of the 
order revoking its license.  See 28 U.S.C. s 2342(2).

                                II

     We review final decisions in PACA cases under the defer-
ential standard of the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A), (E).  Under that standard, we must "uphold the 
Judicial Officer's decision unless we find it to be arbitrary, 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, not in accordance with law, 
or unsupported by substantial evidence."  JSG Trading Corp. 
v. USDA, 176 F.3d 536, 541 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     Kirby concedes that it failed promptly to pay creditors for 
its PACA debts.  But the company contends that it was able 
to pay in full--and in fact did pay in full--by the January 13, 
1999 scheduled hearing date, and it denies that its November 
10, 1998 motion was an admission to the contrary.  Accord-
ingly, Kirby argues that there was an issue of material fact as 
to its qualification for slow-pay status, and that the Depart-
ment's decision to revoke its license without a hearing was 
arbitrary and capricious.

     PACA states that upon issuing a PACA complaint, the 
Secretary shall "afford [the respondent] an opportunity for a 
hearing thereon before a duly authorized examiner of the 
Secretary."  7 U.S.C. s 499f(c)(2).  Although a hearing is not 
required if there is no genuine factual dispute, see Veg-Mix, 
Inc. v. USDA, 832 F.2d 601, 607-08 (D.C. Cir. 1987), the 
Agriculture Department's regulations require a hearing "[i]f 
any material issue of fact is joined by the pleadings."  7 
C.F.R. s 1.141(b).  In its briefs and at oral argument, the 
Department conceded that if there had been an issue of 
material fact regarding Kirby's ability to pay by the sched-

uled hearing date, revocation without a hearing would have 
been improper.

     The Judicial Officer based his conclusion that there was no 
material dispute on two grounds.  The first was that Kirby's 
consent to the Brown order constituted an admission that the 
company had not promptly paid its PACA creditors.  That 
point is correct and undisputed, but it is also plainly insuffi-
cient to eliminate dispute as to whether Kirby could have 
made full payment by January 13, 1999.

     The Officer's second ground was that Kirby's November 10, 
1998 motion for an indefinite adjournment constituted an 
admission that the company would not be able to pay by 
January 13 of the following year.  The Judicial Officer did not 
explain why it regarded Kirby's motion as an admission.  
Indeed, the Judicial Officer reached that conclusion without 
adjudicating Kirby's claim that it had in fact made full 
payment by January 13, and despite acknowledging that if 
Kirby actually had paid by that date, revocation could have 
been avoided.  See In re Kirby Produce Co., 58 Agric. Dec. at 
1011.

     Kirby's motion for adjournment stated:  "[T]he payment of 
all produce debt prior to the hearing substantially reduces the 
potential sanction....  Failure to grant this motion for ad-
journment will ... prejudice Respondent's position at the 
time of the hearing."  App. at 20 (emphasis added).  At oral 
argument, the Agriculture Department asserted that the 
term "prejudice" referred to Kirby's classification as a no-pay 
violator and that, by using the verb "will" rather than "could," 
Kirby implicitly admitted that its PACA debts could not 
possibly be paid by the time of the hearing.  But under 
Agriculture Department precedent, an implicit or equivocal 
admission is insufficient to remove a fact from material 
dispute.  See In re H. Schnell & Co., 57 Agric. Dec. 1722 
(1998) (holding that before a hearing may be dispensed with, 
oral statements of a respondent's attorney "must clearly 
constitute an admission of the material allegations of the 
complaint") (emphasis added).  That rule is especially apt in 
this circumstance.  Litigants that move to extend deadlines 
often lament the harm likely to result if their motions are 

denied.  To construe such a statement as admitting default, 
however, confuses prediction of risk with confession of impos-
sibility.  Kirby clearly intended to emphasize the risk that its 
payments could not be made before January 13, but it was 
not reasonable to infer that Kirby intended to admit that non-
payment was certain.

     The Judicial Officer's unadorned statement, that Kirby's 
request for a continuance of the hearing "constitutes an 
admission" that Kirby would not be able to make full payment 
by the date of the hearing, did not represent analysis;  it 
merely expressed a conclusion.  Such a conclusion was partic-
ularly unreasonable in light of Kirby's protestations that it 
had intended no such admission.  And it was doubly so in 
light of the Judicial Officer's refusal to determine whether 
Kirby had in fact paid by January 13, after the Officer 
acknowledged that if Kirby had actually met that deadline, 
revocation could have been avoided.  See In re Kirby Produce 
Co., 58 Agric. Dec. at 1011.  Indeed, in his decision denying 
reconsideration, the Judicial Officer only added to the arbi-
trariness of his reasoning.  There, in the face of Kirby's 
representation that full payment had been made prior to 
January 13, 1999, and again without determining whether 
that representation was correct, the Judicial Officer ruled 
that Kirby's "admission" that it "would not be able to" pay 
removed any issue of material fact as to whether it actually 
did pay by that date.  In re Kirby Produce Co., 58 Agric. 
Dec. 1032 (1999).

     At oral argument, the Department offered to provide this 
court with an inspector's affidavit attesting that, as of October 
31, 2000, Kirby still had not paid $1.1 million of its PACA 
debt.  After argument, Kirby submitted a declaration by its 
chief executive officer, made under penalty of perjury, that 
the company had in fact paid in full prior to January 13, 1999.  
Although both statements obviously cannot be true, it is just 
as clear that this court is not the proper authority to make 
the necessary factual determination.  That is a task for the 
agency upon remand.  See Veg-Mix, Inc., 832 F.2d at 609.

                               III

     In revoking Kirby's license without a hearing, the Judicial 
Officer relied upon his conclusion that the company had 
admitted that it could not make payment by the date that had 
been scheduled for that hearing.  That conclusion was arbi-
trary and capricious.  We therefore grant Kirby's petition for 
review and remand the case for further proceedings consis-
tent with this opinion.

                                               