                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 9, 2001    Decided April 16, 2002 

                           No. 00-5347

                         James Musengo, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

             Thomas E. White, Secretary of the Army, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv01884)

     Charles W. Gittins argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Diane M. Sullivan, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Roscoe C. 
Howard Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant 
U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Plaintiff James Musengo chal-
lenges the Army's refusal to remove an Officer Evaluation 
Report from his military record.  The District Court granted 
summary judgment against Musengo, concluding that the 
Army Board for Correction of Military Records did not act 
arbitrarily or capriciously in refusing to expunge the report.  
We affirm.

                                I

     Musengo is currently a major in the United States Army 
Reserve.  During the period at issue in this case, he was a 
captain on active duty, instructing members of the Reserve 
Officer Training Corps and teaching courses in military sci-
ence at the University of Akron.  In July 1992, Musengo 
received an Officer Evaluation Report (OER) assessing his 
performance from June 24, 1991 to June 23, 1992.  We have 
recently described in detail the officer rating system em-
ployed by the Army at the time of Musengo's evaluation, see 
Cone v. Caldera, 223 F.3d 789, 790-91 (D.C. Cir. 2000), and 
we therefore sketch it only briefly here.1

     An OER is used to evaluate an officer's performance and 
career potential.  See Army Regulation (AR) 623-105, at 
p 1-6(a) (Apr. 30, 1992).  At least two of the officer's superi-
ors prepare the OER.  The first is a "rater," who directly 
supervises the rated officer and is familiar with his or her 
day-to-day performance.  Id. p 3-4.  The second is a "senior 
rater"--here, Colonel Joseph M. Barrow--who is charged 
with "evaluat[ing] the rated officer from a broad organization-
al perspective," including measuring the officer's potential for 

__________
     1 In 1998, the Army altered its regulations and OER form, 
including the block rating system discussed in the text infra.  See 
Army Regulation 623-105 (Apr. 1, 1998).  The citations in this 
opinion refer to the regulations in effect at the time of Musengo's 
disputed OER.

promotion relative to the larger group of officers under the 
senior rater's command.  Id. p 3-10(a).

     The OER form contains blanks for both a numerical and a 
narrative assessment of the rated officer.  In Part VII(a), the 
senior rater is to check one of a column of nine blocks that 
compare "the rated officer's potential with all other officers of 
the same grade."  Id. p 4-16(b).2  The rater's evaluation is to 
be based on the premise that in a representative sample of 
officers Army-wide, the distribution of ratings "will approxi-
mate a bell-shaped normal distribution pattern."  Id.3  Ac-
cording to the regulations, this means "that in a representa-
tive sample of 100 officers of the same grade or grade 
grouping (Army-wide) only one officer can reasonably be 
expected to be placed in the top block."  Id. p 4-16(c).  An-
other two are expected to fall in the second block, and so on.  
See id. fig. 4-4.  The center block, block five, is expected to 
be the rating achieved by 60 officers out of a representative 
100.  Id.

     Once the OER is completed, the Army compares the senior 
rater's assessment of the individual officer to the senior 
rater's rating history for all officers of the same grade--
known as the senior rater's "profile."  Id. pp 2-5, 
4-16(d)(5)(a).  By comparing a specific officer's OER to his 
senior rater's profile, the Army can discern whether that 

__________
     2 In Cone, the Army described the column as containing ten 
blocks.  Army Br. at 5, Cone.  The Army now states that the 
column contains nine blocks, Army Br. at 2 n.4, Musengo, and this 
appears to be correct.  What could be construed as two equally 
weighted blocks in the center of the column is instead a single block 
into which the Army expects 60% of the evaluations of a representa-
tive sample to fall.  See AR 623-105, at fig. 4-4.

     3 In a normal distribution, most of the data points are "clustered 
near the mean, and the density or relative frequency of the num-
bers decreases with increasing distance from the mean."  David W. 
Barnes & John M. Conley, Statistical Evidence in Litigation 140 
(1986).  "If the frequencies with which the numbers in the normal 
population appear as the result of random experiments are plotted 
on a graph, the figure resembles a bell-shaped curve."  Id.

officer performed above, at, or below the "center-of-mass"--
i.e., the median ranking--of all officers ranked by the same 
senior rater.  Moreover, by comparing the profiles of differ-
ent senior raters, the Army can determine whether one 
rater's "rating tendency" is more lenient than that of another.  
Id. p 4-16(d)(5)(a);  see id. p 9-7(f).

     On the OER that is in dispute in this case, Musengo's 
senior rater, Colonel Barrow, gave Musengo a second-block 
rating--corresponding to the top 2-3% of Army captains 
according to the expected distribution pattern set out in the 
regulations.  Id. fig. 4-4.  Within Barrow's personal profile 
for the relevant time period, however, this placed Musengo 
below the center-of-mass of the captains Barrow rated.  Of 54 
captain reports completed by Barrow during the period, 32 
contained top-block ratings, 20 contained second-block rat-
ings, and 2 placed captains in the third block.  See Joint 
Appendix (J.A.) at 32.

     Concerned that a below-center-of-mass rating would hurt 
his chances of promotion, Musengo contacted Barrow, who 
told Musengo that he had intended to rate Musengo at 
center-of-mass, and that he had thought the second-block 
rating was in fact his center-of-mass.  Armed with this infor-
mation, Musengo appealed to the Officer Special Review 
Board (OSRB), which has the power to correct substantive 
inaccuracies in an OER.  AR 623-105, at p 9-2(i).  After the 
OSRB denied Musengo's initial request to delete the senior 
rater's numerical rating from his OER, Musengo obtained a 
supporting letter from Barrow and resubmitted his request.  
In the letter, Barrow stated:  "It was my clear intent to give 
CPT Musengo a strong center of mass evaluation on this 
OER and also get him promoted."  J.A. at 11.  Musengo also 
provided the OSRB with the transcript of a deposition in 
which Barrow reiterated that "it was my desire that [Musen-
go] be placed in center of mass," and that "I believed that my 
center of mass was a two block at that time."  J.A. at 19.  
The OSRB denied Musengo's second appeal.  Thereafter, 
Musengo filed three more appeals to the OSRB, all of which 
were likewise unsuccessful.

     Following the denial of his requests by the OSRB, Musen-
go appealed to the Army Board for Correction of Military 
Records.  The Correction Board is the "next agency in the 
Army's redress system," AR 623-105, at p 9-5(f), and has the 
power to direct changes in military records in order to correct 
"material error or injustice," AR 15-185, at p 1-8(b).4  The 
Board concluded that "the contested OER appears to repre-
sent a fair, objective and valid appraisal of [Musengo's] 
demonstrated performance and potential, and represents the 
considered opinion and objective judgment of the senior rater 
at the time of preparation."  ABCMR Decision at 4 (March 
30, 1994), reproduced at J.A. 5, 8.  Because it was "not 
convinced that the senior rater was not aware that his center 
of mass was within the top block at the time he rated the 
applicant," the Board denied Musengo's appeal.  Id.

     Musengo then filed the instant action in the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia.  He alleged that 
the Correction Board's decision was arbitrary and capricious 
in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(A), and sought removal of the disputed OER 
from his military record.  The district court granted sum-
mary judgment in favor of the Army, and this appeal fol-
lowed.

                                II

     Under Army regulations, OERs are presumed to be "ad-
ministratively correct" and to "[r]epresent the considered 
opinions and objective judgment of the rating officials at the 
time of preparation."  AR 623-105, at p 5-32(a).  An appli-
cant petitioning the Correction Board to amend or delete a 
report has the burden of "produc[ing] evidence that estab-
lishes clearly and convincingly" that the "presumption of 

__________
     4 The Correction Board operates within the Office of the Secre-
tary of the Army pursuant to 10 U.S.C. s 1552(a), which provides 
that the secretary of a military department acting through a civilian 
board "may correct any military record of the Secretary's depart-
ment when the Secretary considers it necessary to correct an error 
or remove an injustice."

regularity" should not apply, and that "[a]ction is warranted 
to correct a material error, inaccuracy, or injustice."  Id. 
p 9-7(a) (citing id. p 5-32);  see also Frizelle v. Slater, 111 
F.3d 172, 178 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  Although this court has 
jurisdiction to review decisions of the Correction Board,5 we 
do so under an "unusually deferential application of the 
'arbitrary or capricious' standard" of the APA.  Kreis v. 
Secretary of the Air Force, 866 F.2d 1508, 1514 (D.C. Cir. 
1989);  see Cone, 223 F.3d at 793;  Kidwell v. Department of 
the Army, 56 F.3d 279, 286 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  We review de 
novo the district court's ruling, on cross-motions for summary 
judgment, that the Correction Board did not act arbitrarily or 
capriciously in this case.  See Cone, 223 F.3d at 793.

     Musengo offers three arguments in support of his conten-
tion that the Board acted unlawfully in denying his applica-
tion for correction.  We consider these arguments below.

                                A

     Musengo's first contention is that his rating should be 
vacated because senior rater Barrow violated AR 623-105, at 
p 4-16(b).  That regulation states that a senior rater's evalua-
tion "is based on the premise that in a representative sample 
of 100 officers of the same grade or grade grouping (Army-
wide), the relative potential of such a sample will approximate 
a bell-shaped normal distribution pattern."  Musengo con-
tends that because Barrow's evaluations did not approximate 
a bell-shaped curve, the senior rater violated the governing 
regulation and the Board acted arbitrarily in refusing to 
delete the second-block rating from his OER.

     We rejected the same argument in Cone.  As we explained 
in that case, although the regulations direct the senior rater 
to base his or her ratings on the "premise" that evaluations of 
an Army-wide representative sample will approximate a bell-
shaped curve, "they do not require adherence to a bell-shaped 

__________
     5 See Cone, 223 F.3d at 793;  Frizelle, 111 F.3d at 176;  Dickson v. 
Secretary of Defense, 68 F.3d 1396, 1401 n.6 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  Kreis 
v. Secretary of the Air Force, 866 F.2d 1508, 1512 (D.C. Cir. 1989) 
(citing Chappell v. Wallace, 462 U.S. 296 (1983)).

curve" for the evaluations of any individual rater's ratees in a 
given rating period.  Cone, 223 F.3d at 793.  Moreover, even 
if Barrow was lax in adhering to the regulation's premise, the 
Army "anticipates, and compensates for, the fallibility of 
individual raters by requiring that each rater's personal pro-
file ... be included in the OER of each officer he or she 
reviews."  Id. at 794.  The profile permits reviewers "to place 
the rated officer's OER in perspective by revealing the senior 
rater's general rating tendency," AR 623-105, at 
p 4-16(d)(5)(a), including his or her "tendency to inflate or 
deflate ratings," id. p 9-7(f).  Accordingly, as in Cone, it was 
reasonable for the Correction Board to refuse to alter the 
plaintiff's OER.  See Cone, 223 F.3d at 794.6

                                B

     Musengo's second contention is that the Correction Board's 
refusal to vacate his rating was arbitrary and capricious in 
light of Barrow's letter and deposition, which averred that 
Barrow had made a mistake in issuing that rating:  although 
the senior rater had placed Musengo in the second block, he 
stated that he had done so under the mistaken belief that the 
second block was his center-of-mass.  Musengo does not 
dispute that under the regulations, OERs are presumed to 
represent "the considered opinions and objective judgment of 
the rating officials at the time of preparation," AR 623-105, at 
p 5-32, and that he needed clear and convincing evidence to 
overcome that presumption, id. p 9-7(a).  But he contends 
that Barrow's statements were sufficient to satisfy that regu-
latory standard.

__________
     6 In support of his argument, Musengo cites an opinion of the 
Court of Federal Claims, Richey v. United States, 44 Fed. Cl. 577 
(1999), which remanded a Correction Board decision where a senior 
rater's evaluations did not approximate a bell-shaped curve.  We 
are not certain whether Richey intended to announce a general rule 
of law or merely to hold that the Board acted arbitrarily in light of 
the specific facts of that case.  However, even if Richey intended 
the former, this court's decision in Cone necessarily controls the 
disposition of the instant appeal.

     There is, however, another regulation at issue here as well.  
Paragraph 5-32(b)(2) of AR 623-105 provides that state-
ments from rating officials that they "did not intend to rate 
[an officer] as they did" will "not be used to alter or with-
draw a report."  The reason for this rule is that "statements 
from rating officials often reflect retrospective thinking, or 
second thoughts, prompted by an appellant's non-selection or 
other unfavorable personnel action claimed to be the sole 
result of the contested report."  Id. app. N, at p N-2(b)(3).  
As we explained in Cone, the rule is based on the "under-
standing that raters may attempt to retract otherwise accu-
rate assessments when requested to do so by their disap-
pointed officers."  Cone, 223 F.3d at 794.  This regulation 
was a reasonable basis for the Correction Board's decision to 
reject Barrow's statements as insufficient to overcome the 
presumption of regularity.  See id.7

     In rebuttal, Musengo contends that there is an exception to 
p 5-32(b)(2) that permits reliance on post hoc statements in 
the case of "information which was unknown or unverified 
when the report was prepared," and which "is so significant 
that it would have resulted in a higher or lower evaluation 
had it been known or verified when the report was prepared."  
AR 623-105, at p 5-32(c)(1)-(2).  But it is clear in context that 
this regulation applies to new information concerning the 
quality of a ratee's performance, rather than to a rater's 
sudden recognition of his own profile.8  To read the exception 

__________
     7 Musengo alludes to the fact that Barrow apparently rated nine 
captains twice over a one-year period, see J.A. at 32 (OER page 
containing Barrow's profile), and suggests that this may explain 
why Barrow did not realize that his center-of-mass had changed 
from the second to the top block.  But the inclusion of those nine 
reports did not change Barrow's center-of-mass.  It would still be 
at the top block even if we assumed that all nine were for top-block 
captains and removed them from his profile.  See id.

     8 See also AR 623-105 app. N, at p N-2(b)(3) ("[C]laims by rating 
officials that they did not intend to evaluate as they did will not, 
alone, serve as the basis of altering or withdrawing an evaluation 
report.  Rating officials may, however, provide statements of sup-
port contending the discovery of new information that would have 

as encompassing the latter would permit it to swallow the 
rule against accepting after-the-fact testimonials.

     In addition to the OER's presumption of regularity, Bar-
row's contemporaneous rating history provides further evi-
dence that he was aware that the top block was his center-of-
mass at the time he placed Musengo in the second block.  As 
the Correction Board noted, the OSRB determined that for 
the five months preceding Musengo's contested OER, Barrow 
"had rendered 23 OER's ... with 17 top block ratings and 
only six second block ratings;  and that the senior rater did 12 
OER's the week of the applicant's OER with eight top block, 
three second block, and one third block checks."  ABCMR 
Decision at 3.9  This series of contemporaneous ratings, 
heavily weighted toward the top block, is further reason to 
discount Barrow's suggestion that he was unaware that the 
top block was his center-of-mass.10

__________
resulted in an improved evaluation had it been known at the time of 
report preparations.").

     9 Still further evidence is the fact that Barrow "restarted" his 
profile immediately prior to the rating period covered by Musengo's 
OER.  ABCMR Decision at 2.  Army regulations permit a senior 
rater to restart his profile to ensure that his intended evaluations 
are properly conveyed to selection boards and personnel managers.  
AR 623-105, at p 3-12.1.  The Correction Board concluded that the 
fact that Barrow had recently restarted his profile undermined his 
contention that he "was not aware that his center of mass was 
within the top block at the time he rated the applicant."  ABCMR 
Decision at 4.

     10 Musengo contends that the Correction Board should not have 
considered this data because the OSRB opinion in which it was 
contained was not included in the certified administrative record 
filed with the district court by the Army.  That failure of certifica-
tion, however, is not fatal.  Cf. 5 U.S.C. s 706 (stating that in 
reviewing agency action "due account shall be taken of the rule of 
prejudicial error").  The Correction Board decision makes clear 
that the OSRB opinion was part of the "evidence of record" before 
the Board, ABCMR Decision at 2-3, as would be expected since the 
purpose of Musengo's appeal to the Board after his rejection by the 
OSRB was to seek review by "the next agency in the Army's 

                                C

     Finally, Musengo contends that this case is distinguishable 
from Cone because of the different kind of relief he seeks:  
Cone asked for an amendment of his OER, while Musengo 
seeks only its removal from his military record.11  We did 
note in Cone that the "knowledge that 'correcting' Cone's 
grades would ultimately require us to reassess the relative 
rankings of his entire cohort ... confirms the wisdom of 
deferring to the reasonable judgment of the Correction 
Board."  Cone, 223 F.3d at 795.  The difference in requested 
remedy, however, cannot justify a different conclusion as to 
whether Musengo's rating violated Army regulations.  Nor 
does that difference truly sidestep the "quagmire" of serial 
reassessments that we sought to avoid in Cone.  Id.

     Were we to vacate Musengo's second-block rating because 
Barrow wrongly thought the second block was his center-of-
mass, would we not have to do the same for the twenty other 
captains Barrow rated in that block, all of whom could make 
similar complaints?  And if we did that, what would become 
of those officers Barrow placed in the top block?  Whatever 
Barrow thought was his center-of-mass, he clearly thought 
that those he placed in the top block were superior to those 
he placed in the second, including Musengo.12  Yet with the 

__________
redress system," AR 623-105, at p 9-5(f).  Army regulations gave 
Musengo the right to obtain a copy of the OSRB decision, id., and 
he conceded at oral argument that he did obtain one.  Moreover, at 
no time during the numerous proceedings before the OSRB, Cor-
rection Board, district court, or this court has Musengo contended 
that the data contained in the OSRB opinion is inaccurate.

     11 Before the Correction Board, Musengo sought removal only of 
the senior rater's numerical ranking.  See ABCMR Decision at 2.  
In this court, Musengo seeks removal of the entire OER.  See 
Compl. at 8.

     12 The OSRB found that:  "[T]he SR [senior rater] intended to 
give the appellant [a] ranking lower than those officers designated 
as top block.  The SR may have lost control of his profile, however, 
the fact remains he rendered both top block and second block 
reports clearly rank ordering the officers he rated."  See Musengo 

second-block officers' ratings expunged, the top-block group 
would lose the advantage of the comparison.  Moreover, were 
we to begin this game of falling dominos for those officers 
rated by Barrow, we would open the door to similar chal-
lenges from officers rated by every other rater whose profile 
did not match the bell-shaped curve that Musengo insists is 
required by the regulations.  That, of course, is precisely the 
quagmire we refused to enter in Cone.

                               III

     The Army does not dispute that James Musengo rendered 
meritorious service.  But there is no warrant for concluding 
that his rating in the second block of the OER--which placed 
him among the top 2-3% of all captains Army-wide but not 
among the top 1%--underrated his performance.  As in Cone, 
223 F.3d at 796, Musengo's underlying complaint is that he 
failed to get the full benefit of the inflated grading curve 
employed by his senior rater, whose ratees, like the children 
of Lake Wobegon, were apparently all above average.13  As 
that failure does not render the Army's refusal to expunge 
Musengo's record arbitrary or capricious, the district court's 
grant of summary judgment is

                                                                           Affirmed.

__________
Br. at 9-10 (quoting OSRB).  Neither Musengo's brief, nor Bar-
row's letter in support of Musengo, disputes that Barrow intended 
to rank Musengo below the officers he placed in the top block.  See 
J.A. at 14.

     13 See Garrison Keillor, Lake Wobegon U.S.A. (Minn. Pub. Radio 
2000), quoted at http: //prairiehome.org/catalog/catalog_014.htm.

                                                                    