                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 13, 2001   Decided October 9, 2001 

                           No. 00-1433

        U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, D.C. and 
    Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Justice, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

               Federal Labor Relations Authority, 
                            Respondent

           American Federation of Government Employees 
                           Local 709, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority

                            ---------

     Howard S. Scher, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for petitioners.  With him on the briefs was 
William Kanter, Deputy Director.

     Ann M. Boehm, Attorney, Federal Labor Relations Au-
thority, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief was David M. Smith, Solicitor.  William R. Tobey, 
Deputy Solicitor, entered an appearance.

     Stuart A. Kirsch and Mark D. Roth were on the brief for 
intervenor.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge*.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Judge Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  This is an appeal from the 
Federal Labor Relations Authority's finding of an unfair 
labor practice on the part of the Department of Justice's 
Office of the Inspector General ("OIG").  The FLRA found 
that the OIG had violated the so-called Weingarten rule 
during its investigation of a Department employee, see NLRB 
v. J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251 (1975) (codified as to 
federal employees in 5 U.S.C. s 7114(a)(2)(B)), by refusing 
the employee's request for the assistance of a union represen-
tative.  Believing the case to be controlled by Supreme Court 
precedent, we uphold the FLRA's decision.

                             *  *  *

     The OIG received a report that an employee of the Federal 
Correctional Institution Englewood, in Littleton, Colorado 
had smuggled illegal drugs into that facility.  The employee, 
a member of a bargaining unit, asked for union representa-
tion, but the investigating agents denied the request and 
interviewed him anyway.  The criminal investigation was 
later closed when the prison warden wrote a memorandum to 
the employee informing him that "there was nothing to 
substantiate the allegations, and that there would be no 
further investigation."

     The union representing the employee filed an unfair labor 
practice charge, claiming that the agents' denial of the em-

__________
     * Senior Circuit Judge Williams was in regular active service at 
the time of oral argument.

ployee's request had violated 5 U.S.C. s 7114(a)(2)(B).  That 
section requires an agency to give an employee the opportuni-
ty to have a union representative at an interrogation under 
certain circumstances.  The FLRA's General Counsel issued 
a complaint.  The ALJ granted summary judgment for the 
FLRA, and the Department and OIG filed exceptions.  In the 
meantime the Supreme Court issued an opinion upholding a 
prior FLRA decision that a NASA Inspector General was a 
"representative of the agency" within the meaning of 
s 7114(a)(2)(B), and that he therefore violated that section 
when he interviewed a NASA employee without allowing 
adequate union representation.  National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration v. FLRA, 527 U.S. 229 (1999) 
("NASA").  Following that decision, the FLRA adopted the 
ALJ's decision and order.  U.S. Department of Justice v. 
Federal Labor Relations Authority, 56 FLRA 556 (2000).  It 
rejected the Department's argument that, in view of the 
Court's statement in NASA that it was not considering the 
applicability of s 7114(a)(2)(B) to "law enforcement officials 
with a broader charge," 527 U.S. at 244 n.8, the section could 
not properly be applied to the OIG's criminal investiga-
tions--as distinct from the administrative investigation at 
issue in NASA.  Like the FLRA, we find no basis for carving 
out such an exception from NASA.

                             *  *  *

     The statutory provision at issue here provides in relevant 
part:

     (2) An exclusive representative of an appropriate unit in 
     an agency shall be given the opportunity to be represent-
     ed at--
     
          (B) any examination of an employee in the unit by a 
          representative of the agency in connection with an 
          investigation if--
          
          (i) the employee reasonably believes that the exami-
     nation may result in disciplinary action against the 
     employee;  and
     
          (ii) the employee requests representation.
     
5 U.S.C. s 7114(a)(2)(B) (emphasis added).  As the section is 
part of the FLRA's organic statute, we owe its interpretation 
deference under Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  See NASA, 527 
U.S. at 234.  To the extent that the FLRA decision is simply 
an interpretation of NASA itself, however, we owe the FLRA 
no deference.  See New York v. Shalala, 119 F.3d 175, 180 
(2d Cir. 1997) (holding that "an agency has no special compe-
tence or role in interpreting a judicial decision");  cf. Profes-
sional Reactor Operator Society v. United States Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission, 939 F.2d 1047, 1051 (D.C. Cir. 1991) 
(deference is inappropriate when the agency interprets a 
statute it is not charged to administer).  In fact the case 
turns on the force of the Department's efforts to distinguish 
NASA, and we agree with the Authority's conclusion that the 
attempted distinctions are flawed.  Like the Court in NASA 
itself, we need not consider whether s 7114(a)(2)(B) permits 
other readings.  See NASA, 527 U.S. at 234.

     As in NASA, no one here questions that there was an 
"examination" of a bargaining unit employee, that the exami-
nation was "in connection with an investigation," that the 
employee requested representation, or that the employee 
reasonably believed that he might be subject to disciplinary 
action.  See NASA, 527 U.S. at 233.  Thus, the only issue in 
dispute is whether, as the Court found there, the Authority 
could find that the OIG agents were "representative[s] of the 
agency" when they conducted the interview.

     To support the proposed distinction between criminal and 
administrative investigations, the Department points to a 
provision of the Inspector General Statute that it says creates 
special consequences for an investigation's being criminal.  5 
U.S.C. App. s 4(d) requires any OIG agent to "report expedi-
tiously to the Attorney General whenever the Inspector Gen-
eral has reasonable grounds to believe there has been a 
violation of Federal criminal law."  Id.  According to the 
Department, this implies that whenever a criminal investiga-
tion is underway, the OIG agent is for purposes of 
s 7114(a)(2)(B) no longer a "representative of the agency" but 
rather answers to the Attorney General.

     First we note that s 4(d) is triggered whenever an Inspec-
tor General comes upon "reasonable grounds to believe" that 
federal criminal law was violated.  This is a broader test than 
what the Department regards as the key distinction of this 
case from NASA, namely the OIG's own classification of the 
investigation as criminal;  our acceptance of it as controlling 
would thus sweep an unknown number of administrative 
inquiries into the exception.  More important, nothing in 
s 4(d) overrides 5 U.S.C. App. s 3(a), which requires that 
each Inspector General shall "report to and be under the 
general supervision of the head of the establishment in-
volved...."  The NASA Court relied at least in part on this 
provision in holding that OIG agents are "representatives" of 
their respective agencies.  527 U.S. at 239.  Section 4(d)'s 
extra reporting requirement does not extract OIG agents 
from the organizational spot that is assigned them by 
s 3(a)--under the head of the relevant agency.

     Thus the Department's effort at a statutory distinction 
between criminal and administrative investigations fails.  Its 
remaining argument is mostly that the NASA decision rested 
on factors that are peculiar to administrative investigations 
and therefore it does not apply to criminal ones.  None of the 
distinctions seems convincing.

     First, the Department argues that NASA was based on the 
fear that agency managers might hand off their dirty work to 
OIG agents, thus circumventing s 7114(a)(2)(B) by using the 
OIG to conduct investigations for their own purposes.  See 
NASA, 527 U.S. at 234.  With criminal investigations, the 
Department says, this concern is "totally absent" because 
agency managers have no "criminal investigative duties" in 
the first place.  But the NASA decision rested (in part) on a 
recognition that the overlaps between "pure" management 
activities and OIG duties would naturally generate coopera-
tion between agency managers and OIGs.  527 U.S. at 242.  
It would be astonishing for us to ignore the parallel, and 
equally obvious, overlap of administrative and criminal en-
forcement goals and to create an exception resting on this 
ignorance.  In fact, we once observed that "the results of 
inspections, when no criminal proceedings ensue, are routine-

ly turned over to management for possible use in disciplinary 
actions."  U.S. Postal Service v. NLRB, 969 F.2d 1064, 1072 
(D.C. Cir. 1992).

     Second, the Department argues that NASA was in part 
compelled by the fact that Inspectors General, when conduct-
ing an administrative investigation, need the cooperation of 
agency managers, who can direct the employee's use of his 
time--here, to attend the interview and answer questions.  
See NASA, 527 U.S. at 242.  The Department attributes this 
power to the fact that the employee's refusal to answer 
questions related to his duties may be used against him in an 
administrative investigation.  See Kalkines v. United States, 
473 F.2d 1391, 1393 n.4 (Ct. Cl. 1973).  In contrast, says the 
Department, the employee's refusal to answer questions in a 
criminal investigation may not be used against him.  See 
Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967).  It follows that 
the agency manager has "no role" to play in forcing the 
employee to answer questions in a criminal investigation.

     We cannot see that the "no role" consequence follows.  In 
both administrative and criminal investigations, the employee 
enjoys a Fifth Amendment right not to incriminate himself in 
his answers to a government investigator.  The only differ-
ence appears to be that in administrative investigations, the 
investigators usually grant criminal immunity to the employ-
ee, see Kalkines, 473 F.2d at 1393 n.4, so that they may 
threaten the employee with administrative penalties unham-
pered by the Fifth Amendment.  But this is a choice made by 
the Inspector General in a given case, depending on what 
penalties he or she wishes to seek.  In other words, the 
difference between administrative and criminal investigations 
in this respect is one of investigative strategy, not one of law.  
In either case, both OIG and agency management can benefit 
by mutual cooperation, and it was the likelihood of such 
cooperation that the NASA Court saw as militating in favor 
of treating OIG interrogators as "representatives of the agen-
cy."

     Third, the Department argues that in a criminal investiga-
tion an employee has the right to an attorney and therefore 

doesn't need a union representative.  But nothing in the 
language of the statute or of NASA suggests that the applica-
tion of s 7114(a)(2)(B) depends on whether a particular em-
ployee "needs" union representation.  Moreover, the section 
implicates the union's rights as well.  See Weingarten, 420 
U.S. at 260-61.  In fact, we've already rejected a suggestion 
that an interrogatee's right to counsel could render 
s 7114(a)(2)(B) inapplicable.  American Federation of Gov-
ernment Employees, Local 1941, AFL-CIO v. FLRA, 837 
F.2d 495, 499 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

     Apart from the supposedly distinguishing "factors" and the 
reference to s 4(d), the Department relies heavily on the 
NASA Court's statement that it was not deciding the applica-
bility of s 7114(a)(2)(B) to "law enforcement officials with a 
broader charge."  NASA, 527 U.S. at 244 n.8.  But the 
reference doesn't appear to address OIG agents at all.  In the 
previous sentence the Court mentioned the concern that 
applying s 7114(a)(2)(B) to the OIG might hinder "joint or 
independent FBI investigations of federal employees."  Id.  
Thus the later reference to "law enforcement officials" clearly 
means "FBI officials" or the like, not an agency's OIG 
officials pursuing a criminal investigation on their own.  As 
was true for the Court in NASA, we need not address the 
possible application of s 7114(a)(2)(B) to a joint OIG/FBI 
investigation.

     The Department also argues that application of 
s 7114(a)(2)(B) to criminal investigations is "simply unwork-
able."  Specifically, it says, the union representative might be 
called to testify at a trial, thereby working against the 
employee's true interests.  But where an administrative in-
vestigation turns out to uncover criminality, the union repre-
sentative may equally be called to testify.  And if the employ-
ee is concerned about the possible testimony of the union 
representative, he can simply decide not to ask for one.  Cf. 
U.S. Postal Service, 969 F.2d at 1072 n.5 (rejecting idea that 
risks of a union representative's testimony against an employ-
ee could enable the employer to deny the Weingarten right).  
Perhaps inconsistently, the Department also says that appli-
cation of s 7114(a)(2)(B) will impede criminal investigations.  

We have no doubt that there is a risk of such impediments, 
but it presumably closely parallels the risks to effective 
management (and successful criminal prosecutions) that flow 
from application of s 7114(a)(2)(B) to administrative investi-
gations, risks that the Court regarded as "not weighty 
enough to justify a nontextual construction of s 7114(a)(2)(B) 
rejected by the Authority."  NASA, 527 U.S. at 243-44.

     Further, on the score of workability, the Department's 
approach presents problems of its own.  Many if not most 
investigations will have both administrative and criminal po-
tential.  Classification appears to depend--as one would ex-
pect--on the ongoing flow of information.  The investigation 
at issue in NASA, for instance, was instigated by information 
from the FBI, see 527 U.S. at 231-32, and according to the 
FLRA decision involved "a serious threat to co-workers," 
NASA, 50 F.L.R.A. 601, 1995 FLRA LEXIS 82, at *3 (1995).  
See also id. at *48 (ALJ decision, noting that documents "set 
forth potential threats and plans for violence").  The investi-
gator determined, "after consulting appropriate investigative 
agencies," that the employee "had not violated the law and, as 
a result, that the matter would be administratively, rather 
than criminally, investigated."  Id. at *3 n.2.  At what point, 
then, would the agent's investigation have become subject to 
s 7114(a)(2)(B)?  When the agent--to some degree indepen-
dently--decided to treat it administratively?  What if he had 
viewed the matter as unclassified, and interviewed the em-
ployee in part in order to decide on the classification?  Such 
possibilities erode the likelihood of any bright-line distinction 
between administrative and criminal investigations.

                             *  *  *

     Accordingly, the order of the FLRA is

                                                                           Affirmed.

                                                                        