                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 5, 2000   Decided November 21, 2000 

                           No. 98-1266

                      U.S. AirWaves, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                 NextWave Telecom Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                             98-1267

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

                            ---------

     Robert A. Long, Jr. argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
him on the briefs was Andrew J. Heimert.

     Stanley R. Scheiner, Counsel, Federal Communications 
Commission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on 
the brief were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, Dan-
iel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, Joel I. Klein, 
Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, 
Catherine G. O'Sullivan, and Andrea Limmer, Attorneys.  
John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and James 
M. Carr, Counsel, Federal Communications Commission, en-
tered appearances.

     Ian Heath Gershengorn argued the cause for intervenor 
NextWave Telecom Inc.  With him on the brief was Donald 
B. Verrilli, Jr.  David A. LaFuria and Thomas Gutierrez 
entered appearances.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Before us are petitions for review 
of two rulemaking orders of the Federal Communications 
Commission.  The orders changed the financial terms applica-
ble to companies that purchased licenses to provide personal 
communications services (PCS) at an auction in which bidding 
was limited to small businesses and entrepreneurs.  See 
Amendment of the Commission's Rules Regarding Install-
ment Payment Financing for [PCS] Licensees, Second Re-
port and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rule Mak-
ing, 12 F.C.C.R. 16,436 (1997) (Restructuring Order);  and 
Amendment of the Commission's Rules Regarding Install-
ment Payment Financing for [PCS] Licensees, Order on 
Reconsideration of the Second Report and Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 
8345 (1998) (Reconsideration Order).  Petitioners U.S. Air-
waves, Inc. (hereinafter Airwaves) and Sprint Spectrum L.P. 
characterize the rules as a benefit given retroactively to 
incumbent licensees, to the detriment of losing bidders in the 

spectrum auction and of competitors in the PCS industry, and 
therefore as unauthorized, unreasonable, and arbitrary and 
capricious.  Intervenor NextWave Inc., a successful bidder in 
the original auction, supports the new rules;  it also maintains 
that neither petitioner has standing to challenge them.

     We hold that Airwaves, as a disappointed bidder in the 
original auction, does have standing to petition for review of 
the new rules;  we therefore do not reach the question 
whether Sprint Spectrum L.P. also has standing.  We hold 
further that, although the changes to the Commission's fi-
nancing rules are indeed retroactive, the Commission had 
adequate reasons for adopting them, and that it reasonably 
balanced competing goals and acted within its statutory au-
thority.

                          I. Background

     Broadband PCS are a type of mobile telephone technology.  
See Omnipoint Corp. v. FCC, 78 F.3d 620, 626 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  In order to provide PCS a company must get from the 
Commission a license to use a portion of the electromagnetic 
spectrum.  In 1994 the Commission decided to distribute such 
licenses through a system of competitive bidding, pursuant to 
47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(1).  See Implementation of Section 309(j) 
of the Communications Act--Competitive Bidding, Second 
Report and Order, 9 F.C.C.R. 2348, pp 54-58 (1994) (2d 
R&O).  The Commission designated a portion of the spec-
trum for the provision of PCS and divided that portion into 
six blocks, which it labeled A through F.  In keeping with its 
statutory mandate to "ensure that small businesses ... are 
given the opportunity to participate" in spectrum auctions, 47 
U.S.C. s 309(j)(4)(D), the Commission limited the bidding for 
"C-block" spectrum to entrepreneurs and small companies.  
See Restructuring Order at p 8;  cf. Omnipoint, 78 F.3d at 
626 (upholding the limitation).  The Commission offered small 
businesses bidding for C-block licenses an "installment pay-
ment plan" under which they could pay 10% down and the 
balance "over a period of ten years, with interest only paid for 
the first six years and interest and principal for the remaining 
four."  Restructuring Order at p 8.  (Entrepreneurs who did 

not qualify as small businesses were offered less favorable 
payment terms.  See id. at n.10.)

     Between May and July 1996 some 90 different bidders 
bought at auction 493 licenses--one for each "basic trading 
area" (BTA) in the nation--to use 30 MHz of spectrum for 
the provision of PCS.  Their bids totaled $10.2 billion, a 
figure some observers attributed to irrational exuberance;  on 
average, C-block licensees agreed to pay nearly three times 
per potential customer what the winning bidders in the A- 
and B-block auctions had paid.  See Restructuring Order at 
p 9 & n.11;  Peter Spiegel, Hollow Victory, Forbes, Jan. 27, 
1997, at 50.

     Within nine months of the C-block auction, it became clear 
that a number of high bidders might not be able to make 
their scheduled payments.  See Wireless Telecommunica-
tions Bureau Seeks Comment on Broadband PCS C and F 
Block Installment Payment Issues, Public Notice, 12 
F.C.C.R. 21,015, 21,015 & n.4 (1997).  In March, 1997 the 
Commission suspended the payment obligations of all C-block 
licensees pending a review of its installment payment terms.  
See Installment Payments for PCS Licenses, Order, 12 
F.C.C.R. 17,325, p 2 (1997).

     In October, 1997 the Commission issued the first of the two 
orders challenged in this case.  That order ended the suspen-
sion of payments announced the previous March and offered a 
"menu" of new financing options to all C-block licensees.  See 
Restructuring Order at pp 6, 25.  Upon reconsideration the 
Commission retained the menu approach but altered several 
of the offerings in important particulars.  See Reconsidera-
tion Order at pp 8-10.  The revised scheme also permitted a 
licensee to select a different option for licenses it held in each 
"Major Trading Area" (MTA)--referring to the 51 geographic 
regions into which the Commission has divided the nation--so 
long as it applied the same option to all its licenses within 
each MTA.  See Reconsideration Order at p 17.  Upon the 
promulgation of the order on reconsideration, each licensee 
was required, in order to avoid default, to choose a menu 
option for each of its MTAs.  See id. at p 23.

     The menu offered each licensee four choices.  First, the 
licensee could continue to make payments under the original 
terms of the auction.  See Restructuring Order at p 6.

     Second, the licensee could surrender all its licenses for a 
particular MTA and receive a "prepayment credit" in an 
amount equal to 70% of the down payments and 100% of any 
installment payments it had made on those licenses, as well as 
forgiveness of its debt on the returned licenses.  The prepay-
ment credit would be put toward payment for such other PCS 
licenses as the licensee continued to hold.  The licensee could 
either provide additional funds in order to prepay all the 
licenses it retained in a given MTA or, were it to rely solely 
upon its prepayment credits, could prepay as many licenses 
as possible in a given MTA and surrender any remaining 
licenses to be auctioned anew.  See Restructuring Order at 
p 64;  Reconsideration Order at pp 38, 41-43.

     Third, the licensee could elect to "disaggregate" each of its 
licenses within a given MTA, returning 15 MHz of spectrum 
to the Commission and retaining 15 MHz under license.  The 
licensee's outstanding debt to the Commission with respect to 
returned spectrum would be forgiven.  The licensee would 
also receive a credit equal to 40% of its down payments on the 
returned spectrum, which it could apply to the payments due 
on the retained spectrum.  A licensee combining disaggrega-
tion and prepayment would receive a credit equal to 70% of 
its down payment for returned spectrum, which it could use 
to prepay the Commission either for the retained 15 MHz of 
the disaggregated licenses or for other PCS licenses it re-
tained.  See Restructuring Order at pp 38-39;  Reconsidera-
tion Order pp 51, 54.

     Finally, the licensee could simply surrender its licenses for 
a particular MTA and be forgiven its outstanding debt with 
respect to those licenses.  A licensee electing this so-called 
"amnesty" option could either retain the right to rebid when 
its licenses were sold at auction again or forego the opportu-
nity to rebid and receive a credit of 70% of its original down 
payment;  it could apply that credit to payments due in 
connection with the prepayment or disaggregation of licenses 

that it retained in other MTAs.  See Reconsideration Order 
at p 12.

     The Commission states that in crafting this menu of options 
it "considered and balanced" several policy goals:  maintain-
ing the integrity of spectrum auctions;  ensuring fairness to 
actual and prospective licensees;  resolving all issues prompt-
ly;  and complying with its statutory mandates to "[p]romot[e] 
economic opportunity and competition in the marketplace," 
and to "ensure 'that new and innovative technologies are 
readily accessible to the American people by avoiding exces-
sive concentrations of licenses and by disseminating licenses 
among a wide variety of applicants, including small busi-
nesses.' "  See Restructuring Order at p 2 (quoting 47 U.S.C. 
s 309(j)).

                           II. Analysis

     Airwaves and Sprint PCS contend that the Commission 
changed its original auction rules arbitrarily and capriciously 
and without statutory authority.  After analyzing the petition-
ers' standing, we consider the Commission's claim that the 
new rules were foreshadowed in the original auction rules and 
therefore do not represent a significant change in policy.  We 
then turn to the questions of arbitrariness and of statutory 
authority.

A.   Do petitioners have standing?

     The "irreducible constitutional minimum" for standing in an 
Article III court is that the petitioner was injured in fact, that 
its injury was caused by the challenged conduct, and that its 
injury would likely be redressed by a favorable decision of the 
court.  Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 
(1992).  NextWave Inc., intervening in defense of the Com-
mission, argues that Airwaves lacks standing because it can 
demonstrate neither that it was injured in fact nor that its 
alleged injury is redressable.

     A bidder in a government auction has a "right to a legally 
valid procurement process";  a party allegedly deprived of 
this right asserts a cognizable injury.  DIRECTV, Inc. v. 
FCC, 110 F.3d 816, 829 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  A disappointed 
bidder "need not ... demonstrate that it would be successful 

if the contract were let anew" but only that it was " 'able and 
ready to bid ... and that the [rule] prevent[ed] it from doing 
so on an equal basis.' "  Id. at 829-30 (quoting Northeastern 
Fla. Chapter of Assoc. Gen. Contractors of America v. City of 
Jacksonville, 508 U.S. 656, 666 (1993)).  Of course, in order to 
show that its injury is redressable, a disappointed bidder 
must demonstrate that it is "ready, willing, and able" to 
participate in a new auction should it prevail;  but it need not 
demonstrate that it will participate in such an auction regard-
less of the circumstances then prevailing.  See Orange Park 
Florida T.V., Inc. v. FCC, 811 F.2d 664, 672 & n.18 (D.C. Cir. 
1987).

     Airwaves meets these requirements.  It submitted bids in 
the original C-block auction but dropped out before securing 
any licenses.  It claims that it would have bid more had it 
known that financial terms more favorable than those an-
nounced at the time of the auction would later be offered to 
winning bidders.  Airwaves further affirms, in the sworn 
declaration of its chief executive, that it "intends" to bid in a 
future reauction of PCS spectrum and that it is able to raise 
the capital necessary to do so.  That is sufficient.

     NextWave also argues that Airwaves cannot base its stand-
ing upon its participation in the original auction because 
Airwaves acknowledges that the original auction was fair;  
Airwaves challenges only the way in which the Commission 
treated licensees after the auction was completed.  In this 
argument, however, NextWave misapprehends Airwaves' 
claim, which is that post-auction revisions to the financing 
options available to the high bidders constitute impermissibly 
retroactive changes to the initial auction rules.  There is no 
basis for suggesting, as NextWave seems to do, that ex post 
changes can never affect the validity of a government auction.

     Finally, NextWave argues that Airwaves fails to demon-
strate that its claim is redressable by this court because it 
does not allege that when it petitioned for review of the new 
rules it was ready, willing, and able to bid in a new auction.  
NextWave asserts that as of that date Airwaves had returned 
all its investment capital to its investors and was not in good 

standing in the State of Delaware because of a tax dispute, 
for both of which reasons it would have been unable to bid in 
any new auction that the Commission might have conducted.  
NextWave's premise is correct:  Standing is determined as of 
the date an action is filed, see Smith v. Sperling, 354 U.S. 91, 
93 n.1 (1957);  but NextWave offers no persuasive reason to 
think either that Airwaves lacked access to capital on that 
date or that it would not have resolved its tax dispute in 
Delaware had that been necessary in order to bid in a new 
auction.  (In fact, the tax matter was resolved soon after the 
filing.)  Absent any evidence to the contrary, Airwaves' asser-
tion that it was ready, willing, and able to participate in a 
rerun of the C-block auction satisfies the redressability re-
quirement.

     Having determined that Airwaves has standing, we do not 
need to reach the question whether Sprint Spectrum L.P. has 
standing as well, for Sprint presents no arguments beyond 
those made by Airwaves.  See Railway Labor Executives' 
Ass'n v. United States, 987 F.2d 806, 810 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 
("[I]f one party has standing in an action, a court need not 
reach the issue of the standing of other parties when it makes 
no difference to the merits of the case").

B.   Is the rule retroactive?

     Airwaves argues that the changes in the Commission's 
auction rules give a windfall to C-block licensees.  The 
Commission and NextWave respond that the original auction 
rules anticipate the possibility that the Commission might 
revise its financing provisions, making the adoption of the 
new rules foreseeable.*  Cf. Small Refiner Lead Phase-
Down Task Force v. EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 547, 549 (D.C. Cir. 
1983) (holding that final administrative rules that depart from 
an agency's initial proposals do not require new notice and 
comment if the final rules are a "logical outgrowth" of the 
proposals, such that the parties "should have anticipated [that 
they] might be imposed").

__________
     * The implication of the Commission's account is that the possibil-
ity of new rules is fully reflected in the prices paid;  hence there is 
no windfall.

     The Commission points out that the original auction rules 
provided that "as a general rule" a defaulting bidder's licens-
es would be deemed forfeit and reauctioned, 2d R&O at p 204, 
which reasonably can be taken to suggest that forfeiture and 
reauction were not to be the inevitable consequence of de-
fault.  More important, the original rules specifically allowed 
a licensee "that has defaulted or that anticipates default 
under an installment payment program" to obtain a "three to 
six month grace period" during which to "seek from the 
Commission a restructured payment plan."  Id. at p 240.  In 
addition, the original rules provided that default would occa-
sion a "substantial penalty," Implementation of Section 309(j) 
of the Communications Act--Competitive Bidding, Fifth Re-
port and Order, 9 F.C.C.R. 5532, p 75 (1994), and under the 
revised rule every licensee that fails to honor its original 
payment obligations forfeits at least 30% of its down payment 
on all spectrum that it returns to the Commission.

     In some respects, however, the new rules clearly do contra-
dict the Commission's previously stated policies.  The initial 
auction rules provided that the Commission would consider 
requests for financial restructuring on a "case-by-case basis."  
2d R&O at p 240.  This certainly implied that the Commission 
would not proceed by way of a further rulemaking and a new 
rule of general application, see Bowen v. Georgetown Univ. 
Hosp., 488 U.S. 204, 209 (1988).  The distinction is significant, 
for the initial auction rules made only those licensees "that 
ha[d] defaulted or that anticipate[d] default" eligible for a 
grace period and financial restructuring.  2d R&O at p 240.  
The C-block menu, in contrast, is available to all licensees 
regardless of their financial condition.  See Restructuring 
Order at p 6.

     The new regulations therefore do not merely fill in the 
details of a policy foreseeable at the time of the original 
C-block auction;  instead, they constitute a secondarily retro-
active change to the rules governing that auction.  See Bow-
en, 488 U.S. at 219 (1988) (Scalia, J., concurring) (defining 
"secondary retroactivity" as describing "rule[s] with exclu-
sively future effect [that] ... affect past transactions") (em-
phasis omitted).  A secondarily retroactively rule is valid only 

to the extent that it is reasonable--both in substance and in 
being made retroactive.  See id. at 220.  It is to reasonable-
ness that we turn next.

C.   Are the regulations reasonable?

     Airwaves argues that the rule is invalid for two related 
reasons.  First, it contends that the Commission failed to 
relate its offering of post-auction refinancing options to its 
own stated goals.  Second, it argues that regardless whether 
the Commission embraced fairness as a goal, the rule is 
simply so unfair that it must be deemed arbitrary and capri-
cious.

     Under the arbitrary and capricious standard, this court 
does not substitute its judgment for that of the administrative 
agency.  See Motor Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n of the United States, 
Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983).  
A regulatory decision in which the Commission must balance 
competing goals is therefore valid if the agency can show that 
its resolution "reasonably advances at least one of those 
objectives and [that] its decisionmaking process was regular."  
Fresno Mobile Radio, Inc. v. FCC, 165 F.3d 965, 971 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999).  Because Airwaves does not challenge the regular-
ity of the Commission's decisionmaking process, the issue now 
before us is whether the Commission reasonably justified its 
regulations with reference to at least one of its avowed goals.  
See Restructuring Order at p 2.

     The C-block menu withstands review under this standard:  
The Commission justified each of the menu options and its 
MTA-by-MTA selection principle with reference to one or 
more of its stated goals.  In particular, the Commission 
justified each of its menu options as "enabling C block 
licensees to remain participants in the wireless market," 
which it found would hasten "the delivery of new services to 
the public" and promote efficient use of the spectrum.  Re-
consideration Order at p 10;  see Restructuring Order at 
pp 43, 45 (disaggregation);  id. at p 53 (amnesty);  Reconsider-
ation Order at p 40 (prepayment).  In addition, the Commis-
sion justified the prepayment option as a way of minimizing 
conflicts between the agency's roles as creditor and as regu-

lator.  See Reconsideration Order at p 40.  The Commission 
explained disaggregation, as it did the provision for MTA-by-
MTA election, in part as an effort to help small licensees plan 
their businesses rationally.  See Restructuring Order at p 45;  
Reconsideration Order at p 19.

     Airwaves challenges the Commission's rationale in two 
respects.  Its first point proceeds from the observation that 
the Commission deemed "essential" two and only two of its 
stated goals, namely, maintaining the integrity of the auction 
process and ensuring fairness to all market participants.  
Restructuring Order at p 3.  Airwaves claims that it is unrea-
sonable for the Commission to adopt any policy that under-
mines a goal that the agency itself has styled "essential."  
This is an unduly cramped reading of the orders, however.  
The Commission reasonably can treat fairness and integrity 
as "essential" goals and yet recognize that they are matters of 
degree.  Thus, the Commission may choose to sacrifice some 
degree of fairness or integrity in order to gain other impor-
tant objectives.  Several of the goals that the Commission 
lists in addition (and therefore potentially in opposition) to 
fairness and integrity--such as competition, speedy deploy-
ment of services to the public, efficient use of the spectrum, 
and participation of small businesses in the market--are 
mandated by statute.  See 47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(3).  A more 
reasonable construction of the Commission's statement that 
fairness and integrity are "essential" goals, therefore, is that 
in its view they must be included (along with those specified 
in the statute) among the goals to be balanced.  This by no 
means requires that they trump all other goals in every case 
where there is conflict.

     Airwaves also argues that, aside from the orders' failure to 
advance the Commission's "essential" goals, they also fail to 
advance the other goals the Commission invoked as justifica-
tions for the menu options.  For example, Airwaves argues 
that, contrary to the Commission's claims, the rule will retard 
rather than hasten the availability of services to consumers;  
instead of forcing a reauction that would transfer spectrum to 
competent and solvent firms, the rule allows precisely those 
companies that "have demonstrated financial irresponsibility 

and undue optimism about their financial capabilities" to 
retain their spectrum.  New buyers at auction may, as the 
petitioner asserts, be more likely to effectuate a rapid build-
out of wireless systems, but the Commission is reasonably of 
the view that starting the licensing process all over again 
would delay build-out.  We defer to the agency regarding a 
predictive matter, such as this, within its expertise.  See 
Fresno Mobile Radio, 165 F.3d at 971.

     In a similar vein, Airwaves complains that, contrary to the 
Commission's expectation, the rule will not promote the par-
ticipation of small businesses in the wireless industry;  that 
goal would be better effected by redistributing licenses to 
small businesses in a new auction than by reinforcing the 
current concentration of C-block licenses in relatively few 
hands.  The petitioner's position is again plausible, but it is 
also reasonable, again, for the Commission to expect that 
small businesses generally will be better situated to face their 
larger competitors in the wireless industry if those that 
already have licenses are able to build their businesses in at 
least some markets.  Again, we defer to the Commission's 
expertise regarding such predictive issues.

     Notwithstanding the Commission's reasoned justification, 
the rule might still be arbitrary and capricious if, as Airwaves 
claims, it is sufficiently unfair.  We agree with the petitioner 
that the Commission systematically downplays the inequity of 
the rule:  it clearly grants a substantial windfall not only to 
distressed but also to healthy companies that bought licenses 
in the initial auction.  Those companies can now discard the 
licenses they have found, with the benefit of hindsight, to be 
less valuable--without incurring the ordinary penalty for 
default and, indeed, while recouping some of the payments 
they have already made.  At the same time they can retain 
the licenses they have found to be more valuable, subject only 
to the requirement that they elect a single menu option within 
each MTA.  Further, the rule allows them not only to concen-
trate their resources in the most desirable markets but to 
apply to the spectrum they retain some of the payments they 
had made on spectrum they returned.  Obviously, those who 
were outbid in the original auction would have bid more than 

they actually did--and might have bid enough to win licens-
es--had they known that the Commission later would make 
such options available.

     Having established that the Commission changed the rules 
in a way that could not be foreseen, the question is whether, 
under the circumstances, that was so unfair as to be arbitrary 
and capricious.  We start from the intuitive premise that an 
agency cannot, in fairness, radically change the terms of an 
auction after the fact.  At the same time, an agency must be 
allowed to adjust its policies to changing circumstances, with-
in the framework of rules it established in advance of the 
auction.  In this case the Commission determined that the 
statutory goals of speeding the delivery of service to the 
public and of facilitating the participation of small businesses 
in the wireless market required it to liberalize the financial 
terms available to C-block licensees.  See Reconsideration 
Order at pp 7-8.  Competing goals do not absolve the agency 
of its duty to losing bidders, of course, but the Commission 
was careful to temper its liberalization accordingly.  The 
agency did not simply forgive agreed-upon payments, much 
less grant the winning bidders' more sweeping requests for 
relief.  Rather, under each of the menu options it imposed 
upon every distressed licensee a "substantial penalty"--in 
every case at least 30% of the down payment for a returned 
license, and up to 60% in the case of a licensee choosing 
disaggregation without prepayment.

     Considering the dramatic and unexpected business rever-
sals faced by C-block licensees, and post-auction conditions in 
the wireless market, we think the Commission reasonably 
exercised its discretion to balance fairness to losing bidders 
with the needs of the market and with the public interest.  
We therefore conclude that the orders under review are 
consistent with the Commission's stated goals, and that such 
unfairness as they worked does not render them arbitrary 
and capricious.

D.   Did the Commission exceed its statutory authority?

     The Commission conducts spectrum auctions pursuant to 
its authority to grant licenses "through the use of a system 
of competitive bidding."  47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(1).  Airwaves 

argues that post-auction concessions made to the winning 
bidders effectively render the auction noncompetitive and 
therefore without statutory authorization.  Airwaves argues 
further that retroactive changes to auction rules violate the 
requirement that the Commission "ensure that ... an ade-
quate period is allowed ... after issuance of bidding rules[ ] 
to ensure that interested parties have a sufficient time to 
develop business plans, assess market conditions, and evalu-
ate the availability of equipment."  Id. s 309(j)(3)(E).  Air-
waves' argument here is that post-auction rule changes nec-
essarily leave no time for interested parties to plan, assess, 
or evaluate.

     These arguments were not put before the Commission and 
are therefore not properly before this court.  See Washington 
Ass'n for Television & Children v. FCC, 712 F.2d 677, 680 
(1983) ("[C]laims not presented to the agency may not be 
made for the first time to a reviewing court").  Airwaves 
suggests that the issue was adequately raised before the 
Commission in the comment of another party, which argued 
that "Section 309(j) does not ... contain any provision allow-
ing the Commission to change the amount owed the govern-
ment as a result of an auction."  The broad and general claim 
that the Commission lacks statutory authority "to change the 
amount owed" is materially different, however, from Air-
waves' specific argument that the Commission violated the 
statutory provisions requiring "a system of competitive bid-
ding" and "an adequate period" for planning after auction 
rules are issued.  Confronted only with the former, broad 
claim, the Commission had no notice of the specific objections 
now raised by Airwaves.  As we have said more than once 
before, a litigant may not " 'sandbag' agencies by withholding 
legal arguments ... until they reach the courts of appeal."  
USAir, Inc. v. Department of Transp., 969 F.2d 1256, 1260 
(D.C. Cir. 1992).

                         III. Conclusion

     In summary, we hold that the changes to the Commission's 
C-block auction rules are neither arbitrary and capricious, 

nor unreasonable, nor without statutory authority.  Therefore 
the petitions to review the rules are

                                                                 Denied.

                  