                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 10, 2002   Decided February 26, 2002 

                           No. 01-3042

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Wallace E. Weaver, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                          (99cr00363-01)

     Veronice A. Holt argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     John K. Han, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. Howard, 
Jr., U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Thomas J. Tourish, Jr., 
and Steven J. Durham, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.  Roy W. 

McLeese, III, Assistant U.S. Attorney, entered an appear-
ance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  A jury convicted Wallace E. 
Weaver of each count of a fourteen-count indictment charging 
misappropriation of postal funds, in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
s 1711.  The district court sentenced Weaver to concurrent 
terms of thirty months' imprisonment on each count, and 
ordered him to pay restitution to the United States Postal 
Service of $120,622.  Weaver's appeal is on the grounds that 
errors infected his trial, that he was entitled to a new trial, 
that his counsel was ineffective, and that the district court 
miscalculated his sentence.

                                I.

     Each count of the indictment corresponded to an alleged 
theft of postal funds on a particular day between December 
20, 1994, and May 21, 1996.  The government's evidence 
tended to show that Weaver began working as a supervisor at 
the Brentwood Road Post Office, the main post office in 
Washington, D.C., in May 1994.  A Postal Service investiga-
tion conducted in 1996 revealed problems with several post-
age meter accounts for customers outside the District of 
Columbia who leased meters from Brentwood in order to 
obtain a D.C. postmark.  Post offices in the customers' 
localities serviced the meters.  The customers gave checks to 
their local post office and had their meters adjusted accord-
ingly.  The local post offices then sent the checks, and related 
paperwork, to the Brentwood facility.  Brentwood maintained 
the balance ledger for each of the meters.  When investiga-
tors looked at the books, they noticed that several meters 
were apparently still producing postage although the ledger 
indicated that no new payments had come in for quite some 
time.

     Further investigation indicated that while Brentwood had 
received the meter customers' payments, no one had updated 
the ledgers.  This led investigators to surmise that someone 
at Brentwood was stealing cash from the Main Office Window 
Unit and replacing it with the unrecorded checks to avoid 
detection.  Eventually, they focused on Weaver, who often 
served as the close-out supervisor at Brentwood.  The close-
out supervisor deposited cash and checks received at the unit 
throughout the day.  The ledger "gaps" began in May 1994, a 
date coinciding with Weaver's assignment to the Brentwood 
facility, and ended in the spring of 1996, around the same 
time postal inspectors questioned Weaver as part of their 
investigation.  A handwriting expert testified that Weaver 
signed or marked the deposit slips for many of the checks 
corresponding to ledger gaps (including all fourteen days 
representing the separate counts charged in the indictment).  
A review of Weaver's personal finances demonstrated that his 
known expenditures well exceeded his reported income, and 
that he made large cash deposits to numerous bank accounts 
in 1994, 1995, and 1996.  The government also elicited testi-
mony showing that Weaver was a compulsive gambler.

     Weaver took the stand and denied stealing any money.  He 
produced a document indicating that he did not arrive at the 
Brentwood facility until May 21, 1994.  This was designed to 
rebut the government's claim that the thefts began shortly 
after he started working as a supervisor at Brentwood.  (The 
indictment did not charge Weaver with any thefts in May, but 
the government argued that he was the only postal employee 
working at the Brentwood facility on every date on which 
there was a suspected theft.)  The date on the assignment 
document was typed on white correction tape.

     After trial, but before sentencing, Weaver retained a new 
attorney, who now represents him in this appeal.  During the 
interval his new counsel inspected several boxes of documents 
allegedly "discovered" at the Brentwood Post Office after 
trial.  On the basis of these documents, Weaver moved for a 
new trial, arguing that they proved that he was not a close-
out supervisor in May 1994 when the losses began and that 

the documents incriminated another postal employee.  The 
district court denied the motion on January 17, 2001.

     The court sentenced Weaver on April 6, 2001.  In addition 
to the $64,240 loss comprising the thefts charged in the 
indictment, the court attributed $56,382 in losses correspond-
ing to eleven other ledger gaps.

                               II.

     Weaver's claims of error at trial are in two parts.  The first 
is that the district court erred in allowing two witnesses, Rory 
Pankhurst and Carole Edwards, to testify without being 
qualified as experts.  Because Weaver interposed no such 
objection, he may prevail only if the court committed plain 
error.  See Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b);  United States v. Olano, 
507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993);  United States v. Myles, 96 F.3d 491, 
495 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     Pankhurst was a long-time member of the Postal Inspec-
tion Service specializing in revenue investigation and was a 
certified internal auditor.  His testimony linked the ledger 
gaps and unrecorded (but deposited) checks to the alleged 
cash thefts.  He examined the cash register logs for the 
fourteen days in the indictment and estimated the absolute 
minimum amount of cash received by the end of the day, 
based upon the types of transactions conducted at the win-
dows.  (For example, the purchase of a money order indicat-
ed a cash transaction, because one could not pay for this 
service by personal check or credit card.)  He then compared 
this minimum amount to the close-out logs and determined 
that on nine of the fourteen days in the indictment there was 
less cash recorded than the bare minimum.  Because the total 
amount (cash, credit cards, checks) balanced with the daily 
transactions register, he concluded that someone must have 
stolen cash and replaced it with unprocessed out-of-town 
postage meter checks.

     Why Weaver thinks the court should have prevented Pank-
hurst from giving this testimony is not obvious to us even 
with his argument, and it surely would not have been obvious 
to the district court without any argument.  Pankhurst was 

an active participant in the investigation.  His testimony 
rested on the personal knowledge he gained during the 
course of his examination.  See Fed. R. Evid. 602.  That he 
performed "routine computations and culling through of docu-
ments" to arrive at his conclusions did not require him to be 
qualified as an expert.  See United States v. Lemire, 720 F.2d 
1327, 1350 (D.C. Cir. 1983).

     Carole Edwards was a forfeiture specialist at the Postal 
Service.  She testified that on the basis of her review of 
Weaver's tax returns and other financial documents, his 
expenditures significantly exceeded his known income in 
1994-1996.  Weaver believes the analysis Edwards performed 
did not comport with basic accounting principles and that the 
need for her to be qualified as an expert should have been 
obvious to the district court.  Like Pankhurst, Edwards' 
testimony was based on her personal review of the financial 
documents, and simply involved the addition of known sources 
of income and known expenditures.  For that reason, the 
court's allowing her to testify without objection was not error.

     According to Weaver, the other plain trial error occurred 
when the court admitted what he calls the government's 
"summary" exhibits.  The argument portion of Weaver's 
opening brief did not identify which exhibits he meant to 
include in this category;  his reply specified, in a caption, 
Exhibits 37 and 38.  We will not consider Exhibit 37, which 
was a timeline of events relating to the investigation.  Nei-
ther Weaver's brief nor his reply brief contained any argu-
ment explaining what he thought constituted error in admit-
ting this exhibit.  See Trans Union Corp. v. FTC, 245 F.3d 
809, 814 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  see also United States v. Brock-
smith, 991 F.2d 1363, 1366 (7th Cir. 1993).

     Exhibit 38 was a chart, admitted during Pankhurst's testi-
mony.  The chart compared the attendance records of various 
Brentwood employees with the dates of the alleged losses, 
and indicated that Weaver was the only employee present at 
that facility on every date on which a theft occurred.  Weaver 
argues that it was plain error for this "summary" exhibit to 
be admitted without "safeguards," by which he apparently 
means some sort of jury instruction.

     Weaver's attorney, when asked by the court whether he 
had any objection to Exhibit 38, replied "No objection, your 
honor."  Relying on Supreme Court dicta in Olano, the 
government maintains that Weaver thereby waived his right 
to complain about this evidence on appeal.  Olano stated that 
when the defendant has waived a right at trial, not even plain 
error review is available on appeal.  507 U.S. at 733.  Weav-
er's "No objection" relinquished an evidentiary point, not a 
constitutional right.  See id.  His counsel did more than sit 
by silently as the evidence came in.  Instead, he made a 
conscious choice, on the record, to indicate his lack of objec-
tion.  Whether he did so for tactical reasons--for instance, to 
convey to the jury that he believed Exhibit 38 was not telling, 
see United States v. Yu-Leung, 51 F.3d 1116, 1122 (2d Cir. 
1995)--or because he did not have the imagination to come up 
with an objection, seems to us of no particular consequence.  
Plain error assumes that the court should have intervened 
sua sponte because the error was so obvious.  When defense 
counsel has informed the court that he has no problem with 
admitting the evidence, it may be too much to expect the trial 
court to second-guess defense counsel's position and make its 
own independent assessment of the possible grounds for 
exclusion.  See United States v. Lakich, 23 F.3d 1203, 1208 
(7th Cir. 1994).

     However, rather than deciding whether Weaver waived the 
point, we are content to rest on the ground that the trial 
court did not commit plain error in admitting Exhibit 38.  As 
Rule 1006 required, the government made available for in-
spection the documents underlying the exhibit.  See Fed. R. 
Evid. 1006.  While Weaver now claims that no document 
showed him working at Brentwood on May 12, 1994, his trial 
counsel agreed that the government showed him a payroll 
record indicating that Weaver was employed at Brentwood on 
that date.

     As to Weaver's claim that the court should have issued 
some sort of "safeguards" with respect to Exhibit 38, we 
think he misapprehends the Rules of Evidence.  Rule 1006, 
an exception to the best evidence rule, provides:

     The contents of voluminous writings, recordings, or pho-
     tographs which cannot conveniently be examined in court 
     may be presented in the form of a chart, summary, or 
     calculation.  The originals, or duplicates, shall be made 
     available for examination or copying, or both, by other 
     parties at a reasonable time and place.  The court may 
     order that they be produced in court.
     
Fed. R. Evid. 1006. Exhibit 38 compared payroll records for 
various employees at the Brentwood facility with the dates of 
the alleged losses.  As such, it was a "summary" exhibit 
under Rule 1006 and was itself evidence, serving as a substi-
tute for the actual payroll records.  We therefore do not 
understand Weaver's point that an instruction was needed 
because the exhibit constituted inadmissible evidence.  Weav-
er cites Lemire, 720 F.2d at 1347, but the case is not 
comparable.  In Lemire, the testimony of a government 
witness summarized the testimony of previous witnesses and 
explained the significance of documents already in evidence.  
See id. at 1346.  The witness used four "summary charts" 
while testifying.  The defendants objected to the testimony 
but the trial court allowed it subject to a limiting instruction 
that the "testimony was explanatory and was not itself evi-
dence."  Id. at 1347.  There is no indication that the govern-
ment sought to introduce the charts into evidence and, so far 
as one can tell from the opinion, the only objection was to the 
summary testimony, not the charts.  Lemire thus has nothing 
to do with this case.  Although Lemire mentioned Rule 1006 
by way of analogy, the opinion does not stand for the proposi-
tion that Rule 1006 summaries are not evidence or that in 
admitting such a summary into evidence the court commits 
plain error if it omits some sort of cautionary instruction 
when the defense has not requested one.  See 3 Stephen A. 
Saltzburg, et al., Federal Rules of Evidence Manual 2078, 
2089 (7th ed. 1998 & Supp. 2001).

                               III.

     Weaver moved for a new trial, arguing that the government 
violated its duty to turn over, before trial, documents his new 

counsel found at Brentwood after the trial.  The motion was, 
in essence, a Brady claim.  See Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 
83 (1963).  The district court denied the motion, a ruling with 
which we agree.

     During discovery, the government informed Weaver's trial 
counsel that it possessed documents relating to the May 1994 
losses.  The government also filed a motion, unopposed by 
Weaver, to use the May 12, 1994, loss as Rule 404(b) evi-
dence.  We need not decide whether the government sup-
pressed the documents, for there is no "reasonable probabili-
ty" that he would have been acquitted if the discovered 
documents had been admitted.  Strickler v. Greene, 527 U.S. 
263, 289 (1999) (internal quotations omitted);  see United 
States v. Bowie, 198 F.3d 905, 908-09 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  We 
agree with the district court that the "documentary evidence 
produced by the government ... not only demonstrated Mr. 
Weaver's means and opportunity to commit the crimes 
charged, but also demonstrated the fact that his expenditures 
were far in excess of his postal worker's income" and "the 
cross-examination seriously undermined Mr. Weaver's credi-
bility."  It is worth adding that the missing documents indi-
cated at most that Weaver did not serve as a close-out 
supervisor in May of 1994, and that another postal employee 
did.  But Weaver was not charged with any thefts occurring 
in May 1994, and his handling the close-out on a particular 
day was not essential to the government's theory of the case.  
He was working at Brentwood on the date of the first 
uncharged theft incident--May 12, 1994--and had access to 
the cash received and the postage meter checks.  Further, 
Weaver's trial counsel established in cross-examination of the 
government's witness that no document showed Weaver act-
ing as a close-out supervisor on May 12.

                               IV.

     Weaver claims that his trial counsel was constitutionally 
ineffective, in violation of the Sixth Amendment to the Consti-
tution.  See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984).  
When this issue is raised for the first time on appeal, as it is 

here, our general practice is to remand to the district court 
for an evidentiary hearing unless it is clear from the record 
that counsel was or was not ineffective, or that the supposed 
defect in representation amounted to a strategic choice by 
defense counsel.  See United States v. Geraldo, 271 F.3d 
1112, 1116 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  United States v. Richardson, 167 
F.3d 621, 626 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  United States v. Pinkney, 543 
F.2d 908, 915 (D.C. Cir. 1976).  The theory presumably is 
that trial counsel cannot be expected to argue his own ineffec-
tiveness in a motion for a new trial, and so we ought to allow 
new counsel to argue it on appeal.  Geraldo, 271 F.3d at 1116, 
points out that our approach may place us in a minority of 
one among the courts of appeals.  (Other courts of appeals 
require defendants to raise their ineffectiveness claims only in 
a collateral proceeding.  Id.)  Rule 33 of the Federal Rules of 
Criminal Procedure requires new trial motions to be filed 
within 7 days of the verdict, yet our practice of remanding to 
the district court for an evidentiary hearing has the effect of 
greatly extending that time limit.

     Weaver's claim of ineffectiveness, as set forth in his open-
ing brief, is on two scores, both of which may be rejected 
without a remand for an evidentiary hearing.  The first deals 
with counsel's failure to object to the testimony of Carole 
Edwards, the forfeiture specialist who testified that Weaver's 
expenditures far exceeded his known income from 1994 to 
1996.  Weaver basically repeats his claim that Edwards was 
an expert witness giving her "opinion, not fact."  Brief of 
Appellant at 39-40.  We have already rejected that argument.  
Weaver's second claim of ineffectiveness is counsel's failure to 
object to Exhibits 37 and 38 on the basis that Weaver was not 
working at Brentwood on May 12, 1994.  Id. at 40.  Here too 
we have already rejected the premise.  Weaver has presented 
no argument about Exhibit 37 and Exhibit 38 was properly 
admitted for the reasons given above.

                                V.

     At sentencing, the government argued that, in addition to 
the indicted offenses, the losses identified as having occurred 

between May 12, 1994, and May 21, 1996 (essentially the Rule 
404(b) evidence discussed at trial) should be attributed to 
Weaver.  The court credited Weaver with eleven additional 
losses totaling $56,382.  These thefts occurred immediately 
before and during the time of thefts charged in the indict-
ment.  Weaver argues that this finding of relevant conduct 
violates Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), and is 
not supported by a preponderance of the evidence.

     Weaver's Apprendi claim is hard to understand.  The idea 
apparently is that any attribution of relevant conduct contra-
venes the spirit of Apprendi.  We have, on numerous occa-
sions, refused to extend Apprendi beyond its holding that any 
factor other than a prior conviction triggering a sentence 
above the statutory maximum must be submitted to and 
found by a jury.  See, e.g., United States v. Agramonte, 276 
F.3d 594, 597 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  United States v. Fields, 251 
F.3d 1041, 1043-44 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  In re Sealed Case, 246 
F.3d 696, 698 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

     Weaver's other complaint about the sentencing is well-
taken.  The court credited Weaver with $22,817 in losses, yet 
there was no evidence that checks for this amount were ever 
received at Brentwood.  The government's theory of its case 
was that Weaver stole cash and covered his theft by deposit-
ing (but not logging) a postage meter check.  The theory 
cannot hold with respect to the $22,817.  Since checks total-
ing this amount never cleared, there is no way of knowing 
when the loss occurred and without a date there was no way 
of knowing whether Weaver worked on the day the check 
came in and no way of matching unexplained cash deposits in 
Weaver's bank accounts with the loss.  The district court 
clearly erred in attributing this amount to Weaver.  See 
United States v. Kim, 23 F.3d 513, 517 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  It 
reasoned that the $22,817 occurred close in time to the 
indicted offenses.  But that alone cannot constitute a prepon-
derance of the evidence.  With respect to the other thefts, the 
government could point to corroborative evidence:  for exam-
ple, on the unindicted April 3, 1996 loss, the government had 
evidence to indicate that Weaver worked at Brentwood on the 
day the check arrived at the facility, that he was the close-out 

supervisor, that he signed the deposit slip for the check, and 
that his personal bank account showed a large cash deposit 
shortly thereafter.  For the other attributed losses, the gov-
ernment could at least prove that Weaver worked at the Post 
Office on the date the check was deposited and that his bank 
accounts showed cash deposits shortly thereafter.

     Weaver received a nine-level addition to his base offense 
level because the total losses attributed to him exceeded 
$120,000.  Removing the $22,817 places the loss at less than 
$120,000 but more than $70,000--an eight-level addition un-
der the applicable version of the Guidelines.  U.S.S.G. 
s 2B1.1(b)(1)(I) (1998).  Because the error affects the sen-
tencing range the court should have applied (reducing it from 
30-37 months to 27-33 months), the case will be remanded to 
the district court for resentencing.

                             * * * *

     Weaver's conviction and the denial of his motion for a new 
trial are affirmed.  The case is remanded for resentencing.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                       