                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 11, 2001     Decided August 13, 2002 

                           No. 01-7018

                        Ellen Waterhouse, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    District of Columbia and 
     Anthony A. Williams, Mayor of the District of Columbia, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv00241)

     Theodore M. Cooperstein argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for appellant.

     Mary E. Pivec argued the cause for appellees.  With her 
on the brief was Robert R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel.  
Jessica A. Valltos entered an appearance.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Alleging that she was unlawfully 
terminated because of her race, Ellen Waterhouse brought 
suit against her former employer, the District of Columbia, 
and her former supervisor, Mayor Anthony Williams.  The 
district court granted the defendants' motion for summary 
judgment, holding that Waterhouse failed to offer evidence 
upon which a reasonable jury could find that her termination 
was the result of discrimination.  We affirm.

                                I

     In March 1997, Ellen Waterhouse, a white female, began 
work as the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) for the District of 
Columbia's Department of Administrative Services (DAS).  
She was hired by Anthony Williams, who at the time was the 
Chief Financial Officer for the District.  She worked for him 
and was directly supervised by several members of his senior 
staff, including Norman Dong, Williams' Chief of Staff, Laura 
Triggs, the Associate Chief Financial Officer, and Earl Cab-
bell, one of Williams' Deputy CFOs.  Dong, Triggs, and 
Cabbell all participated in Waterhouse's hiring.

     DAS provides procurement and accounting services to the 
agencies that make up the District of Columbia government.  
As its CFO, Waterhouse was responsible for making pay-
ments to vendors who provide telecommunications, security, 
custodial, and other services to those agencies, and for man-
aging the process through which the agencies reimburse DAS 
for making those payments.  It was also her duty to oversee 
the preparation of year-end closing packages, which resolve 
any discrepancies between the amount of money each agency 
transferred to DAS during the preceding year and the 
amount DAS actually paid for the services used by that 
agency.  In addition, she was charged with preparing the 
DAS annual budget and with hiring, managing, and improving 
the DAS financial team.  As part of her job, Waterhouse was 

expected to make regular reports to Dong and Triggs con-
cerning the status of these projects.

     In late 1997, citing her failure to fulfill her job responsibili-
ties, Dong and Triggs recommended that Waterhouse be 
fired.  In January 1998, Williams terminated her employ-
ment.  Shortly thereafter, Waterhouse filed a charge of dis-
crimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission.  She received a right-to-sue letter, and subsequently 
brought suit against the District and Mayor Williams (in his 
official capacity) in the United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia.  In her complaint, Waterhouse alleged 
that the defendants had terminated her on the basis of race in 
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 
ss 2000e et seq.1

     After conducting discovery, the defendants moved for sum-
mary judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
56, contending that Waterhouse was fired because of her 
failure to fulfill her job responsibilities, and that there was no 
evidence upon which a reasonable jury could find that race, 
rather than her poor performance, was the cause of her 
termination.  As required by Local Civil Rule 7.1(h), the 
defendants filed a "Statement of Facts" that they contended 
were undisputed.  That statement documented evidence re-
lated to Waterhouse's performance problems.  In response, 
Waterhouse filed a "Verified Statement of Material Facts" 
that she contended were in dispute.2

__________
     1 Waterhouse also charged violations of 42 U.S.C. s 1981(b), 
which prohibits racial discrimination in "the making, performance, 
modification, and termination of contracts, and the enjoyment of all 
benefits, privileges, terms, and conditions of the contractual rela-
tionship."  She does not mention s 1981(b) on appeal, and, in any 
event, we analyze claims under both statutes using the same 
framework.  See Sparrow v. United Air Lines, Inc., 216 F.3d 1111, 
1114 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

     2 Rule 7.1(h) requires a party moving for summary judgment to 
provide a statement identifying the undisputed facts that entitle it 
to judgment as a matter of law, and directs the nonmoving party to 

     The district court reviewed these submissions and found 
that Waterhouse's statement, and the record material it ref-
erenced, failed to rebut "many of the facts set forth by defen-
dants concerning plaintiff's alleged failure to perform her 
work satisfactorily."  Waterhouse v. District of Columbia, 
124 F. Supp. 2d 1, 4-5 (D.D.C. 2000).  In accordance with 
Rule 7.1(h),3 the court treated as admitted all facts not con-
troverted by the plaintiff, and based on those facts concluded 
that Waterhouse could not establish that the reasons prof-
fered by the defendants were false.  Id. at 5, 7-11.  The 
court then considered additional evidence that Waterhouse 
contended demonstrated discrimination, including statements 
allegedly made by Williams and Dong.  It found that this 
evidence did not create a genuine dispute as to the defen-
dants' motivation for firing her.  Id. at 11-13.  Consequently, 
the court concluded that a reasonable jury could not find that 
Waterhouse's termination was motivated by a discriminatory 
animus, and therefore granted summary judgment for the de-
fendants.  Id. at 13.4

__________
respond with a statement listing the facts "as to which it is 
contended there exists a genuine issue necessary to be litigated."  
D.D.C. Local Civ. Rule 7.1(h).  The identical rule appears as Local 
Civil Rule 56.1.

     3 The rule states that "the court may assume that facts identified 
by the moving party in its statement of material facts are admitted, 
unless such a fact is controverted in the statement of genuine issues 
filed in opposition to the motion."  D.D.C. Local Civ. Rule 7.1(h).

     4 Waterhouse's complaint also claimed that the defendants sub-
jected her to a racially hostile work environment, and that they 
discriminated against her prior to her termination by giving her 
"less time, resources and support" than similarly situated African-
American employees.  Compl. p p  16, 22.  The district court granted 
summary judgment against Waterhouse on the hostile work envi-
ronment claim because she did not oppose the defendants' motion 
with respect to that claim.  124 F. Supp. 2d at 3.  It granted 
judgment on the second claim because she "set forth no evidence 
whatsoever that she received fewer resources than other non-white 
agency-based CFOs," and "failed to identify any similarly situated 
African-American CFO who was treated more favorably than she 

                                II

     We review the district court's decision to grant summary 
judgment de novo.  Breen v. Department of Transp., 282 
F.3d 839, 841 (D.C. Cir. 2002);  Aka v. Washington Hosp. 
Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 1288 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  In doing so, we 
must view the evidence in the light most favorable to Water-
house and draw all reasonable inferences in her favor.  
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., 530 U.S. 133, 152 
(2000);  Aka, 156 F.3d at 1288.

     A district court may grant summary judgment only if 
" 'there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and ... the 
moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.' "  
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247 (1986) 
(quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)).  A dispute about a material 
fact "is 'genuine' ... if the evidence is such that a reasonable 
jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party."  Id. at 
248.  A moving party is "entitled to judgment as a matter of 
law" against "a party who fails to make a showing sufficient 
to establish the existence of an element essential to that 
party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of 
proof at trial."  Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322 
(1986).

     Consistent with Local Civil Rule 7.1(h), in determining 
whether to grant summary judgment the district court looked 
only at the parties' statements and the record material they 
referenced.  See Jackson v. Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, 
Garrett & Dunner, 101 F.3d 145, 154 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (holding 
that the district court may rely on statements submitted in 
accordance with the local rule and "is under no obligation to 
sift through the record ... in order to evaluate the merits of 
[a] party's case").  We limit our review to those materials as 
well, and, like the district court, we treat as admitted all facts 
not controverted in Waterhouse's Verified Statement.  See 
SEC v. Banner Fund Int'l, 211 F.3d 602, 615 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  

__________
was."  Id. at 15.  Waterhouse does not challenge the dismissal of 
those claims on appeal.  See Appellant's Br. at 1.

Jackson, 101 F.3d at 154;  D.D.C. Local Civ. Rule 7.1(h).5

     Title VII makes it "an unlawful employment practice for an 
employer to ... discharge any individual ... because of such 
individual's race [or] color."  42 U.S.C. s 2000e-2(a).  The 
Supreme Court's opinion in McDonnell Douglas provides the 
familiar framework for analyzing Title VII claims that are 
based principally on circumstantial evidence.  McDonnell 
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-04 (1973);  see 
Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142.  Although "intermediate evidentiary 
burdens shift back and forth in this framework, 'the ultimate 
burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant 
intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all 
times with the plaintiff.' "  Id. at 143 (quoting Texas Dept. of 
Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981)).

     Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, "the plaintiff 
must [first] establish a prima facie case of discrimination."  
Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142 (citing St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. 
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 506 (1993)).  If the plaintiff establishes a 
prima facie case, the burden of production shifts to the 
defendant to " 'produc[e] evidence that the plaintiff was re-
jected ... for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.' "  Id. 
(quoting Burdine, 450 U.S. at 254).  If the defendant satisfies 
that burden, "the McDonnell Douglas framework--with its 
presumptions and burdens--disappear[s], and the sole re-
maining issue [i]s discrimination vel non."  Id. at 142-43 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).

     At that point, to survive summary judgment the plaintiff 
must show that a reasonable jury could conclude that she was 
terminated for a discriminatory reason.  See Aka, 156 F.3d at 
1290.  The question is:

__________
     5 The district court noted that the format of Waterhouse's Veri-
fied Statement was deficient in a number of respects.  124 F. Supp. 
2d at 4.  Waterhouse's appellate counsel disputed this and contend-
ed that the statement "did not actually violate" Rule 7.1(h), Appel-
lant's Reply Br. at 9, although he conceded at oral argument that 
the statement was not in "the ideal or exemplary format."  While 
we regard the district court's criticism of the statement as quite 
well founded, the point is moot since the court disregarded the 
statement's deficiencies and decided the summary judgment motion 
as if the statement were valid.

     whether the jury could infer discrimination from the 
     combination of (1) the plaintiff's prima facie case;  (2) any 
     evidence the plaintiff presents to attack the employer's 
     proffered explanation for its actions;  and (3) any further 
     evidence of discrimination that may be available to the 
     plaintiff (such as independent evidence of discriminatory 
     statements or attitudes on the part of the employer)....
     
Id. at 1289;  see Reeves, 530 U.S. at 151.  With respect to the 
second category of evidence, "the plaintiff may attempt to 
establish that he was the victim of intentional discrimination 
'by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is 
unworthy of credence.' "  Reeves, 530 U.S at 143 (quoting 
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256).  As the Supreme Court has 
explained, "[p]roof that the defendant's explanation is unwor-
thy of credence is simply one form of circumstantial evidence 
that is probative of intentional discrimination," because "in 
appropriate circumstances, the trier of fact can reasonably 
infer from the falsity of the explanation that the employer is 
dissembling to cover up a discriminatory purpose."  Id. at 
147.

                               III

     To establish her prima facie case, Waterhouse contended 
that she performed her job at an acceptable level, that she 
was discharged, and that a person of another race was hired 
in her stead.  See Waterhouse, 124 F. Supp. 2d at 5, 6-7.  
Although the defendants disputed that she performed at an 
acceptable level, the district court noted that inadequate 
performance was also the defendants' explanation for termi-
nating Waterhouse.  The court therefore announced that it 
would "assume that a prima facie case is established and 
proceed to analyze whether plaintiff has demonstrated that 
defendants' proffered reason is a pretext for discrimination."  
124 F. Supp. 2d at 7 (internal quotation marks and alteration 
omitted).

     The defendants do not challenge that approach on appeal.6  
Nor does Waterhouse dispute the district court's finding that 

__________
     6 See Fischbach v. District of Columbia Dep't of Corr., 86 F.3d 
1180, 1182 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("proceed[ing] directly to the second 

the defendants satisfied their burden of production by prof-
fering a legitimate reason for firing her, namely her poor job 
performance.  We therefore proceed directly to the final 
question:  did Waterhouse meet her "burden of showing that 
a reasonable jury could conclude that [she] had suffered 
discrimination"?  Aka, 156 F.3d at 1290.  As noted above, we 
consider three possible sources of evidence that, in combina-
tion, Waterhouse might have relied upon to meet that burden:  
(1) evidence she used to establish her prima facie case;  (2) 
evidence that the defendants' proffered explanation for her 
termination was false;  and (3) any additional evidence of 
discriminatory motive.  Id. at 1289;  see Reeves, 530 U.S. at 
151.

     The prima facie case that Waterhouse presented to get to 
the second step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis is particu-
larly weak support for a claim of intentional discrimination, as 
it was based on little more than an allegation that the 
defendants rebutted in the next step:  that she had adequate-
ly performed her responsibilities as CFO.  Accordingly, Wa-
terhouse does not dispute that her prima facie case adds little 
to the pile of evidence that she must accumulate to survive 
summary judgment.

     Nor did Waterhouse offer "sufficient evidence for a reason-
able factfinder to reject the employer's nondiscriminatory 
explanation for its decision."  Reeves, 530 U.S. at 140.  Ac-
cording to the defendants, Waterhouse was fired due to poor 
job performance.  The district court's thorough opinion dem-
onstrates that there was no genuine issue regarding Water-
house's failure to fulfill her basic job responsibilities, largely 

__________
step under McDonnell Douglas" where the defendant conceded that 
the plaintiff had "made out a prima facie case of discrimination");  
see also Mungin v. Katten Muchin & Zavis, 116 F.3d 1549, 1554 
(D.C. Cir. 1997) (noting that "[w]here the defendant has done 
everything that would be required of him if the plaintiff had 
properly made out a prima facie case, whether the plaintiff really 
did so is no longer relevant" (quoting U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of 
Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 715 (1983))).

because she failed to "dispute many, if not most, of the facts 
on which defendants rely to support their termination deci-
sion."  124 F. Supp. 2d at 7.  We highlight only a few 
examples.

     One of the primary reasons the defendants cited for Water-
house's termination was her delay in submitting DAS' Fiscal 
Year (FY) 1997 closing packages.  They asserted that, as part 
of the year-end closing process, Waterhouse was required to 
provide audit and financial information on or before Novem-
ber 30, 1997, and that she failed to meet that deadline as well 
as several interim deadlines.  Defs.' Stmt.p p  22-24, 32.  At 
her deposition, Waterhouse admitted that she missed the 
deadlines, Waterhouse Dep. Vol. II at 38-39, and she did not 
dispute that her delay had an adverse impact on other 
agencies, 124 F. Supp. 2d at 8 n.10 (citing Defs.' Stmt. p 22).  
She also did not dispute that Chief of Staff Dong, Associate 
CFO Triggs, and Deputy CFO Cabbell met with her on 
several occasions to express dissatisfaction with her progress 
in submitting the closing information.  Id. (citing Defs.' Stmt. 
p p  24, 32).7  Her only defense was that she was not solely 
responsible for the delay, and that she should have received 
greater support from outside contractors.  Pl.'s Verif. Stmt. 
at 16-17.

     The defendants also cited Waterhouse's failure to meet 
deadlines related to the budget formulation process.  Specifi-
cally, their Statement of Facts charged that in late 1997, the 
Deputy CFO of the Office of Budget and Planning reported 
to Williams that Waterhouse was late in providing his office 
with several reports necessary to prepare the FY 1999 budget 

__________
     7 Dong, Triggs, and Cabbell determined that it was necessary to 
assign employees from other departments to assist Waterhouse.  
Defs.' Stmt. p p  22-24.  Waterhouse did not dispute that one of those 
employees, Laura Braxton, reported that she found serious deficien-
cies in Waterhouse's management of the process, and that Water-
house's failure to submit timely and accurate FY 1997 closing 
packages had forced other district agencies to reopen their books 
and record budget deficiencies.  124 F. Supp. 2d at 8 n.10 (citing 
Defs.' Stmt. WW 25, 31).  Nor did she dispute that an outside 
contractor echoed Braxton's complaints.  Id.

for DAS.  He also told Williams that she did not have the 
financial expertise necessary to manage the budget process.  
Defs.' Stmt. p 27;  Williams Aff. p 18.  As the district court 
noted, Waterhouse did not contest these facts.  124 F. Supp. 
2d at 11 n.15.  Instead, she described an improved system 
she said she implemented for providing budgetary informa-
tion to the agencies served by DAS.  Pl.'s Verif. Stmt. at 13.

     The defendants further charged that Waterhouse failed to 
pay vendors on time.  Defs.' Stmt. p p  14-15.  Waterhouse did 
not take issue with this charge.  To the contrary, she ac-
knowledged during her deposition that she was late in making 
payments and that vendors complained to her superiors.  
Waterhouse Dep. Vol. I at 198-202.  In response to this 
charge, her Verified Statement merely asserted--without of-
fering any evidentiary support--that "most invoices" were not 
paid very late, and that she "made substantial progress 
toward improving her agency's timely payments to vendors."  
Pl.'s Verif. Stmt. at 7.  Waterhouse also contended that in 
some cases she did not make payments because she believed 
they were not authorized.  However, she admitted that she 
failed to make those payments even after she explained her 
rationale to her superiors and they directed her to make 
payment.  Id.;  Waterhouse Dep. Vol. I at 149-54.

     Finally, the defendants complained, and Waterhouse con-
ceded, that she failed to submit monthly status reports re-
quired by Dong and Triggs.  Defs.' Stmt. WW 17, 34;  see 
Waterhouse Dep. Vol. II at 30-31 (admitting that she failed 
on several occasions to submit the reports).  Waterhouse 
contended that this failure was not important because she 
kept her supervisors updated by other means.  Pl.'s Verif. 
Stmt. at 12.

     Because Waterhouse did not contravene--and in fact ad-
mitted--many of the deficiencies the defendants cited con-
cerning her performance, she failed to establish that her 
" 'employer's proffered explanation [was] unworthy of cre-
dence.' "  Reeves, 530 U.S. at 143 (quoting Burdine, 450 U.S. 
at 256).  At best, her responses constituted an argument that, 
notwithstanding those failings, the District should not have 
terminated her because there were extenuating circumstances 

and there were some positive attributes to her performance.  
But courts are without authority to " 'second-guess an em-
ployer's personnel decision absent demonstrably discriminato-
ry motive.' "  Fischbach v. District of Columbia Dep't of 
Corr., 86 F.3d 1180, 1182 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (quoting Milton v. 
Weinberger, 696 F.2d 94, 100 (D.C. Cir. 1982)).  And Water-
house's responses offered no grounds for a rational juror to 
conclude that the reason she was fired was racial discrimina-
tion rather than poor performance.  See Forman v. Small, 
271 F.3d 285, 291 (D.C. Cir. 2001) ("Consistent with the 
courts' reluctance to become involved in micromanagement of 
everyday employment decisions, the question before the court 
is limited to whether [plaintiff] produced sufficient evidence of 
... discrimination, not whether he was treated fairly...." 
(citations omitted));  Fischbach, 86 F.3d at 1183 (noting that 
to rebut the employer's nondiscriminatory explanation " '[i]t 
is not enough for the plaintiff to show that a reason given for 
a job action is not just, or fair, or sensible' " (quoting Pignato 
v. American Trans Air, Inc., 14 F.3d 342, 349 (7th Cir. 
1994))).8

     In a further attempt to undermine the defendants' explana-
tion for her termination, Waterhouse identified six "black 
managers" who she alleged were not terminated despite 
performance problems.  Pl.'s Verif. Stmt. at 19-20.  She did 
not allege, however, that even one had problems of the same 
magnitude cited by defendants in explaining their decision to 
fire her.  Indeed, as the district court found, Waterhouse's 
Verified Statement "provide[d] no evidence that these individ-
uals ... had individual performance problems [or] had perfor-
mance problems similar to hers."  124 F. Supp. 2d at 14.  In 
the absence of evidence that the comparators were actually 

__________
     8 Had Waterhouse been able to demonstrate, as she claimed in 
her complaint, that the reason she failed was that she was intention-
ally given "less time, resources and support" than similarly situated 
African-American employees, Compl. WW 16, 22, her responses would 
have been considerably more probative.  As noted above, however, 
the district court granted summary judgment on that claim because 
Waterhouse proffered "no evidence whatsoever" to support it, 124 
F. Supp. 2d at 15, and she has not challenged that decision on 
appeal.  See supra note 4.

similarly situated to her, this allegation added nothing to 
Waterhouse's claim that the defendants' explanation for her 
termination was mere pretext.  See McGill v. Munoz, 203 
F.3d 843, 848 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (holding that the plaintiff 
provided no evidence of pretext where she "offered no evi-
dence that employees with similarly suspicious patterns of 
absenteeism were treated any differently than she was");  
Neuren v. Adduci, Mastriani, Meeks & Schill, 43 F.3d 1507, 
1514 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (finding that the terminated employee 
failed to show that the retained employee had similar difficul-
ty in getting along with others in the firm).

     Having concluded that neither her prima facie case nor her 
evidence of pretext--either separately or in combination--
was sufficient to permit her case to go to a jury, we turn 
finally to the additional evidence of discriminatory intent 
proffered by Waterhouse.  For this, she relied primarily on 
two statements by her superiors, one by Anthony Williams 
and one by Norman Dong.

     With respect to Mayor Williams, Waterhouse cited a Wash-
ington Post article that quoted him as saying:  "One of the 
legacies I want to leave is that one of the finest run cities in 
the country was run by an African-American team and that is 
an important message."  Pl.'s Verif. Stmt. at 20, Exh. P.  As 
the district court pointed out, however, this statement was 
made in the context of a general discussion of Williams' 
commitment to challenging stereotypes with respect to his 
mayoral staff.  It was not made when he was District CFO;  
rather, it was made more than a year after he became Mayor 
and more than two years after Waterhouse was terminated.  
124 F. Supp. 2d at 11-12.9

__________
     9 Waterhouse further contends that Williams was quoted as de-
crying that "it was too white at the top in the beginning."  Appel-
lant's Br. at 25.  Her citation, however, is to the same Washington 
Post article, which attributes the quote not to Williams but to an 
anonymous "former staffer who is white," and suggests that it 
refers to the beginning of Williams' mayoral administration rather 
than of his service as District CFO.  Pl.'s Verif. Stmt., Exh. P.

     Waterhouse also pointed to a statement that Dong alleged-
ly made during a discussion of office hiring with Antonio 
Acevedo, who was Human Resources Director for the Office 
of the Chief Financial Officer.  According to Acevedo, Dong 
said that the District "had too many white managers al-
ready."  Pl.'s Verif. Stmt. at 18 (citing Acevedo Dep.).  The 
statement was made midway through Waterhouse's tenure, 
and its probative value was seriously undercut by the undis-
puted fact that Dong approved the decision to hire Water-
house earlier that same year.  Dong Aff. p 5.  See Grady v. 
Affiliated Cent., Inc., 130 F.3d 553, 560 (2d Cir. 1997) (affirm-
ing summary judgment and noting that "when the person 
who made the decision to fire was the same person who made 
the decision to hire, it is difficult to impute to her an invidious 
motivation that would be inconsistent with the decision to 
hire," especially "when the firing has occurred only a short 
time after the hiring");  Burhmaster v. Overnite Transp. Co., 
61 F.3d 461, 464 (6th Cir. 1995) ("An individual who is willing 
to hire and promote a person of a certain class is unlikely to 
fire them simply because they are a member of that class.").10  
Moreover, Dong was not the only one to complain of Water-
house's deficiencies or to recommend her termination.

     In short, in light of the circumstances in which they were 
made, the statements of Williams and Dong did not add 
enough to Waterhouse's proffered evidence to satisfy her 
"burden of showing that a reasonable jury could conclude" 
that she was terminated on account of her race.  Aka, 156 
F.3d at 1290.

                                IV

     For the foregoing reasons, we find that the defendants 
were entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  The district 
court's grant of summary judgment in their favor is therefore

                              Affirmed.

__________
     10 See also Williams v. Vitro Servs. Corp., 144 F.3d 1438, 1442 
(11th Cir. 1998);  Bradley v. Harcourt, Brace & Co., 104 F.3d 267, 
270-71 (9th Cir. 1996);  Brown v. CSC Logic, Inc., 82 F.3d 651, 658 
(5th Cir. 1996);  Evans v. Technologies Applications & Serv. Co., 80 
F.3d 954, 959 (4th Cir. 1996);  EEOC v. Our Lady of the Resurrec-
tion Med. Ctr., 77 F.3d 145, 152 (7th Cir. 1996).                                      