                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 26, 2001     Decided April 17, 2001 

                           No. 00-5094

          Borg-Warner Protective Services Corporation, 
                            Appellant


                                v.

            Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 
                             Appellee


          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (99cv00861)

     Priscilla L. Hapner argued the cause for appellant.  With 
her on the briefs were John M. Stephen and Thomas P. 
Steindler.

     Robert J. Gregory, Attorney, Equal Employment Opportu-
nity Commission, argued the cause for appellee.  On the brief 

were Philip B. Sklover, Associate General Counsel, and Geof-
fery L. J. Carter, Attorney.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph, and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Williams, with 
whom Circuit Judge Tatel joins.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Since 1991, Borg-Warner Pro-
tective Services Corporation has required its employees to 
sign, as a condition of employment, some form of an arbitra-
tion agreement or, as the company calls it, a "Pre-Dispute 
Resolution Agreement."  A typical version of the agreement 
provides that if the employee brings suit on an employment-
related claim, Borg-Warner may insist on arbitration pursu-
ant to the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. s 1 et seq., 
before a single arbitrator of "all matters directly or indirectly 
related" to the individual's recruitment, employment and ter-
mination, including "claims involving laws against discrimina-
tion ...."  The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
considers such agreements unenforceable in regard to claims 
arising under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and 
has spelled out its position in a "Policy Statement on Manda-
tory Binding Arbitration of Employment Disputes as a Condi-
tion of Employment" (July 10, 1997) ("Policy Statement").

     Borg-Warner brought this action against the EEOC in the 
district court seeking a declaratory judgment that its arbitra-
tion agreements were enforceable and that it had not violated 
Title VII by insisting that its employees sign such agree-
ments as a condition of their employment.  The company also 
sought an injunction, nationwide in scope, forbidding "the 
EEOC from issuing determinations to the contrary or attack-
ing the facial validity of arbitration agreement[s] through 
litigation."  According to the complaint, the events precipitat-
ing this action were as follows.  On December 10, 1998, Rudy 
Lee, a former Borg-Warner employee, filed a charge with the 
EEOC's Seattle, Washington, office alleging that Borg- 
Warner had discriminated against him on the basis of his 
race.  After an investigation, the EEOC found insufficient 

evidence to support the charge.  Although Lee had not 
complained about the arbitration agreement, the EEOC Dis-
trict Director issued a "determination," a finding that there 
was "reasonable cause" to believe a Title VII violation had 
occurred when Borg-Warner required Lee to sign the arbi-
tration agreement as a condition of employment.  The EEOC 
invited the company and Lee to engage in conciliation to 
"eliminate the alleged unlawful practices."  In a letter ad-
dressed to Borg-Warner, the EEOC asked the company to 
agree to cease using such agreements, and to provide notice 
to all employees that it had rescinded its policy favoring 
mandatory arbitration.  Borg-Warner refused and filed this 
action a few days later.

     On the EEOC's motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction, the district court held that the complaint did not 
arise under Title VII and so jurisdiction could not rest on 28 
U.S.C. s 1331, 28 U.S.C. s 1337 or 28 U.S.C. s 1343.  Borg-
Warner Protective Services Corp. v. EEOC, 81 F. Supp. 2d 
20, 24-25 (D.D.C. 2000).  The court found nothing in Title VII 
to give an employer a cause of action against the EEOC.  Id. 
Borg-Warner could not invoke the Administrative Procedure 
Act, the court held, because neither the EEOC's Policy 
Statement nor its determination in the Lee case constituted 
"final" agency action.  Id. at 26-28.  The determination was 
merely tentative and interlocutory.  The Policy Statement did 
not finally fix any obligation on the part of Borg-Warner.  As 
to the company's request for a declaratory judgment, the 
court held that although it had subject matter jurisdiction, 
Borg-Warner lacked standing because the company has not 
alleged injury that could "be redressed by a favorable deci-
sion."  Id. at 29.

                                I.

     We have no doubt the district court had subject matter 
jurisdiction over Borg-Warner's complaint under 28 U.S.C. 
s 1331:  "The district courts shall have original jurisdiction of 
all civil actions arising under the Constitution, laws, or trea-
ties of the United States."  This means, as Professor Mishkin 
put it in his classic article, that "the plaintiff must be contend-

ing that a federally ordained rule specifically creates his 
cause of action."  Paul J. Mishkin, The Federal Question in 
the District Courts, 53 Colum. L. Rev. 157, 164 (1953).  "Any 
national source," he added, "will suffice...."  Id.  Or as 
Justice Holmes wrote in American Well Water Works Co. v. 
Layne & Bowler Co., 241 U.S. 257, 260 (1916), a "suit arises 
under the law that creates the cause of action."  These 
formulations scarcely exhaust the definitions of federal ques-
tion jurisdiction, see Franchise Tax Board of California v. 
Construction Laborers Vacation Trust, 463 U.S. 1, 8-9 (1983), 
but they are surely at the heart of the matter.

     Borg-Warner's complaint "arises under" federal law in the 
following respects.  The company alleges a cause of action 
based on the Administrative Procedure Act:  it contends that 
the APA entitles it to judicial review of the EEOC's Policy 
Statement and the EEOC's determination that Lee had a 
right to sue for a violation of Title VII.  Both the APA and 
Title VII are federal laws, and so the claims satisfy the 
"arising under" requirement.  It is of no moment whether 
Borg-Warner's claims are meritless or would eventually fail.  
A claim does not have to be a good one for the court to have 
subject matter jurisdiction over it.  See, e.g., Bell v. Hood, 327 
U.S. 678 (1946).  Borg-Warner's request for a declaratory 
judgment also arises under federal law.  "Federal courts have 
regularly taken original jurisdiction over declaratory judg-
ment suits in which, if the declaratory judgment defendant 
[here the EEOC] brought a coercive action to enforce its 
rights, that suit would necessarily present a federal question."  
Franchise Tax Bd., 463 U.S. at 19.

                               II.

     Subject matter jurisdiction is one thing.  Ripeness, stand-
ing, justiciability and the like, all of which the district court 
invoked in dismissing the complaint, are quite another.  To 
put matters into perspective, we need to take stock of the 
state of the law regarding arbitration agreements and Title 
VII.

     The EEOC has been waging a losing battle in its efforts to 
convince the courts that agreements like Borg-Warner's can-
not be enforced to require employees to arbitrate Title VII 
claims.  Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., 500 U.S. 
20 (1991), held that an employer could compel an employee to 
arbitrate his claim that the employer had violated the Age 
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), 29 U.S.C. s 621 
et seq.  The Supreme Court considered and rejected Gilmer's 
contention that compulsory arbitration of an ADEA claim is 
inconsistent with that statute.  However, because Gilmer's 
arbitration agreement was contained in his application to the 
New York Stock Exchange to become a registered securities 
representative, the Court reserved the question whether a 
compulsory arbitration clause found in an employment con-
tract would be enforceable.  500 U.S. at 25 n.2.  Shortly after 
Gilmer, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1991, Pub. L. 
No. 102-166, 105 Stat. 1071, s 118 of which stated that 
"[w]here appropriate and to the extent authorized by law, the 
use of alternative means of dispute resolution, including ... 
arbitration, is encouraged to resolve disputes arising under" 
Title VII.  105 Stat. 1081 (reprinted in notes to 42 U.S.C. 
s 1981).

     In Cole v. Burns International Security Services, Inc., 105 
F.3d 1465 (D.C. Cir. 1997), we relied on Gilmer to affirm a 
district court order dismissing an employee's Title VII action 
and compelling the employee to arbitrate with his employer 
pursuant to a compulsory arbitration agreement.  Burns In-
ternational Security Services, the prevailing party in Cole, is 
the parent corporation of Borg-Warner and Borg-Warner's 
arbitration agreements are about the same as the one we held 
enforceable in Cole.

     Therefore, if the district court were to grant the relief 
Borg-Warner seeks in this case the company would gain 
nothing in the District of Columbia.  Our decision in Cole 
already rejected the EEOC's position.  A declaratory judg-
ment saying as much would be redundant.  An injunction 
against the EEOC (assuming one were proper) is entirely 
unnecessary.  As far as this jurisdiction is concerned, Borg-
Warner is therefore suffering no injury for which it is entitled 

to redress.  Nor is Borg-Warner suffering any conceivable 
injury in the First Circuit, the Second Circuit, the Third 
Circuit, the Fourth Circuit, the Fifth Circuit, the Sixth Cir-
cuit, the Seventh Circuit, the Eighth Circuit, the Tenth 
Circuit, or the Eleventh Circuit, all of which have also reject-
ed the EEOC's position.  Rosenberg v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, 
Fenner & Smith, Inc., 163 F.3d 53 (1st Cir. 1998);  Desidero 
v. National Ass'n of Securities Dealers, Inc., 181 F.3d 198 (2d 
Cir. 1999);  Seus v. John Nuveen & Co., 146 F.3d 175, 182 (3d 
Cir. 1998);  Austin v. Owens-Brockway Glass Container, Inc., 
78 F.3d 875 (4th Cir. 1996);  Alford v. Dean Witter Reynolds, 
Inc., 939 F.2d 229 (5th Cir. 1991);  Willis v. Dean Witter 
Reynolds, Inc., 948 F.2d 305 (6th Cir. 1991);  Koveleskie v. 
SBC Capital Markets, Inc., 167 F.3d 361 (7th Cir. 1999);  
Patterson v. Tenet Healthcare, Inc., 113 F.3d 832 (8th Cir. 
1997);  Metz v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc., 
39 F.3d 1482 (10th Cir. 1994);  Bender v. A.G. Edwards & 
Sons, Inc., 971 F.2d 698 (11th Cir. 1992).  Each of those 
courts of appeals agrees with us that Title VII claims may be 
subject to mandatory arbitration.1

     The Supreme Court's decision in Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. 
Adams, 2001 WL 273205 (Mar. 21, 2001), adds to the weight 
of these precedents.  The Court held that s 1 of the Federal 
Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. s 1, did not exempt contracts of 
employment except those involving transportation workers, a 
position we had reached in Cole, which the Court cited.  Id. at 
*3.  As to statutory claims, the Court reiterated "that arbi-
tration agreements can be enforced under the FAA without 
contravening the policies of congressional enactments giving 
employees specific protection against discrimination prohibit-
ed by federal law...."  Id. at *10.  Not only does that broad 
statement encompass Title VII and all other federal laws 

__________
     1 Even if any one of these court of appeals had not ruled on this 
question, the Policy Statement still would have no effect on Borg-
Warner in that particular jurisdiction.  The existence (or non-
existence) of the Policy Statement does not affect the EEOC's 
ability to file an amicus brief arguing the same position.  In fact, if 
we credit the EEOC's representation about how it litigates this 
issue, its amicus briefs hardly even mention the Policy Statement.

forbidding discrimination, but also the arbitration agreement 
in Circuit City Stores expressly stated that Title VII disputes 
were subject to mandatory arbitration.

     The Ninth Circuit is the only court of appeals to hold that 
Title VII disputes cannot be made subject to compulsory 
arbitration agreements.  See Duffield v. Robertson Stephens 
& Co., 144 F.3d 1182 (9th Cir. 1998).  We cannot say whether 
the Ninth Circuit will continue to adhere to Duffield in the 
face of the Supreme Court's Circuit City decision (which 
overruled another Ninth Circuit case).  We do know that 
although the EEOC maintained in its "determination" in the 
Lee case that requiring employees to sign an agreement to 
arbitrate future Title VII claims was itself a violation of Title 
VII, Duffield does not so hold.  Duffield ruled only that such 
agreements are "unenforceable" with respect to Title VII 
claims.  144 F.3d at 1199.

                                A.

     Borg-Warner's first claim, set out as Count I of its com-
plaint, alleges that the EEOC's determination letter to Lee--
stating that there was reasonable cause to believe that Borg-
Warner was violating Title VII in requiring employees to sign 
the arbitration agreement--exceeded its authority under Title 
VII.  (The EEOC's Policy Statement does not take the 
position that requiring employees to sign the agreement is 
itself a violation of Title VII;  as in Duffield, it states only 
that such agreements are unenforceable with respect to Title 
VII claims. Policy Statement at 3101, 3106.)  This portion of 
Borg-Warner's complaint fails, the district court ruled, be-
cause the determination is merely interlocutory and not final.  
Borg-Warner, 81 F. Supp. 2d at 26.

     The court relied upon Georator Corp. v. EEOC, 592 F.2d 
765, 767 (4th Cir. 1979), which held that an EEOC determina-
tion of reasonable cause is not "final agency action" because 
"standing alone, it is lifeless and can fix no obligation nor 
impose any liability on the plaintiff."  A Supreme Court 
opinion, which the parties failed to mention, adds further 
support to the court's ruling.  Federal Trade Commission v. 

Standard Oil, 449 U.S. 232 (1980), held that the FTC's 
determination that there was reasonable cause to believe the 
company was violating the pertinent statute and its later 
issuance of an administrative complaint did not constitute 
final agency action within the meaning of s 704 of the APA.  
"It represents a threshold determination that further inquiry 
is warranted and that a complaint should initiate proceed-
ings."  Id. at 241.  If the FTC's complaint in Standard Oil 
"had no legal force or practical effect upon [the company's] 
daily business other than the disruptions that accompany any 
major litigation," id. at 243, the EEOC's determination in the 
matter of Lee had even less effect.  At least the complaint in 
Standard Oil served "to initiate the proceedings," id. at 242.  
The EEOC's determination is even further removed:  rather 
than initiating proceedings, it merely informed Lee that he 
had a right to bring a complaint.  While there may be other 
reasons for rejecting this portion of Borg-Warner's com-
plaint, it is perfectly clear that the EEOC's determination is 
not final agency action.  That is enough to sustain the district 
court's judgment.

                                B.

     As to Borg-Warner's alleged cause of action under the 
APA to review the EEOC's Policy Statement, we will assume 
that the Policy Statement is a "rule" within the meaning of 5 
U.S.C. s 551(13) and we will also assume that it represents 
the EEOC's "final" position regarding arbitration of Title VII 
claims--that, in other words, it constitutes "final agency 
action."  5 U.S.C. s 704;  Bennet v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154 
(1997). Even so, Borg-Warner still must establish that it is 
"aggrieved" by the EEOC's policy position.  See 5 U.S.C. 
s 702.

     The EEOC's Policy Statement carries no special weight in 
the courts:  if it has any force, it is derived from the power of 
the EEOC's reasoning to persuade.  Christensen v. Harris 
Co., 529 U.S. 576, 587 (2000) (quoting Skidmore v. Swift & 
Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944)). The EEOC tells us that in its 
amicus briefs it therefore pays scant attention to its Policy 

Statement;  its efforts are devoted to mounting arguments 
that, it hopes, will convince.  What injury then is the Policy 
Statement inflicting on Borg-Warner?  As we have written, 
in the District of Columbia and in the geographic areas 
covered by all the circuits except the Ninth, the answer is 
none.

     Borg-Warner seems to recognize as much, which is why it 
wants us to concentrate our attention on the state of affairs in 
the Ninth Circuit.  But even in the Ninth Circuit, Borg-
Warner's problem is not with the EEOC's Policy Statement.  
It is with Duffield.  The only plausible harm to the company 
consists in its inability to enforce its arbitration agreements 
with its employees who are working within the geographical 
limits of the Ninth Circuit.  But that harm is not being 
caused by the EEOC's Policy Statement.  It results directly 
from the Duffield decision.

     Borg-Warner claims that as "a result of the Policy ..., 
[Borg-Warner] can be subjected to stiffer legal and monetary 
penalties in future litigation challenging the Agreement since 
both the Policy and Determination may be admissible to show 
that [its] use of the Agreement is unlawful and utilized with 
reckless indifference to the law."  We think this is much too 
speculative.  The Policy Statement does not declare--as did 
the EEOC's determination in the Lee case--that having 
employees sign such agreements itself violates Title VII.  
The Policy Statement instead concludes that agreements 
compelling arbitration of Title VII claims are "inconsistent" 
with or "contrary to" Title VII.  See Policy Statement 
("agreements that mandate binding arbitration of discrimina-
tion claims as a condition of employment are contrary to the 
fundamental principles evinced in these laws") ("the Commis-
sion believes that such agreements are inconsistent with the 
civil rights laws") ("the Commission will continue to challenge 
the legality of specific agreements").  At oral argument, the 
EEOC's attorney said that the Commission carefully worded 
its Policy Statement so that it did not maintain that an 
employer violates Title VII by conditioning employment on 
the employee's signing of an agreement to arbitrate.  All the 
Policy Statement was intended to convey, he added, was the 

EEOC's view that such agreements are unenforceable.2  
Even if the Policy Statement treated arbitration agreements 
as "illegal" that would not support Borg-Warner's argument.  
To say that an agreement is illegal is not to say that 
employers who require employees to sign the agreements as 
a condition of employment are guilty of violating Title VII.  
Calling an unenforceable agreement "illegal" is "misleading 
insofar as it suggests that some penalty is necessarily im-
posed on one of the parties, apart from the court's refusal to 
enforce the agreement.  In some cases, the conduct that 
renders the agreement unenforceable is a crime, but this is 
not necessarily or even usually so."  E. Allan Farnsworth, 
Contracts s 5.1 (2d ed. 1990).

     Even Duffield does not say that companies requiring em-
ployees to sign arbitration agreements are guilty of violating 
Title VII.  Although the Duffield court refused, with respect 
to Title VII claims, to enforce a general arbitration agree-
ment, the court enforced the same agreement in regard to 
state law claims.  See 144 F.3d at 1203.  In the face of that 
ruling, we cannot see how an employer exposes itself to 

__________
     2 We credit counsel's statement of how the EEOC views its Policy 
Statement.  After oral argument, the EEOC supplied us with some 
of its filings in EEOC v. Luce, Forward, Hamilton & Scripps, LLP, 
122 F. Supp. 2d 1080 (C.D. Cal. 2000), a case now on appeal to the 
Ninth Circuit.  Invoking res judicata, the district court there 
rejected the EEOC's argument for punitive damages.  Two items 
are of note.  First, in support of the claim for punitive damages the 
EEOC cited its Policy Statement, stating that it put employers "on 
notice regarding the EEOC's position concerning most discrimina-
tion issues." Plaintiff's Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Sum-
mary Judgment, at 15.  This statement does not contradict the 
representation made by the EEOC's counsel at oral argument in 
this case.  The question we have been considering is what position 
the EEOC did express in the Policy Statement.  Second, the 
district court enjoined the employer in Luce from requiring pro-
spective employees to sign mandatory arbitration agreements re-
garding Title VII claims.  In doing so the court did not cite the 
Policy Statement.  It cited only Duffield.  122 F. Supp. 2d at 1093.  
Whether the court correctly interpreted the Ninth Circuit's opinion 
remains to be seen.

punitive damages by having employees sign such an agree-
ment.  Furthermore, the notion that Borg-Warner could be 
held liable in punitive damages for insisting upon an arbitra-
tion agreement in the face of the Supreme Court's Circuit 
City opinion and the decisions of eleven courts of appeals 
upholding such agreements is, we think, far-fetched.  (The 
California Supreme Court, observing that the Ninth Circuit 
was in "minority of one," also rejected Duffield and indicated 
that Title VII claims may be subject to mandatory arbitration 
agreements.  Armendariz v. Foundation Health Psychare 
Servs., Inc., 6 P.3d 669, 677 (Cal. 2000).)

     The short of the matter is that Borg-Warner is not ag-
grieved by the existence of the EEOC's Policy Statement.  It 
is not suffering any legally cognizable injury from the Policy 
Statement, and for that reason the district court properly 
dismissed its complaint.  Given this disposition, we do not 
address any questions of comity between this circuit and the 
Ninth, or the propriety of a federal court in the District of 
Columbia enjoining the EEOC from adhering to a litigating 
position in the Ninth Circuit that the court of appeals for that 
circuit has sustained.

                                                                 Affirmed.

     Williams, Circuit Judge, with whom Circuit Judge Tatel 
joins, concurring:  Because the EEOC's use of its Policy 
Statement appears more complicated than stated above, I 
write separately.

     The Policy Statement may not explicitly state that employ-
ment contracts requiring arbitration of discrimination claims 
violate Title VII, but the EEOC apparently believes that it 
could honestly be read to that effect.  The EEOC has cited it 
in at least one brief in support of precisely that argument.  In 
October 2000 the EEOC submitted a brief in the Central 
District of California that expressly asks the court for puni-
tive damages because the defendant allegedly "unlawfully 
retaliated against Mr. Lagatree [an applicant for employ-
ment] by denying him employment ... based on his refusal to 
sign an employment agreement compelling mandatory arbi-
tration of future claims of employment discrimination ..., in 
violation of Title VII."  EEOC v. Luce, Forward, Hamilton & 
Scripps, LLP, No. 00-1322 at 2 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 23, 2000) 
(plaintiff's opposition to defendant's motion for summary 
judgment) (submitted under Circuit Rule 28(j)).  In the sec-
tion specifically addressing punitive damages, the brief states:

     [I]t is also important to note that the EEOC had publish-
     ed a Policy Statement on July 10, 1997, two months 
     before Luce terminated Mr. Lagatree, on "Mandatory 
     Arbitration of Employment Disputes as a Condition of 
     Employment", which concluded that these unilateral 
     agreements harms [sic] both the individual civil rights 
     claimant and the public interest in eradicating discrimi-
     nation.  These policy statements put employers on notice 
     regarding the EEOC's position concerning most discrimi-
     nation issues.
     
Id. at 15.  Although the EEOC did not explicitly say in its 
brief that the Policy Statement concludes that these agree-
ments violate Title VII, its citation to the Policy Statement--

in an argument supporting the imposition of punitive damages 
on an employer who insisted on such agreements--must 
mean that the EEOC briefwriter believed that competent 
judges could be persuaded to believe that it reached that 
conclusion.1

     As the preceding opinion notes, however, EEOC counsel 
before us took a quite different position--one that we believe 
is better supported by the Policy Statement's language.  He 
declared, "This agreement [referring to the Policy Statement] 
does not purport to do that [make an assertion of illegality], 
and I hope it doesn't do that."  Tr. at 31.  Indeed, he said 
that the Policy Statement "was vetted very carefully to make 
sure that it didn't say it [an employer's insistence on an 
arbitration agreement] was illegal under Title VII."  Id. at 
28.

     Because the formulation of the Commission's position be-
fore a court of appeals is a more material commitment than 
the filing of a district court brief, and counsel certainly did 
not file a corrective letter despite the panel's prolonged 
interrogation on the issue, it seems reasonable to take the 
EEOC's position before us as its true position, a proposition 
helpful, though not necessarily essential, to the ultimate 
judgment here.

1  Although the district court rejected EEOC's argument for 
punitive damages because of res judicata, the court declined to 
interpret Duffield as holding "only that mandatory arbitration 
agreements are unenforceable" and held that injunctive relief was 
appropriate because requiring employees to enter into mandatory 
arbitration agreements is "unlawful under Title VII."  EEOC v. 
Luce, Forward, Hamilton & Scripps, LLP, 122 F. Supp. 2d 1080, 
1091, 1093 (C.D. Cal. 2000).

                                                                         