                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued February 4, 2002    Decided July 2, 2002 

                      Nos. 01-1070 & 01-1158

                     Sierra Club, Petitioner

                                v.

               Environmental Protection Agency and 
              Christine Todd Whitman, Administrator 
                           Respondents

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     David S. Baron argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs was Howard I. Fox.

     Martin F. McDermott, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the brief 
were John C. Cruden, Assistant Attorney General, and Sara 
Schneeberg, Attorney, U.S. Environmental Protection Agen-
cy.  David A. Carson, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
entered an appearance.

     Thurbert E. Baker, Attorney General, State of Georgia, 
Patricia T. Barmeyer, Special Assistant Attorney General, 
Jeremiah W. (Jay) Nixon, Attorney General, State of Mis-
souri, James R. Layton, Solicitor, James E. Ryan, Attorney 
General, State of Illinois, A. Benjamin Goldgar, Assistant 
Attorney General, and Donald Trahan were on the brief for 
amici curiae State of Georgia, et al., in support of respon-
dent.  Katherine L. Rhyne entered an appearance.

     Randolph A. Beales, Attorney General, Commonwealth of 
Virginia, Roger L. Chaffe, Senior Assistant Attorney General, 
and Carl Josephson, Assistant Attorney General, were on the 
brief for amicus curiae Commonwealth of Virginia, in support 
of respondent.

     Albert M. Ferlo, Jr., Sheila D. Jones, and John J. Bosley 
were on the brief for amicus curiae Metropolitan Washington 
Air Quality Committee, in support of respondent.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  The Sierra Club petitions for re-
view of a decision by the Environmental Protection Agency 
approving revisions to the state implementation plans for 
ozone in the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area.  The Club 
contends the EPA was without authority to approve revised 
SIPs that extend the Area's deadline for attainment and do 
not provide for the States concerned to adopt reasonably 
available control measures, annual rates of progress in reduc-
ing emissions, and specific contingency measures to take 
effect should the Area fail to achieve scheduled reductions in 
emissions.

     We hold that the EPA exceeded its authority and that its 
decision is otherwise arbitrary and capricious in the above 
respects.  Therefore, we grant the petition and remand this 
matter to the EPA for further proceedings.

                          I. Background

     Section 109 of the Clean Air Act directs the EPA to 
promulgate National Ambient Air Quality Standards 

(NAAQS) for ozone, see 42 U.S.C. s 7409, and Title V of the 
Act delegates to the states primary responsibility for imple-
menting those standards, see id. ss 7407, 7410.  A state 
discharges this responsibility by developing and enacting a 
state implementation plan (SIP) that provides for "implemen-
tation, maintenance, and enforcement" of the standards in 
each "air quality control region" within its jurisdiction, sub-
ject to the EPA's approval and supervision.  Id. s 7410(a)(1).

     If an area "does not meet the NAAQS or it contributes to 
ambient air quality in a nearby area that does not meet the 
NAAQS," then the EPA designates the area as one of "nonat-
tainment," id. s 7407(d)(1)(A), and classifies the degree of 
nonattainment in the area as marginal, moderate, serious, 
severe, or extreme, see id. s 7511(a), (b)(2).  This classifica-
tion determines both the date by which the area must attain 
the NAAQS and the stringency of the measures that the area 
must implement in the meantime to reduce emissions of 
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and oxides of nitrogen 
(NOx), both of which are the precursors of ozone.  See id. 
s 7511(a).

     All states were required to revise their SIPs to bring any 
areas of "serious" nonattainment into attainment "as expedi-
tiously as practicable but not later than" November 15, 1999.  
Id. ss 7511(a)(1), 7511a(c)(2)(A).  The Act specifies that a 
revised SIP must contain certain elements, including:  "the 
implementation of all reasonably available control measures 
[RACM]," id. s 7502(c)(1);  annual demonstrations of "reason-
able further progress," id. s 7502(c)(2), defined--with an 
exception not here relevant--as a reduction in the emission of 
VOCs at a rate of "at least 3 percent of baseline emissions 
each year," id. s 7511a(c)(2)(B)(i);  and contingency measures 
"to be undertaken if the area fails to make reasonable further 
progress, or to attain" the NAAQS by November 15, 1999, id. 
s 7502(c)(9).  The states were required to submit the revised 
SIPs to the EPA for approval, which the Agency was re-
quired to grant if the "revision [met] all the requirements ... 
[and] would be adequate to attain and maintain the [NAAQS] 
by the attainment date specified."  Id. s 7509a(a)(1), (2).

     An area of serious nonattainment that failed to reach 
attainment by the deadline was to be reclassified by operation 
of law to "severe" nonattainment status.  See id. 
s 7511(b)(2)(i).  The deadline for attainment would then be 
extended until November 15, 2005, see id. s 7511(a)(1), but 
the area would be required again to revise its SIP to imple-
ment still more rigorous programs for monitoring and reduc-
ing emissions, see id. s 7511(b)(2)(A)(i).

     The Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area comprises the 
District of Columbia and several counties each in Maryland 
and Virginia.  In 1991 the EPA declared the Washington 
Area to be in "serious" nonattainment of the NAAQS for 
ozone.  See Designation of Areas for Air Quality Planning 
Purposes, 56 Fed. Reg. 56,694, 56,738, 56,772, 56,841 (Nov. 6, 
1991) (codified respectively at 40 C.F.R. ss 81.309, .321, .347 
(2002)).  In response, the District of Columbia Department of 
Health, the Maryland Department of the Environment, and 
the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (hereinaf-
ter referred to as "the States") submitted nonattainment 
SIPs for the Washington Area, see Approval & Promulgation 
of Air Quality Implementation Plans, 66 Fed. Reg. 586 (Jan. 
3, 2001) (Approval), pursuant to section 172(b) of the Act, 42 
U.S.C. s 7502(b).

     The three proposed SIPs did not provide for attainment by 
November 15, 1999.  See Proposed Rule, Approval & Promul-
gation of Air Quality Implementation Plans, 64 Fed. Reg. 
70,460, 70,476-77 (Dec. 16, 1999) (Proposed Approval).  In-
stead, the States requested that the EPA extend the attain-
ment deadline for the Washington Area until November 15, 
2005 without reclassifying as "severe" the nonattainment 
status of the Area.  See id.  The EPA previously had recog-
nized that for certain "downwind areas, transport [of ozone] 
from upwind areas ha[d] interfered with their ability to 
demonstrate attainment" by the deadlines established in the 
Act.  Extension of Attainment Dates for Downwind Trans-
port Areas, 64 Fed. Reg. 14,441, 14,442  (Mar. 25, 1999).  As a 
result, according to the EPA, many downwind areas "fac[ed] 
the prospect of being reclassified ... to a higher nonattain-
ment classification in spite of the fact that pollution that is 

beyond their control contributes to the levels of ozone they 
experience."  Id.  With this in mind, the Agency granted the 
States' request for an extension, see Approval, 66 Fed. Reg. 
at 630-31, determining that the transport of ozone and its 
precursors into the Washington Area could delay the date by 
which the Area would reach attainment, id.

     The States did not propose in their revised SIPs to adopt 
any RACM, and the EPA concluded that none was warranted 
because "additional emission control measures would not ad-
vance the attainment date."  Id. at 608/1.  Nor did the 
revised SIPs provide for annual rates of progress (ROP) in 
reducing emissions for the years after 1999, see id. at 603;  or 
for any contingency measures "to make up for any emission 
reduction shortfall, either in achievement of ROP milestones 
or for failure to attain" the NAAQS, see id. at 615/2.  The 
EPA determined that these omissions, too, were warranted.  
It deemed the ROP requirement "unreasonable" in light of 
the transport of ozone into the Washington Area, id. at 603/2, 
and it held that contingency measures are not mandatory 
elements of a SIP revision that establishes the attainment 
deadline and ROP for an area, see id. at 615/3.  Consequent-
ly, the Agency approved the revised SIPs.

     The Sierra Club now petitions for review of that decision.  
Amicus briefs have been filed by the Metropolitan Washing-
ton Air Quality Committee, the State of Virginia, and the 
States of Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, and Missouri, all in 
support of the EPA's decision approving the revised SIPs.

                           II. Analysis

     The Sierra Club claims that the Approval is unlawful for 
four reasons:  (1) the EPA had no authority to extend the 
attainment deadline for the Washington Area;  (2) the EPA 
applied an unreasonable standard for determining whether a 
control measure is "reasonably available" for purposes of 
s 172(c)(2) of the Act;  (3) the Act prohibits the EPA from 
approving a SIP that does not provide for ROP reductions;  
and (4) the Act prohibits the EPA from approving a SIP that 
does not include contingency measures.

     We review the EPA's interpretation of the Clean Air Act 
under the standards set out in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. 
Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  If the 
Congress "has directly spoken to the precise question at 
issue," id. at 842, then we must "give effect to [its] unambigu-
ously expressed intent," id. at 843.  If, however, the intent of 
the Congress is ambiguous with respect to the question 
before us, then we defer to the Agency's interpretation if it is 
"based on a permissible construction of the statute."  Id.

A.   Extension of the Attainment Deadline

     We agree with the Sierra Club that the plain terms of the 
Act preclude an extension of the sort the EPA granted here.  
Pursuant to s 181(a)(1), 42 U.S.C. s 7511(a)(1), "each" area of 
"serious" nonattainment was required to meet the NAAQS by 
November 15, 1999.  That deadline could be extended in 
certain limited circumstances or when an area was reclassi-
fied as one of "severe" nonattainment.  Id. s 7511(b)(2)(i), (3).  
In this case, the EPA neither determined that the Washing-
ton Area fit those limited circumstances nor acknowledged 
that the Area was reclassified as "severe."

     The EPA characterizes the issue before the court as fol-
lows:  "whether an attainment date extension is available 
without an accompanying reclassification to 'severe' nonat-
tainment status where the Washington area's ability to attain 
has been demonstrably compromised by upwind emissions 
outside its control."  Fair enough, but as the Sierra Club 
points out, the Act details the conditions in which the EPA 
may extend the attainment deadline, without reclassification, 
to account for upwind emissions that compromise an area's 
ability to come into attainment, and none of them is implicat-
ed here.  For example, the Act exempts from the attainment 
deadlines any area that would be in attainment "but for 
emissions emanating from outside of the United States," 42 
U.S.C. s 7509a(b);  and "an[y] ozone nonattainment area that 
does not include, and is not adjacent to, any part of a 
Metropolitan Statistical Area," id. s 7511a(h)(1), provided the 
"emissions within the area do not make a significant contribu-
tion to the ozone concentrations measured in the area or in 

other areas," id. s 7511a(h)(2).  We cannot but infer from the 
presence of these specific exemptions that the absence of any 
other exemption for the transport of ozone was deliberate, 
and that the Agency's attempt to grant such a dispensation is 
contrary to the intent of the Congress.

     The EPA also contends the Approval "falls within this 
Court's parameters for when it will look beyond a 'literal' 
reading of a statute," but the Agency does not show that this 
is one of those "rare cases [in which] the literal application of 
a statute will produce a result demonstrably at odds with the 
intentions of its drafters."  Engine Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 88 
F.3d 1075, 1088 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Because our "role is not to 
'correct' the text so that it better serves the statute's pur-
poses," id., we will not "ratify an interpretation that abro-
gates the enacted statutory text absent an extraordinarily 
convincing justification," Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 249 
F.3d 1032, 1041 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  Here the EPA asserts that 
"[a]s a matter of 'logic and statutory structure,' Congress 
'almost surely' could not have meant to require" the Agency 
to treat the Washington Area as one of severe nonattainment 
merely because its "attainment has been temporarily stalled 
due to transported pollution."  This assurance does nothing 
to persuade us that, although s 181(a)(1), 42 U.S.C. 
s 7511(a)(1), as written sets a deadline without an exception 
for setbacks owing to ozone transport, "all the other evidence 
from the statute points the other way," United States Nat'l 
Bank of Oregon v. Indep. Ins. Agents of Am., Inc., 508 U.S. 
439, 455 (1993);  see also Engine Mfrs., 88 F.3d at 1088 
("there must be evidence that Congress meant something 
other than what it literally said before a court can depart 
from plain meaning").

     We reject also the EPA's argument that we must accept its 
interpretation of the Act in order to give effect to the 
"broader congressional intent not to punish downwind areas 
affected by ozone transport."  The most reliable guide to 
congressional intent is the legislation the Congress enacted 
and, as we have seen, the Act itself reveals no intention to 
allow for an extension in circumstances like those affecting 
the Washington Area.  Similarly, it is of no moment that the 

extension may be, as the Agency claims, "a reasonable accom-
modation of ... the statutory attainment date and interstate 
transport provisions";  it is not the accommodation the Con-
gress made.  An agency may not disregard "the Congression-
al intent clearly expressed in the text simply by asserting 
that its preferred approach would be better policy."  Engine 
Mfrs., 88 F.3d at 1089.

     Finally, the EPA argues that our decision in Natural Res. 
Def. Council, Inc. v. EPA, 22 F.3d 1125, 1135 (D.C. Cir. 1994), 
approving its extension of the deadlines by which states had 
to submit elements of their SIPs, compels a similar result in 
this case.  Although we upheld the EPA's decision in that 
case to extend the deadline for compliance with a procedural 
requirement of the Act, the Agency's failure to meet its own 
deadline for providing guidance to the states necessitated that 
we do so, see id., 22 F.3d at 1135 ("The agency's failure to 
meet its November 15, 1991 deadline ... made it impossible 
for states ... to meet their November 15, 1992 ... submis-
sion deadline").  In extending another procedural deadline 
under similar circumstances, we since have emphasized the 
importance that "the attainment deadlines remain intact, 
complete with additional program obligations in the event of 
nonattainment, irrespective of a state's dereliction of the SIP 
process," NRDC v. Browner, 57 F.3d 1122, 1127 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).  Unlike the various deadlines by which the states must 
submit proposals, the attainment deadlines are "central to the 
... regulatory scheme and ... leave[ ] no room for claims of 
technological or economic infeasibility."  Union Elec. Co. v. 
EPA, 427 U.S. 246, 258 (1976).

     In sum, to permit an extension of the sort urged by the 
EPA would subvert the purposes of the Act.  Cf. NRDC v. 
Browner, 57 F.3d at 1128 (extension of procedural deadline 
"not incompatible with the multi-faceted statutory scheme as 
a whole").  Therefore, we hold that the EPA was without 
authority in the Act or in our precedent to extend the 
attainment deadline for the Washington Area.

B.   Reasonably Available Countermeasures

     Section 172(c)(1) of the Act directs that a state's revised 
SIP "shall provide for the implementation of all reasonably 

available control measures [RACM] as expeditiously as prac-
ticable."  42 U.S.C. s 7502(c)(1).  As the EPA has interpret-
ed s 172(c)(1), a state must "consider all potentially available 
measures to determine whether they [a]re reasonably avail-
able for implementation in the area, and whether they would 
advance the [area's] attainment date."  Approval, 66 Fed. 
Reg. at 607/3.  The state may "reject measures as not being 
RACM," however, if "they would not advance the attainment 
date, would cause substantial widespread and long-term ad-
verse impacts, or would be economically or technologically 
infeasible."  Id. at 608/1.

     The proposed revisions to the SIPs for the Washington 
Area "contained no measures adopted for the sole purpose of 
satisfying the RACM requirement," id. at 609/3, so the EPA 
reviewed on its own initiative all control measures that could 
qualify as RACM under its definition, see id. at 607/3.  After 
considering "all potential categories of stationary and mobile 
sources that could provide additional emission reduction," id. 
at 611/2, the EPA "concluded that additional emission control 
measures would not advance the attainment date and there-
fore do not constitute RACM," id. at 608/1.

     The Sierra Club maintains that treating as potential RACM 
only those measures that would advance the date at which an 
area reaches attainment "conflicts with the Act's text and 
purpose and lacks any rational basis."  This is a misreading 
of both text and context.

     The Act, on its face, neither elaborates upon which control 
measures shall be deemed "reasonably available," nor com-
pels a state to consider whether any measure is "reasonably 
available" without regard to whether it would expedite attain-
ment in the relevant area.  Further, the EPA reasonably 
concluded that because the Act "use[s] the same terminology 
in conjunction with the RACM requirement" as it does in 
requiring timely attainment, compare 42 U.S.C. s 7502(c)(1) 
(requiring implementation of RACM "as expeditiously as 
practicable but no later than" the applicable attainment dead-
line), with id. s 7511(a)(1) (requiring attainment under same 
constraints), the RACM requirement is to be understood as a 

means of meeting the deadline for attainment, Approval, 66 
Fed. Reg. at 610/2.  Because the statutory provision is ambig-
uous and the EPA's construction of the term "RACM" is 
reasonable, we defer to the Agency.  See Chevron, 467 U.S. 
at 843.

     The Sierra Club also claims it was unreasonable for the 
EPA to reject certain measures as RACM on the ground that 
they could not be implemented without "intensive and costly 
effort."  Far from erecting thereby an unreasonably "subjec-
tive and undefined" standard, as the Sierra Club argues, see 
Pearson v. Shalala, 164 F.3d 650, 660-61 (D.C. Cir. 1999), the 
EPA here did no more than give familiar content to an 
insufficiently specified concept.  The Congress's choice of the 
phrase "reasonably available" clearly bespeaks its intention 
that the EPA exercise discretion in determining which control 
measures must be implemented, and neither that phrase nor 
any other in s 172(c)(1) suggests that the Congress intended 
to preclude the EPA, in so doing, from considering the costs 
of its decisions.  Compare Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc. v. 
EPA, 824 F.2d 1146, 1157 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (en banc) (rejecting 
"position that, as a matter of statutory interpretation, cost 
and technological feasibility may never be considered under 
the Clean Air Act unless Congress expressly so provides"), 
with Whitman v. Am. Trucking Ass'n, 531 U.S. 457, 465 
(2001) (cost considerations precluded when statute "instructs 
the EPA to set primary ambient air quality standards 'the 
attainment and maintenance of which ... are requisite to 
protect the public health' with 'an adequate margin of safe-
ty' ") (quoting 42 U.S.C. s 7409(b)(1)).

     That the EPA's definition of RACM is valid does not end 
the matter, however;  as the Sierra Club points out, the 
Agency failed to consider whether any particular measures 
fell within that definition.  In its Proposed Approval, the 
EPA noted that "measures ... such as retrofitting diesel 
trucks and buses, and controlling ground service equipment 
at airports [could] ... if taken together ... provide signifi-
cant emission reductions for attainment purposes."  64 Fed. 
Reg. at 70,468.  The EPA made no mention of these mea-
sures or measures like them, however, either in its analysis of 

potential RACM for the Washington Area or in the Approval 
document.  This omission--whether the result of inadver-
tence or of an unexplained change of course--renders the 
EPA's decision arbitrary and capricious.  See Motor Vehicle 
Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 
57 (1983) ("an agency changing its course must supply a 
reasoned analysis").  Consequently, we must invalidate the 
Approval of the revised SIPs and remand this matter to the 
EPA to determine which measures, if any, are RACM to be 
implemented by the States in this case.

C.   Rate of Progress Reductions

     The Sierra Club argues next that the EPA could not 
approve the SIPs for the Washington Area because the plans 
fail to provide for rate of progress reductions for the years 
after 1999.  We agree.

     The Act provides that revisions to a SIP for an area of 
serious nonattainment must reduce the emission of VOCs by 
"at least 3 percent of baseline emissions each year," unless 
the EPA determines that a lesser reduction is called for "in 
light of technological achievability."  42 U.S.C. 
s 7511a(c)(2)(B)(i), (ii).  As the Sierra Club observes, there-
fore, with an attainment date in 2005, "the rate of progress 
plan for the Washington area had to demonstrate a 9% 
reduction in emissions from 1996 to 1999, another 9% from 
1999 to 2002, and another 9% from 2002 to 2005."  Yet the 
SIPs provide for no reductions after 1999, and the EPA 
approved the omission on the ground that "it would be 
unreasonable to lock the downwind area into fixed progress 
requirement reductions from local sources, when the combi-
nation of local reductions with upwind area source emission 
reductions is what will bring the area into attainment."  Ap-
proval, 66 Fed. Reg. at 603/2.

     The EPA's reason is of no moment.  The Act by its terms 
makes the 3% annual minimum rate of progress a prerequi-
site for approval of a revised SIP.  The EPA therefore had 
no authority to approve the SIPs for the Washington Area 
notwithstanding the omission of a rate of progress plan for 
the years after 1999.

D.   Contingency Measures

     Finally, the Sierra Club argues that the absence of contin-
gency measures also precludes approval of the revised SIPs 
for the Washington Area.  Again, we agree.

     Section 172(c)(9) of the Act requires that a revised SIP 
include "specific measures to be undertaken if the area fails 
to make reasonable further progress, or to attain the national 
primary ambient air quality standard by the attainment 
date."  42 U.S.C. s 7502(c)(9);  see also id. s 7511a(c)(9) 
(revised SIP for area of serious nonattainment "shall provide 
for the implementation of specific measures to be undertaken 
if the area fails to meet any applicable milestone").  The EPA 
maintains that "contingency measures are required as part of 
the overall nonattainment plan, not as a feature of each 
component of that plan."  Compare 42 U.S.C. s 7502(c)(9) 
("plan shall provide for the implementation" of contingency 
measures), with, e.g., id. s 7502(c)(1) ("plan provisions shall 
provide" for implementation of RACM).  Therefore, says the 
EPA, it lawfully could approve the revised provisions of the 
SIPs for the Washington Area despite the absence of contin-
gency measures therein.

     The answer to the EPA's argument is, as the Sierra Club 
points out, to be found in s 172(c), which lists the elements 
that must be included in a revised SIP for an area in 
nonattainment.  That section specifically declares:

          The plan provisions (including plan items) required to 
     be submitted under this part shall comply with the 
     following:  ...
     
     (9) Contingency measures
     
          Such plan shall provide for the implementation of 
     specific measures to be undertaken if the area fails to 
     make reasonable further progress, or to attain the na-
     tional primary ambient air quality standard by the at-
     tainment date applicable under this part.  Such measures 
     shall be included in the plan revision as contingency 
     measures to take effect in any such case without further 
     action by the State or the Administrator.
     
Id. s 7502(c);  see also id. s 7511a(c)(9) (requiring that con-
tingency measures "be included in the plan revision" for area 
of serious nonattainment).

     As can be seen from the statute itself, the EPA simply errs 
in suggesting that a state need not include contingency 
measures in the revisions to the SIP it submits for an area of 
nonattainment.  For this reason, too, the EPA lacked authori-
ty to approve the revised SIPs submitted by the States in this 
case.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the EPA's approval of the 
revised SIPs for the Washington Metropolitan Area is vacat-
ed, and this matter is remanded to the Agency for further 
consideration.

                                                                 So ordered.

       