                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                Argued En Banc September 27, 2000

                                 
                      Decided March 2, 2001

                           No. 99-7073

                        Jimmy L. Duncan, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

         Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 95cv02360)

     Bruce P. Heppen argued the cause for the appellant.  
Cheryl C. Burke, Robert J. Kniaz and Mark F. Sullivan were 
on brief.

     Sally Dunaway and Melvin Radowitz were on brief for 
amici curiae American Association of Retired Persons and 

National Employment Lawyers Association.  Paula A. 
Brantner entered an appearance.

     Ann Elizabeth Reesman was on brief for amicus curiae 
Equal Employment Advisory Council.

     Bruce M. Bender argued the cause for the appellee. Su-
zanne L. Lawrence entered an appearance.

     Bill Lann Lee, then Assistant Attorney General, Jessica D. 
Silver and Thomas E. Chandler, Attorneys, United States 
Department of Justice, Philip B. Sklover, Associate General 
Counsel, and Barbara L. Sloan, Attorney, Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission, were on brief for amici curi-
ae United States of America and The Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge;  Silberman,* Williams, 
Ginsburg, Sentelle, Henderson, Randolph, Rogers, Tatel 
and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Randolph, with 
whom Circuit Judges Williams and Sentelle join.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Appellant 
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) 
challenges the district court's denial of its post-trial motion 
for judgment as a matter of law in this discrimination action 
brought by appellee Jimmy Duncan under the Americans 
with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. ss 12101 et seq., (ADA).  
Because Duncan offered no significantly probative evidence 
below of the number and types of positions available in his 
local job market so as to demonstrate that his back impair-
ment substantially limits his ability to work, we hold that he 

__________
     * Judge Silberman took senior status on November 1, 2000 but 
continues to participate as a member of this en banc court pursuant 
to 28 U.S.C. s 46(c)(2).

failed to establish he was "disabled" under the ADA.  The 
district court therefore erred in denying WMATA's motion.

     Duncan worked at WMATA for seven years.  He began his 
career there as a custodian in May 1986 and became an 
Automated Fare Collector (AFC) parts runner in November 
1991.  In December 1992 Duncan was involuntarily trans-
ferred to the Elevator/Escalator branch [ELES] where he 
was again employed as a parts runner.  As a custodian, 
Duncan was required to lift between 75 and 100 pounds, as an 
AFC parts runner only about 30 pounds and as an ELES 
parts runner over 100 pounds.  On December 19, 1992, his 
third night in ELES, Duncan, who had suffered a series of 
back injuries between 1989 and 1992, reinjured his back.  As 
a result he was unable to continue in his heavy lifting ELES 
job.  Duncan's supervisor informed him no light lifting jobs 
were then available and Duncan was placed briefly on sick 
leave and then on leave without pay.  He twice applied for a 
vacant AFC parts runner position, in March and July 1993, 
but without success.

     In August 1993 Duncan received a letter from his supervi-
sor instructing him to meet with WMATA's Associate Medical 
Director, Dr. Mary O'Donnell, and to take with him all of his 
relevant medical records, including a statement from his 
treating physician.  Duncan consulted his treating physician 
who referred him to a neurologist.  Because the neurologist 
was out of town, Duncan was unable to obtain a statement 
from him before his August 19, 1993 meeting with O'Donnell.  
At the meeting O'Donnell told Duncan he would probably be 
discharged, apparently because he had failed to produce 
documentation of his current condition.  Duncan was dis-
charged in October 1993.  In February 1994 he took a part-
time light lifting position with Hertz Corporation.

     On December 22, 1994 Duncan filed suit in the district 
court alleging WMATA violated the ADA by discharging him 
on account of a disability and by failing to reasonably accom-
modate his disability.  After a five-day trial the jury returned 
a verdict on May 27, 1997, finding WMATA violated the ADA 
as alleged and awarding Duncan compensatory damages of 
$125,000 on his wrongful termination claim and $125,000 on 

his reasonable accommodation claim.  WMATA filed a post-
trial motion for judgment as a matter of law or, alternatively, 
for a new trial.  The district court denied the motion in a 
memorandum opinion and order filed March 26, 1998.  In 
subsequent orders the court awarded Duncan reinstatement 
with back pay, attorney's fees and costs and pre-trial interest.  
On appeal WMATA challenges the denial of its post-trial 
motion and the various awards.

     "This court reviews de novo the trial court's denial of a 
motion for judgment as a matter of law or, in the alternative, 
for a new trial."  Curry v. District of Columbia, 195 F.3d 654, 
658-59 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (citing Swanks v. WMATA, 179 F.3d 
929, 933 (D.C. Cir. 1999)).  We will not disturb a jury verdict 
"unless the evidence and all reasonable inferences that can be 
drawn therefrom are so one-sided that reasonable men and 
women could not disagree on the verdict."  Id. at 659 (quot-
ing Smith v. Washington Sheraton Corp., 135 F.3d 779, 782 
(D.C. Cir. 1998)).  Evidence supporting the verdict, however, 
must be "more than merely colorable;  it must be significantly 
probative."  Id. (quoting Smith, 135 F.3d at 782).  Applying 
this standard, we conclude Duncan failed to produce signifi-
cantly probative evidence that he was "disabled" under the 
ADA and that the verdict and awards below must therefore 
be vacated.

     In an ADA case with no direct evidence of discrimination 
and where the defendant denies that its decisions were moti-
vated by the plaintiff's disability, this court applies the famil-
iar burden-shifting framework set out in McDonnell Douglas 
Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).  See Marshall v. Federal 
Express Corp., 130 F.3d 1095, 1099 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  Under 
the McDonnell Douglas framework an ADA plaintiff must 
prove that "he had a disability within the meaning of the 
ADA, that he was 'qualified' for the position with or without a 
reasonable accommodation, and that he suffered an adverse 
employment action because of his disability."  Swanks v. 
WMATA, 179 F.3d 929, 934 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  The ADA 
defines a "disability" as "a physical or mental impairment 
that substantially limits one or more of the major life activi-
ties of [an] individual."  42 U.S.C. s 12102(2)(A).  Through-

out this litigation, Duncan has maintained that his degenera-
tive disc disease, which limits his lifting to no more than 20 
pounds, fits this definition because it is a physical impairment 
that limits his major life activity of "working."  WMATA 
responds that Duncan failed to establish at trial that his back 
condition in fact "substantially limits" his ability to work.1  
We agree.

     In Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471 (1999), 
the United States Supreme Court provided guidance on the 
meaning of the phrase "substantially limits":

     The ADA does not define "substantially limits," but 
     "substantially" suggests "considerable" or "specified to a 
     large degree." ...
     
          When the major life activity under consideration is 
     that of working, the statutory phrase "substantially lim-
     its" requires, at a minimum, that plaintiffs allege they 
     are unable to work in a broad class of jobs....  To be 
     substantially limited in the major life activity of working, 
     then, one must be precluded from more than one type of 
     job, a specialized job, or a particular job of choice. If jobs 
     utilizing an individual's skills (but perhaps not his or her 
     unique talents) are available, one is not precluded from a 
     substantial class of jobs.  Similarly, if a host of different 
     types of jobs are available, one is not precluded from a 
     broad range of jobs.
     
527 U.S. at 491-92 (citation omitted).  This passage makes 
clear that whether an impairment substantially limits the 
major life activity of working depends primarily on the avail-

__________
     1 WMATA concedes that Duncan has a physical impairment and, 
until its en banc brief, did not dispute that working is a"major life 
activity" under the ADA.  In light of our holding that Duncan did 
not demonstrate his impairment substantially limits his work activi-
ty, we need not and do not consider WMATA's belated assertion in 
its supplemental en banc briefs that working is not a major life 
activity but we assume arguendo that it is.  Cf. Sutton v. United 
Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 492 (1999) (making same assumption, 
while noting that "there may be some conceptual difficulty in 
defining 'major life activities' to include work").

ability of jobs for which the impaired person qualifies.  The 
Supreme Court further instructed that this is "an individual-
ized inquiry," id. at 483 (citing Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 
624 (1998)), and that courts should consider such factors as 
"the geographical area to which the individual has reasonable 
access and 'the number and types of jobs utilizing similar 
training, knowledge, skills or abilities, within the geographical 
area, from which the individual is also disqualified,' " id. at 
491-92 (citing & quoting 29 C.F.R.  pt. 1630, App. 
s 1630.2(j)(3)(ii)(A), (B)2).  In sum, to establish substantial 
limitation of working activity under the ADA, a plaintiff must 
allege and prove that in his particular circumstances, taking 
into account the appropriate factors, his impairment prevents 
him from performing a "substantial class" or "broad range" of 
jobs otherwise available to him.

     Duncan asserts he sufficiently demonstrated substantial 
limitation through expert medical testimony that his back 
condition and lifting restriction are permanent and through 
evidence of his age, limited skills, education and experience 
and of his inability to find comparable employment after his 
discharge.  The cited evidence tells us little or nothing, 
however, about the number and types of jobs in the Washing-
ton, D.C. area for which Duncan is qualified and which are 
therefore available to him.  There may be numerous local 
positions that do not require heavy or medium lifting--such 
as the AFC parts runner position at WMATA for which 
Duncan twice applied after his injury and for which he 
acknowledges in his complaint he was qualified.  See Amend-
ed Complaint at 3, 4 (filed March 6, 1996).  Or there may be 
very few such jobs.  The jury was left in the dark with no 
significantly probative evidence addressing the factors set out 
in Sutton.3  Duncan points to his own testimony that he made 
"inquiries" about or applied for truck driving jobs but that 

__________
     2 The Sutton Court declined to resolve whether deference is owed 
to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's ADA regula-
tions, 527 U.S. at 480, but quoted this regulation's factors approv-
ingly, id. at 491-92.

     3 We note that social security disability cases have found lifting 
restrictions not to constitute a disability.  See, e.g., Cruze v. Chater, 

they all required heavy lifting.4 This sparse anecdotal evi-
dence, however, cannot support the required jury finding that 
Duncan was substantially limited in his ability to find work 
because his impairment disqualified him from a substantial 
class or broad range of jobs in the Washington area.  At most 
Duncan's testimony shows that he was not qualified for the 
particular kind of job--truck driver--for which he chose to 
apply.  It tells us nothing about whether he was qualified for 
the many other jobs in the Washington metropolitan employ-
ment pool.  See Sutton, 527 U.S. at 492 ("To be substantially 
limited in the major life activity of working, then, one must be 
precluded from more than one type of job, a specialized job, 
or a particular job of choice.").  Without evidence of the 
number and kinds of jobs available to Duncan the jury had no 
basis to find he was disqualified from a substantial class or 
broad range of them.  Because Duncan failed to offer evi-
dence demonstrating he was substantially impaired in work-
ing, the jury's liability verdict cannot stand.

     In concluding that Duncan failed to meet his evidentiary 
burden, we hold that the ADA requires a plaintiff in Duncan's 

__________
85 F.3d 1320, 1322 (8th Cir. 1996) (affirming denial of benefits to 
claimant who "possessed the residual functional capacity to perform 
the physical exertional and nonexertional requirements of work 
except for lifting and carrying of more than 20 pounds occasionally 
or 10 pounds frequently" and who, according to a vocational expert, 
therefore "could still perform work as a light cleaner, office helper 
or messenger, or mail clerk," which positions "exist in significant 
numbers in the national economy");  Lee v. Sullivan, 988 F.2d 789, 
792 (7th Cir. 1993) (affirming denial of benefits to claimant based on 
vocational testimony that person "with a tenth grade education, 
average to borderline intellect, and depression who can perform 
sedentary work with an option for alternate sitting and standing ... 
could be a cashier in a convenience store, a security guard, and a 
parking lot attendant" and that "there were approximately 1,400 of 
these positions in the greater Milwaukee metropolitan area which 
has a work force of 750,000").

     4 Duncan testified he could not remember "any other types of 
jobs or specifics about any types of jobs that [he] applied for."  
Joint App. 136-38.

position to produce some evidence of the number and types of 
jobs in the local employment market in order to show he is 
disqualified from a substantial class or broad range of such 
jobs;  that is, the total number of such jobs that remain 
available to the plaintiff in such a class or range in the 
relevant market must be sufficiently low that he is effectively 
precluded from working in the class or range.  See Sutton, 
527 U.S. at 491-92.  The approach we adopt is consistent with 
most other circuits'.  See Santiago Clemente v. Executive 
Airlines, Inc., 213 F.3d 25, 32-33 (1st Cir. 2000) (concluding 
former flight attendant failed to show temporary hearing loss 
was disability under ADA because she offered "no evidence of 
how many jobs call for this ability, or that she was precluded 
from any class of jobs");  Webb v. Clyde L. Choate Mental 
Health & Dev. Ctr., 230 F.3d 991, 997 (7th Cir. 2000) (uphold-
ing summary judgment against psychologist suffering from 
severe asthma, osteoporosis, and a weakened immune system 
because he "ha[d] not presented evidence that his condition 
prevents him from performing a class of jobs");  Taylor v. 
Nimock's Oil Co., 214 F.3d 957, 961 (8th Cir. 2000) (conclud-
ing former cashier with 40 hour week and 10 pound carry 
limit did not establish disability because she "presented no 
evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact about 
whether she could perform a class of jobs with her restric-
tions") (citing Berg v. Norand Corp., 169 F.3d 1140, 1145 (8th 
Cir. 1999);  Helfter v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 115 F.3d 613, 
617-18 (8th Cir. 1997));  Colwell v. Suffolk County Police 
Dep't, 158 F.3d 635, 645 (2d Cir. 1998) ("Without specific 
evidence about 'the kinds of jobs from which [an] impaired 
individual is disqualified,' the jury could not perform the 
careful analysis that is necessary to determine that [a plain-
tiff] was substantially limited in his ability to work.") (quoting 
Heilweil v. Mount Sinai Hosp., 32 F.3d 718, 723 (2d Cir. 
1994));  Snow v. Ridgeview Med. Ctr., 128 F.3d 1201, 1207 
(8th Cir. 1997) (holding "general lifting restriction imposed by 
a physician, without more, is insufficient to constitute a 
disability within the meaning of the ADA" with regard to 
major life activity of working);  see also Williams v. Channel 
Master Satellite Sys., Inc., 101 F.3d 346, 349 (4th Cir. 1996) 

("hold[ing], as a matter of law, that a twenty-five pound lifting 
limitation--particularly when compared to an average per-
son's abilities--does not constitute a significant restriction on 
one's ability to lift, work, or perform any other major life 
activity");  Ray v. Glidden Co., 85 F.3d 227, 229 (5th Cir. 
1996) ("[I]nability to perform heavy lifting does not render a 
person substantially limited in the major activities of lifting or 
working.");  McKay v. Toyota Motor Mfg., U.S.A., Inc., 110 
F.3d 369, 373 (6th Cir. 1997) (holding woman with carpal 
tunnel syndrome and 20-pound lifting not disabled because 
"at best, her evidence supports a conclusion that her impair-
ment disqualifies her from only the narrow range of assembly 
line manufacturing jobs that require repetitive motion or 
frequent lifting of more than ten pounds").  But see Welling-
ton v. Lyon County Sch. Dist., 187 F.3d 1150, 1155 (9th Cir. 
1999) (holding evidence that impairment disqualified plaintiff 
from "metal fabrication, welding, ... heavy activities, carpen-
try, ... the use of a variety of tools to do maintenance and 
repairs, et cetera" coupled with his anecdotal testimony he 
had to quit one plumbing job because he was "in too much 
pain to even continue" raised triable issue of fact on disabili-
ty);  cf. Burns v. Coca-Cola Enters., Inc., 222 F.3d 247 (6th 
Cir. 2000) (upholding determination plaintiff was disabled 
because of district court's finding impairment "precluded him 
from performing at least 50% of the jobs that he was qualified 
to perform given his educational background and experience" 
where finding was apparently based solely on 23-pound lifting 
limit and limited education and work experience);  Mullins v. 
Crowell, 228 F.3d 1305, 1314 n.18 (11th Cir. 2000) ("[E]xpert 
vocational evidence, although instructive, is not necessary to 
establish that a person is substantially limited in the major 
life activity of working.  Furthermore, a plaintiff could testify 
from his or her own extensive job search whether other jobs 
that he or she could perform were available in the geographi-
cal area.").  Further, the evidentiary burden we place on 
plaintiffs is not onerous.  They need not necessarily produce 
expert vocational testimony, although such evidence might be 
very persuasive.  In the proper case simple government job 

statistics may suffice.5  We leave it to counsel in future ADA 
cases to explore the various forms such evidence may take.  
Here we hold only that Duncan failed to produce any sort of 
significantly probative evidence on the subject.

     For the preceding reasons, we reverse the district court's 
denial of WMATA's motion for judgment as a matter of law.  
We further vacate the judgment on the jury verdict entered 
May 29, 1997 and the district court's post-trial orders award-
ing reinstatement, back pay, attorney's fees and costs and 
prejudgment interest.

                                                            So ordered.

__________
     5 Such statistics are readily available on the worldwide web.  For 
example, a number of different reports on job requirements in 
specific local labor markets are available at low cost from the 
website www.occustats.com.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, with whom Circuit Judges 
Williams and Sentelle join, concurring:  I agree with Judge 
Henderson's opinion for the court.  Although I also agree 
that the court should not decide whether working is a "major 
life activity" within the meaning of the Americans with Dis-
abilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. s 12102(2), see maj. op. at 5 
n.1, I think we should recognize the difficulties the issue 
presents.

     The Supreme Court in Sutton v. United Air Lines, 527 
U.S. 471, 492 (1999), also avoided deciding the question by 
"[a]ssuming without deciding that working is a major life 
activity...."  The Court's statement indicates that it thought 
the question was an open one.  Before Sutton this was far 
from certain.  School Board of Nassau County v. Arline, 480 
U.S. 273 (1987), a case arising under s 504 of the Rehabilita-
tion Act, 29 U.S.C. s 794, stated in dicta that a person could 
be considered a handicapped individual if the person suffered 
from a physical impairment such as cosmetic disfigurement.  
Even though this sort of impairment "might not diminish a 
person's physical or mental capacities," it "could nevertheless 
substantially limit that person's ability to work as a result of 
the negative reactions of others to the impairment."  480 U.S. 
at 283.  To support its point, the Court cited regulations 
implementing the Rehabilitation Act, which listed "working" 
as a major life activity.  Id. at 283 n.10.

     A section of the ADA provides that "nothing in this chapter 
shall be construed to apply a lesser standard than the stan-
dards applied under title V of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
... or the regulations issued by Federal agencies pursuant to 
such titles."  42 U.S.C. s 12201(a).  On the basis of this 
section, Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624, 632 (1998), held that 
the Court must "construe the ADA to grant at least as much 
protection as provided by the regulations implementing the 
Rehabilitation Act."

     There may be ways of explaining the apparent inconsisten-
cy between Sutton on the one hand, and Bragdon and Arline 
on the other.  Sutton, for instance, referred to EEOC regula-
tions suggesting that "working be viewed as a residual life 
activity, considered, as a last resort, only '[i]f an individual is 
not substantially limited with respect to any other major life 

activity.' "  527 U.S. at 492 (emphasis omitted) (quoting 29 
C.F.R. pt. 1630, App. s 1630.2(j) (1998)).  Sutton also identi-
fied "a conceptual difficulty":  if a person claims to be exclud-
ed from work because of his impairment, it is circular for him 
to answer--when asked the nature of his impairment--"ex-
clusion from work."  Id.

     Another set of problems stems from these circumstances:  
to make "working" a major life activity is to create a residual 
category, one that matters only if the individual is not suffer-
ing from some serious physical or mental impairment. (If the 
individual is so suffering there is no need to consider working 
as a separate category.  See Taylor v. Phoenixville Sch. 
Dist., 174 F.3d 142, 152 (3d Cir. 1999);  McAlindin v. County 
of San Diego, 192 F.3d 1226, 1233 (9th Cir. 1999).)  When 
"working" is used in this way, the existence of a disability will 
necessarily turn on factors other than the individual's physical 
characteristics or medical condition.  To illustrate, suppose 
there is an economic downturn and unemployment is high.  
Then more people will be found to be disabled as compared 
with a period when the gross domestic product is growing and 
unemployment is low.  Why?  Because the less likely it is 
that a person can find work the more likely that he is 
substantially limited in the major life activity of working--
that in other words he suffers from a disability.  See Sutton, 
527 U.S. at 491.  One must wonder whether people consid-
ered disabled in a poor economy can become not disabled if 
the economy turns around and more jobs become available.  
One must wonder as well how this can be squared with the 
ADA's express purpose of supplying "clear, strong, consis-
tent, enforceable standards addressing discrimination against 
individuals with disabilities."  42 U.S.C. s 12101(b) (italics 
added).  Geographic disparity also cannot be avoided.  Take 
two identical individuals with identical impairments working 
for the same company.  One works in a sparsely populated 
rural area, the other in a large metropolis.  The individual in 
the rural area would wind up being classified as disabled 
under the ADA more readily than the person in the major 
metropolitan area where more jobs are available.

     From the employer's point of view, the standards will 
hardly appear "clear," 42 U.S.C. s 12101(b).  When "work-
ing" is the allegedly impaired major life activity, how is the 

employer to determine whether the employee is disabled (and 
thus entitled to a reasonable accommodation)?  The employer 
certainly cannot tell just by looking at the employee, or by 
consulting medical records, or by insisting upon a physical 
examination.  Disability will depend on the job market, on 
whether there are jobs in some undefined region "utilizing an 
individual's skills (but perhaps not his or her unique talents)," 
Sutton, 527 U.S. at 492, jobs for which the employee is 
qualified.  Exactly how the employer is to make that determi-
nation is far from certain.  Suppose the employer does not 
acquire the information.  Could the employer still be found to 
have discriminated "because of" a disability, as the ADA 
requires for liability, if the employer does not know the 
employee's job prospects?  See 42 U.S.C. s 12112(a).

     The problems just mentioned, and others, need to be 
considered before we decide whether to join the two other 
circuits which, after Sutton, treat "working" as a major life 
activity under the ADA.  See Bartlett v. New York State Bd. 
of Law Exam'rs, 226 F.3d 69, 80 (2d Cir. 2000);  EEOC v. R.J. 
Gallagher Co., 181 F.3d 645, 654 (5th Cir. 1999).

     Tatel, Circuit Judge, concurring:

     I agree that the verdict in Duncan's favor cannot stand.  I 
write separately to explain my view of the precise nature of 
the burden that Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 
471 (1999), places on ADA plaintiffs.

     Sutton describes the standard for proving that an impair-
ment " 'substantially limits' ... the major life activity of 
working":

          When the major life activity under consideration is 
     that of working, the statutory phrase "substantially lim-
     its" requires, at a minimum, that plaintiffs allege they 
     are unable to work in a broad class of jobs.  Reflecting 
     this requirement, the EEOC uses a specialized definition 
     of the term "substantially limits" when referring to the 
     major life activity of working:
     
          "significantly restricted in the ability to perform either 
          a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various 
          classes as compared to the average person having 
          comparable training, skills and abilities.  The inability 
          to perform a single, particular job does not constitute a 
          substantial limitation in the major life activity of work-
          ing."  29 C.F.R. s 1630.2(j)(3)(i).
          
     ... To be substantially limited in the major life activity 
     of working, then, one must be precluded from more than 
     one type of job, a specialized job, or a particular job of 
     choice.  If jobs utilizing an individual's skills (but per-
     haps not his or her unique talents) are available, one is 
     not precluded from a substantial class of jobs.  Similarly, 
     if a host of different types of jobs are available, one is not 
     precluded from a broad range of jobs.
     
527 U.S. at 491-92.  This passage gives plaintiffs attempting 
to prove disability on the basis of a substantial limitation in 
the major life activity of working a choice:  they may demon-
strate that their impairment excludes them from "either a 
class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes."  As 
the penultimate sentence explains, plaintiffs attempting to 
prove exclusion from a "class of jobs" must show that their 
impairment disqualifies them from jobs utilizing their skills.  
In Sutton, for example, the Supreme Court said that airline 

pilots who have impairments that preclude them from work-
ing as global pilots but who can nonetheless hold "a number 
of other positions utilizing [their] skills, such as regional pilot 
and pilot instructor" cannot claim to be substantially limited 
in the major life activity of working.  Id. at 493.  According 
to the final sentence in the Sutton passage, plaintiffs attempt-
ing to prove exclusion from a "broad range of jobs"--the 
second of the two options--must show that there is not a 
"host" of different types of jobs available to them.  As an 
example of a person who might claim to be precluded from a 
broad range of jobs, the EEOC Interpretive Guidance de-
scribes an individual who "has an allergy to a substance found 
in most high rise office buildings, but seldom found else-
where, that makes breathing extremely difficult."  29 C.F.R. 
pt. 1630, App. s 1630.2(j).  Of course, after Sutton, such a 
person would also have to show that jobs not in high rise 
buildings are unavailable, leaving some doubt as to whether 
plaintiffs would any longer attempt to make such a claim.

     Duncan claimed only exclusion from a class of jobs.  To 
prove his case, Duncan thus needed to show that the class of 
jobs from which he alleged preclusion was "broad" or "sub-
stantial," and not limited to jobs utilizing his "unique talents."  
Sutton, 527 U.S. at 491-92.  Presenting evidence of his back 
injury and lack of formal training or education, he proved 
only his inability to handle jobs requiring heavy lifting.  As I 
read Sutton, he also had to show that he could not handle the 
broader class of jobs requiring manual labor, of which heavy 
lifting is but a subclass.

     Duncan could have satisfied his burden of proof by produc-
ing specific evidence either that he applied unsuccessfully for 
non-lifting manual labor jobs (thus demonstrating that he was 
unqualified for those jobs for some other reason) or that most 
manual labor jobs require heavy lifting.  He failed to do 
either, testifying only as follows:

     Q: When you were on unemployment did you make any 
     inquiries with any employers that had vacancies for truck 
     driver positions to determine if you could do the job?
     
     A: Yes.  I would--I would check the vacancies--I mean 
     the unemployment, and I would call places, and jobs that 
     I thought I could do I would ask them what the job 
     entailed, and if it was to the point where I know I 
     wouldn't be able to do a lot of lifting I wouldn't--I 
     wouldn't inquire no more about it.
     
     Q: Did any of the truck ... driving types of jobs that 
     you applied for, did they require heavy lifting?
     
     A: Yeah, most all of them basically.
     
     ... 
     
     Q: Mr. Duncan, in addition to truck driving positions 
     that you may have made some inquiries about, do you 
     recall any other types of jobs or specifics about any types 
     of jobs that you applied for during that period of unem-
     ployment?
     
     A: I can't remember.
     
[J.A. 137-38].  Absent more "significantly probative" evi-
dence, see Smith v. Washington Sheraton Corp., 135 F.3d 
779, 782 (D.C. Cir. 1998), no reasonable jury could have 
concluded that Duncan was unable to perform manual labor, 
i.e., that he was excluded from a substantial class of jobs.  
From his testimony, the jury could have concluded that all 
truck driving jobs require heavy lifting, but the record con-
tains nothing from which the jury could have concluded that 
other manual labor jobs likewise require heavy lifting.

     While I thus agree that the verdict in Duncan's favor 
cannot stand, I think it important to emphasize that although 
Sutton requires Duncan to have proven an inability to per-
form manual labor, it does not also require him to have shown 
an inability to qualify for non-manual labor jobs in the area in 
which he lives.  Sutton would require such evidence of plain-
tiffs seeking to prove disability based on exclusion from a 
"broad range of jobs," but that requirement does not apply to 
plaintiffs like Duncan who seek to prove disability on the 
basis of exclusion from a "class of jobs."  527 U.S. at 492.  
Requiring such proof of plaintiffs like Duncan, moreover, 
would convert the ADA inquiry from asking whether plain-

tiffs are precluded from classes of jobs to whether, as in the 
Social Security disability benefits context, they are unable to 
work at all.  See 42 U.S.C. s 423(d)(1)(A) (defining "disabili-
ty" under the Social Security Act as "inability to engage in 
any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically 
determinable physical or mental impairment") (emphasis add-
ed).  Consider a surgeon claiming to be disabled under the 
ADA because a physical or mental impairment precludes him 
from a class of jobs.  Like the airline pilot plaintiffs in 
Sutton, although it would not be enough for the surgeon to 
show that he could no longer perform surgery--he would 
need to show that he was unable to practice medicine at all--
nothing in Sutton requires that he demonstrate the absence 
of a "host" of non-medical jobs that he could handle, such as 
office administration, food service, or maintenance.  527 U.S. 
at 492.  In other words, the surgeon could establish disability 
under the ADA by showing only that, as Sutton puts it, "jobs 
utilizing [his] skills (but perhaps not his ... unique talents)" 
were unavailable.  Id.

     So too Duncan.  He need not have demonstrated preclusion 
from non-manual labor jobs;  proving exclusion from the class 
of jobs requiring manual labor would have been enough.  
Because he failed to show even this, I concur.


     Edwards, Chief Judge, dissenting:  Congress passed the 
Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") because, "historical-
ly, society has tended to isolate and segregate individuals 
with disabilities, and, despite some improvements, such forms 
of discrimination against individuals with disabilities continue 
to be a serious and pervasive social problem."  42 U.S.C. 
s 12101 (a)(2)(1994).  The ADA was enacted "to provide a 
clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination 
of discrimination against individuals with disabilities," and "to 
provide clear, strong, consistent, enforceable standards ad-
dressing discrimination against individuals with disabilities."  
42 U.S.C. s 12101(b)(1) & (2)(1994).

     The ADA generally provides that

     no covered [employer] shall discriminate against a quali-
     fied individual with a disability because of the disability 
     of such individual in regard to job application procedures, 
     the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, em-
     ployee compensation, job training, and other terms, con-
     ditions, and privileges of employment.
     
42 U.S.C. s 12112 (a)(1994).  A "qualified individual with a 
disability" includes persons "with a disability who, with or 
without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential 
functions of the employment position that such individual 
holds or desires."  42 U.S.C. s 12111(8)(1994).  And "reason-
able accommodation[s]" include "job restructuring, part-time 
or modified work schedules, [and] reassignment to a vacant 
position."  42 U.S.C. s 12111(9)(1994).

     In light of the general purposes and standards enunciated 
in the ADA, appellate review of this case should have been a 
simple matter.  The plaintiff/appellee, Jimmy Duncan, was in 
a job that everyone--including his attending physician, doc-
tors retained by WMATA, and his supervisors--knew that he 
could not perform because of his physical disability.  He 
presented medical evidence of his physical disability to 
WMATA.  When a WMATA job opened up that he could 
perform, parts runner in Automated Fare Collection, he 
applied to be transferred to the position.  He had held the 
parts runner job previously;  he was indisputably qualified to 

perform the job;  and the work required was within his 
current physical ability.  He also had seniority among the 
competing candidates.  He was denied the job, however, for 
no reason.  Under the ADA, WMATA should have offered 
the parts runner job to Duncan, as a reasonable accommoda-
tion to his existing disability.

     During oral argument before the court, WMATA's counsel 
was asked to address the following hypothetical:

     Assume an employee is disabled because, due to a freak 
     accident, one of his legs is amputated.  As a result of this 
     disability, the employee is unable to perform his job with 
     WMATA.  Subsequently, there is a job opening at 
     WMATA in a position that the disabled employee previ-
     ously has held and is currently capable of performing 
     (because it requires no appreciable standing or walking).  
     The amputee requests a transfer to the job.  Is WMATA 
     required to accommodate the disabled employee?
     
WMATA's counsel conceded that, under the ADA, the em-
ployer would be obliged to accommodate the disabled employ-
ee by offering him the job.  Duncan's request merited an 
equivalent response.

     The problem in this case is that, under the ADA, a disabili-
ty is defined as "a physical or mental impairment that sub-
stantially limits one or more of the major life activities of 
[an] individual."  42 U.S.C. s 12102 (2)(A) (1994) (emphasis 
added).  Congress has delegated to the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") the responsibility for is-
suing regulations to enforce the proscription against discrimi-
nation in employment under the ADA.  42 U.S.C. s 12116 
(1994).  In assuming this responsibility, the EEOC has pro-
mulgated regulations providing that "major life activities" 
include

     caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, 
     seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and work-
     ing.
     
29 C.F.R. s 1630.2(i) (1999).  It is fairly easy to determine 
whether a person is disabled due to a physical impairment 
that substantially limits his ability to walk.  The same cannot 

be said about physical impairments (beyond, say, walking, 
seeing, hearing, speaking, and breathing) that substantially 
limit a person's ability to work.  Thus, the EEOC has ex-
plained that the substantial limitation inquiry with respect to 
"working" entails an inability to work in a class of jobs or a 
broad range of jobs in various classes as compared to the 
average person having comparable training, skills, and abili-
ties.  29 C.F.R. s 1630.2(j)(3)(i).

     The disabled employee in the aforecited hypothetical is 
covered by the major life activity of "walking," so he need 
only show that his walking is substantially impaired in order 
to pursue a claim under the ADA.  Duncan's ADA claim, 
however, rests on the major life activity of "working," so he 
faces a tougher burden.  This disparate burden is hard to 
fathom.  Both men are physically impaired and their impair-
ments limit their abilities to work;  and both men easily can 
be accommodated.  Nonetheless, Duncan is forced to show 
that he is unable to work in a broad class of jobs or a broad 
range of jobs in various classes in order to claim relief, 
whereas the hypothetical employee need only show an inabili-
ty to perform a single job.  Given the purposes of the ADA 
and the similarities in the two situations, it is difficult to find 
a meaningful difference between the hypothetical employee 
and Duncan.  Both the hypothetical employee and Duncan 
should be accommodated because of their disabilities.

     As the majority and separate opinions make clear, however, 
"working" is a disfavored basis upon which to rest a definition 
of major life activities.  Indeed, even the Supreme Court, 
albeit in dicta, has questioned whether "working" should be 
considered a major life activity.  See Sutton v. United Air 
Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 492 (1999).  There are undoubtedly 
some conceptual difficulties in viewing work as a major life 
activity.  For example, an expansive view of work as a major 
life activity might allow a person to claim a disability and 
discrimination under the ADA if he/she is allegedly denied 
work for a physical impairment, such as cosmetic disfigure-
ment, which does not rise to the level of an underlying 
handicap.  In this sense, "work" is arguably over-inclusive 
when viewed as a major life activity, at least when considered 

in conjunction with the principal purposes of the ADA.  Nev-
ertheless, it is hard to believe that Congress intended to deny 
a claimant like Duncan--a truly disabled person, who has 
undisputed job limitations due to his physical impairment and 
can easily be accommodated (much the same as with the 
hypothetical employee)--redress under the ADA because his 
claim rests on "work" as a "major life activity."

     The result reached by the majority in this case invariably 
will make "work" impermissibly under-inclusive when viewed 
as a major life activity, in a way that appears to defy 
Congress' mandate in enacting the ADA.  The Supreme 
Court may have some doubts about work as a major life 
activity, but the Court has not declared the EEOC's regula-
tion unlawful.  Unless and until this happens, claimants like 
Duncan are entitled to full protection of the statute.  In 
short, as long as working is a major life activity, an employ-
er's responsibility to offer a reasonable accommodation to a 
disabled employee like Duncan should be taken seriously.

                           I. Analysis

     Quite apart from the foregoing analytical problems raised 
by this case, I respectfully dissent from the judgment of the 
majority because this is a case that no judge should take from 
a jury.  The jury considered the evidence presented by 
Duncan and WMATA;  there were no erroneous instructions 
given to the jury;  and the jury weighed the evidence and 
found in favor of the plaintiff.  In nullifying the jury verdict, 
the majority has impermissibly encroached on the jury's 
important fact-finding function, which is something that nei-
ther a trial judge, see Tri County Industries, Inc. v. District 
of Columbia, 200 F.3d 836, 840, 842-43 (D.C. Cir. 2000), cert. 
granted, 68 U.S.L.W. 3774 (U.S. Sept. 26, 2000) (No. 99-1953), 
nor an appellate panel, see Boodoo v. Cary, 21 F.3d 1157, 1161 
(D.C. Cir.  1994), is permitted to do.

     The majority opinion is especially suspect, because the 
judgment is based on a re-weighing of the evidence that was 
before the jury.  The case that Duncan presented to the jury 

was adequate to survive a judgment as a matter of law, so 
there is no basis for this court to second-guess the jury.  And 
it is somewhat unnerving to notice that this court showed 
unbridled solicitude for the jury's role when considering a 
highly debatable claim in Tri County Industries (in which the 
city of Washington, D.C., was required to pay $5 million on a 
jury verdict) and now see that same solicitude missing here in 
a case involving a claim under the ADA.

A.   Standard of Review

     In considering whether to take a verdict away from a jury 
and grant a judgment as a matter of law, a court may not 
substitute its judgment for the jury's judgment in factual 
determinations.  See Boodoo, 21 F.3d at 1161 (D.C. Cir.  
1994).  As the Court recently reiterated, "[c]redibility deter-
minations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of 
legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not 
those of a judge."  Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, 
Inc., 120 S. Ct. 2097, 2110 (2000) (quoting Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986)).

     Whether a judge is inclined in favor of one possible inter-
pretation of the evidence, over another plausible interpreta-
tion of the evidence, is of no moment.  This court may enter a 
judgment as a matter of law only when the evidence present-
ed at trial admits of a single inevitable interpretation.  "It is 
long settled that 'the jury's verdict will withstand challenge 
unless the evidence and all reasonable inferences that can be 
drawn therefrom are so one-sided that reasonable men and 
women could not disagree on the verdict.' "  Swanks v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 179 F.3d 929, 933 
(D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 1061 (1999) (quoting Scott v. 
District of Columbia, 101 F.3d 748, 753 (D.C. Cir. 1996)).  
This high threshold has not been met in this case.  Based on 
the evidence presented at trial, the jury reasonably deter-
mined that Duncan's physical impairment substantially limit-
ed him in the major life activity of working.  Despite the 
clear prohibition that a court must not replace a jury as trier 
of fact, WMATA's case turns on asking this court to re-weigh 
the evidence.  At the very opening of his oral argument, 

WMATA's counsel urged this court to weigh the medical 
reports and physicians' testimony offered at trial so as to find 
that Duncan was able to perform medium lifting.  The argu-
ment was one that simply asked this court to make findings of 
fact against the plaintiff, something that we have no authority 
to do.  Indeed, much of WMATA's argument to this court 
was presented as if the judges on the appellate bench were in 
a jury box.  As the following analysis indicates, there is no 
basis here to take this case from the jury.

B.   Disability under the ADA

     As noted above, under the ADA, a disability is "a physical 
or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of 
the major life activities of [an] individual."  42 U.S.C. s 12102 
(2)(A) (1994).  And EEOC regulations provide that "work" is 
a major life activity.  29 C.F.R. s 1630.2(i) (1999).  Unless 
and until the Supreme Court decides otherwise, working 
remains a major life activity under the ADA.  See Mullins v. 
Cromwell, 228 F.3d 1305, 1313 (11th Cir. 2000);  Sinkler v. 
Midwest Property Management, Ltd., 209 F.3d 678, 684 n.1 
(7th Cir. 2000);  Equal Employment Opportunity Comm'n v. 
R.J. Gallagher Co., 181 F.3d 645, 654-55 (5th Cir. 1999).

     EEOC regulations explain that a physical impairment sub-
stantially limits an individual's ability to work when the 
individual is

     significantly restricted in the ability to perform either a 
     class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes as 
     compared to the average person having comparable 
     training, skills and abilities.  The inability to perform a 
     single, particular job does not constitute a substantial 
     limitation in the major life activity of working.
     
29 C.F.R. s 1630.2(j)(3)(i).  In addition, the following factors 
may be considered in assessing whether a physical impair-
ment substantially limits a person's ability to work:

     (A) The geographical area to which the individual has 
     reasonable access;
     
     (B) The job from which the individual has been disquali-
     fied because of an impairment, and the number and types 
     
     of jobs utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or 
     abilities, within that geographical area, from which the 
     individual is also disqualified because of the impairment 
     (class of jobs);  and/or
     
     (C) The job from which the individual has been disquali-
     fied because of an impairment, and the number and types 
     of other jobs not utilizing similar training, knowledge, 
     skills or abilities, within that geographical area, from 
     which the individual is also disqualified because of the 
     impairment (broad range of jobs in various classes).
     
Id.  s 1630.2(j)(3)(ii).

     There is no magical legal standard for measuring substan-
tial limitation.  Clearly, the inability to perform lifting does 
not automatically constitute an impairment that substantially 
limits a person's ability to work.  See, e.g., Thompson v. Holy 
Family Hosp., 121 F.3d 537, 539 (9th Cir.1997) (holding nurse 
who was restricted in her ability to lift but was able to work 
in other nursing jobs was not substantially limited).  Howev-
er, the inability to participate in significant lifting, taken in 
the context of an individualized analysis, may substantially 
limit an individual's ability to work.  In evaluating substantial 
limitation, a jury must engage in a context-dependent assess-
ment of the plaintiff's personal characteristics, education, 
work history, and the available job market in order to assess 
whether the plaintiff is excluded from a class of jobs or a 
broad range of jobs across classes.  See, e.g., Wellington v. 
Lyon County Sch. Dist., 187 F.3d 1150, 1155 (9th Cir. 1999) 
(finding issue of material fact exists regarding disability 
where plaintiff's education was limited to a high school degree 
and some trade school training, his work experience was 
limited to manufacturing, construction, heavy maintenance 
and plumbing, and no evidence was presented that jobs were 
available in the job market for a person with comparable 
abilities);  Quint v. A.E. Staley Mfg. Co., 172 F.3d 1, 11-12 
(1st Cir. 1999) (rejecting judgment as a matter of law against 
plaintiff where plaintiff had only a high school education and 
a work history of heavy physical labor, and physician testified 
plaintiff was precluded from a lot of jobs);  Mondzelewski v. 

Pathmark Stores, Inc., 162 F.3d 778, 784 (3d Cir. 1998) 
(explaining that "an individual's training, skills, and abilities 
are taken into account in determining whether the individual 
is substantially limited in the major life activity of working");  
Webb v. Garelick Mfg. Co., 94 F.3d 484, 487 (8th Cir. 1996) 
(explaining "[a] person's expertise, background, and job ex-
pectations are relevant factors in defining the class of jobs 
used to determine whether an individual is disabled");  Coch-
rum v. Old Ben Coal Co., 102 F.3d 908, 911 (7th Cir. 1996) 
(noting "[t]he physical restrictions Cochrum's physician 
placed upon him--no overhead work, heavy lifting, or pulling 
and pushing out from his body--might apply to a broad range 
of jobs, and are more than job specific").

     In this case, the jury was presented with evidence of 
Duncan's personal characteristics, education, work history, 
and the available job market in order to assess whether he 
was excluded from a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs 
across classes.  It does not matter that WMATA disputed 
some of what Duncan offered;  what matters is that there was 
evidence in the record supporting Duncan's claim.  I agree 
with my colleagues that Duncan did not present the strongest 
case possible.  However, I believe that there was enough 
before the jury to justify its verdict in his favor.

C.   The jury reasonably determined that Duncan was sub-
     stantially limited in the major life activity of working

     There is no serious doubt that Duncan was physically 
impaired.  Dr. Harvey N. Mininberg, an orthopedic surgeon, 
diagnosed Duncan with degenerative disc disease.  See Trial 
Transcript at 18 (May 20, 1997).  After he was injured while 
working for WMATA, Dr. Mininberg authorized Duncan to 
return to work, with the restriction that Duncan not lift more 
than approximately 20 pounds.  See id. at 25.  Dr. Najmaldin 
O. Karim, a neurosurgeon, confirmed both the diagnosis and 
the lifting restriction.  See id. at 122, 127.  Duncan alleged 
that this physical impairment substantially limited him in the 
major life activity of working.  Specifically, Duncan claimed 
that as a result of his physical impairment, he was precluded 
from the classes of jobs that included medium, heavy, and 
very heavy lifting.

     There was sufficient evidence in the record for a reasonable 
jury to determine that, based on Duncan's education, training, 
work history, and efforts to find another job, Duncan's physi-
cal impairment substantially limited his ability to work.  Dun-
can never received a high school diploma or completed his 
GED.  He went to trade school for a year and a half, but 
never finished the training.  He had no other formal training 
or education.  He had no computer training.  He had no 
clerical or office skills.  He could barely type.  See Trial 
Transcript at 127-28 (May 19, 1997).

     Duncan was employed in heavy labor jobs throughout his 
working life.  Before working for WMATA, he worked in 
furniture factories, in a box company, in a glass company, in 
construction, and in a company that provided the physical 
settings for functions and meetings.  He was a physical 
laborer.  Every one of his jobs involved significant lifting.

     After Duncan injured his back while working for WMATA 
and WMATA terminated him, Duncan sought jobs that were 
of a light duty nature.  Duncan testified that during the nine 
months he was receiving unemployment compensation, he 
looked for jobs that were not strenuous.  See id. at 129.  
With his back injury, Duncan knew he could not perform the 
kinds of work he had performed previously.  He testified that 
he could not go back and work as a laborer in construction, or 
as a packer at a glass company or furniture company, as he 
had before.  See id. at 136.

     Duncan testified that, in order to receive unemployment 
compensation, he was required to submit applications in 
search of other employment.  See id. at 129.  Although he 
could not recall the specific jobs for which he applied, Duncan 
testified that during his nine months on unemployment he 
would check the unemployment listings, and call jobs he 
thought he could do.  He would ask prospective employers 
what the jobs entailed.  If the description of a job included 
significant lifting that he knew he could not do, he would not 
inquire further.  See id. at 130.

     Although he wanted to work full time, Duncan was not able 
to find full-time employment.  He ended up accepting a part-

time job with Hertz, moving cars after customers dropped 
them off.  He accepted the job even though it paid $5.75 an 
hour, approximately one-third what he earned working for 
WMATA.  See id. at 135.

     As noted above, Duncan should have been offered the parts 
runner job when it became available.  He had performed the 
job in the past;  he was fully qualified and physically able to 
perform the work;  and he had seniority among the competing 
candidates.  WMATA never offered an adequate explanation 
for its failure to accommodate Duncan, despite knowing of his 
disability and having a position available for him to perform.  
Indeed, the only excuses offered by WMATA were that 
Duncan never furnished medical evidence to support his 
disability and that Duncan never really sought an accommo-
dation.  The jury obviously rejected each of these claims;  
and, based on the record before us, it is easy to understand 
this, for WMATA's claims are patently specious.

                          II. Conclusion

     Based on the evidence presented at trial, the jury reason-
ably determined that Duncan's physical disability substantial-
ly limited him in the major life activity of working.  The jury 
verdict should stand and the judgment of the District Court 
should be affirmed.

                                                           