                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 4, 2002     Decided April 23, 2002 

                           No. 01-1202

                       Andrew W. Van Dyke, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

            National Transportation Safety Board and 
                Federal Aviation Administration, 
                           Respondents

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
            United States Department of Transportation

     Mark T. McDermott argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Peter J. Wiernicki.

     Robert P. Vente, Counsel, Federal Aviation Administration, 
argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the brief was 
Peter J. Lynch, Assistant Chief Counsel, Federal Aviation 
Administration.

     Before:  Edwards and Randolph, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  This is a petition for judicial 
review of an order of the National Transportation Safety 
Board affirming the decision of an administrative law judge to 
suspend Andrew W. Van Dyke's commercial pilot license for 
45 days on a charge brought by the Federal Aviation Admin-
istration. The question is whether there is "substantial evi-
dence" in the record to support the Board's order.  See 49 
U.S.C. s 46110(c).

     On April 25, 1998, the date of the incident for which he was 
suspended, Van Dyke worked for Sky's the Limit, Inc., a sky-
diving company operating out of the Orange County Airport, 
in Montgomery, New York, some 50 miles north of New York 
City.  He piloted a Beechcraft King Air in and out of the 
airport, dropping off one group of skydivers and picking up a 
new group throughout the day.  At 6:15 p.m., as Van Dyke 
was making his descent to the airport, a regional air traffic 
controller instructed him to change course and approach the 
airport from the south.  The traffic controller wanted Van 
Dyke to avoid heavy traffic departing from Stewart Interna-
tional Airport, seven miles to the east.  What happened next 
is the crux of the dispute between Van Dyke and the Federal 
Aviation Administration.

     Because there is no air traffic control tower at the Orange 
County Airport, FAA regulations require approaching pilots 
to make all turns in the same direction.  14 C.F.R. 
s 91.126(b).  The usual path is left-hand turns only.  The 
"preferred method" is for the pilot to approach the pattern on 
a course 45 degrees to the downwind leg and join the pattern 
at midfield.  The pilot then flies parallel to the runway.  Once 
past the end of the runway, the pilot turns to the left.  This is 
the "base leg."  The pilot turns left again, into the wind, and 
lands.  Figure 1 illustrates the standard FAA landing pat-
tern.

                                 








                    










               Figure 1 not available electronically.











     The runway Van Dyke approached at Orange County Air-
port has a different rule:  all turns must be made to the right 
(to avoid planes from nearby Stewart International Airport).  
Markings, visible from the sky, indicate this.  This landing 
pattern is illustrated in Figure 2.

                                 





























               Figure 2 not available electronically.







     In testimony before the ALJ, Bucky Gorton, the operations 
supervisor at the airport on April 25, 1998, said that while he 
was in the airport office he received a radio call from Van 
Dyke announcing that he was entering a left downwind 
pattern for landing.  Gorton radioed back that this Orange 
County runway was right traffic, not left.  Gorton said Van 
Dyke responded that the regional air traffic controller had 
told him to enter a left traffic pattern.  Gorton repeated that 
all turns must be made to the right.  Gorton then looked out 
of his office window, and saw a King Air flying on a left 
downwind leg.  See Figure 3.  The plane passed out of 
Gorton's sight, traveling to the east, and he saw nothing more 
until the plane landed.  Gorton did not see the plane make 
any turns.

     Van Dyke testified that he radioed to announce that he was 
on an extended left base to land at the airport, which would 
have required only that he turn left onto the runway.  When 

Gorton said the plane could not land this way, Van Dyke flew 
past the runway and made several right turns to bring the 
plane down.  See Figure 3.  Jeffrey Hawke, another company 
pilot on the flight, confirmed Van Dyke's version.  The owner 
of "Sky's the Limit," Jeffrey Root, saw the plane fly north 
across the field, as Van Dyke claims.  This is segment 1 of 
Van Dyke's path.  See Figure 3.  Root was then distracted.  
When he looked up, he saw the plane turn right from the base 
leg into its final approach.  This is segment 3 and segment 4.









              Figure 3 not available electronically.












     The ALJ concluded that Van Dyke "entered a high left-
hand pattern," and therefore found him in violation of three 
FAA regulations.  The first, 14 C.F.R. s 91.126(b), requires 
pilots in Class G airspace - when approaching an airport 
without a control tower - to make all turns to the left unless 
the airport specifies otherwise.  The second, 14 C.F.R. 
s 91.127(a), applies the same condition to those operating in 
Class E airspace, like the Orange County Airport.  The third, 
14 C.F.R. s 91.13, forbids operating an aircraft in a "careless 

or reckless manner," which Van Dyke allegedly did by mak-
ing left-hand turns.

     The Board, in affirming the ALJ, put its decision on the 
basis that the ALJ believed Gorton's version of events and 
disbelieved the version put forward by Van Dyke and the 
other two witnesses.  Gorton's story, the Board wrote, pro-
vided "adequate circumstantial proof that respondent had 
operated contrary to the regulations cited in the Administra-
tor's complaint" by making "left turns."

     Substantial evidence is "such relevant evidence as a reason-
able mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion" 
(Consol. Edison Co. v. NLRB, 305 U.S. 197, 229 (1938)), 
taking "into account whatever in the record fairly detracts 
from its weight" (Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 
474, 488 (1951)).  See Lindsay v. Nat'l Transp. Safety Bd., 47 
F.3d 1209, 1213 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  No such evidence supports 
the Board's conclusion here.  The airport manager, Gorton, 
did not see Van Dyke's plane making any turns.  The Board 
nevertheless thought Gorton's testimony carried the day be-
cause he "did observe the landing that followed the left 
downwind."  But Gorton's observations are entirely consis-
tent with Van Dyke's making only right turns, as Van Dyke 
said he did, by crossing over the runway and making right 
turns until he turned right again into the downwind leg of the 
landing pattern.

     One can imagine another theory to support the Board's 
conclusion.  The ALJ might have concluded, in light of Van 
Dyke's demeanor, "not only that the witness' testimony is not 
true, but that the truth is the opposite of his story," Dyer v. 
MacDougall, 201 F.2d 265, 268-69 (2d Cir. 1952).  Perhaps 
the Board had this in mind when it stated that the ALJ had 
rejected not only Van Dyke's testimony, but also the testimo-
ny of Hawke and Root, on the basis of their lack of credibility.  
We need not decide whether this court would affirm a sanc-
tion on this ground.  See United States v. Zeigler, 994 F.2d 
845 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  The ALJ made no such credibility 
determinations.  Rather than finding Van Dyke not credible, 

the ALJ stated in his opinion, delivered orally, "I have no 
reason to doubt the veracity of [Van Dyke] but as I said 
earlier, nor can I doubt the veracity of [Gorton and the FAA's 
expert witness]."  Gorton and Van Dyke gave contradictory 
accounts on some matters other than the direction of turns so 
we cannot understand what the ALJ had in mind.  As to 
Root, the ALJ never mentioned his testimony confirming Van 
Dyke's account.  Contrary to the Board, the ALJ thus did not 
impugn Van Dyke's credibility or that of his supporting 
witnesses.

     An expert witness for the FAA devoted some of his testi-
mony to explaining why the landing pattern described by Van 
Dyke - with all turns made to the right - was dangerous.  
This may be so, but Van Dyke was prosecuted for making left 
turns in his landing pattern and thereby flying recklessly.  
The government has defended the Board's decision on that 
ground alone.  Brief for Respondents at 16-17.  That is the 
reasoning the Board put forward in its opinion.  If there is no 
substantial evidence to support the Board's reasoning - and 
there is none here - its order must be vacated.  See SEC v. 
Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196 (1947).

                                                                 Vacated.

           