                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 7, 2002    Decided March 22, 2002 

                           No. 01-5170

           Association of Civilian Technicians, Inc., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               Federal Labor Relations Authority, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv02562)

     Daniel M. Schember argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellant.

     William E. Persina, Attorney, Federal Labor Relations 
Authority, argued the cause for the appellee.  With him on 
the brief were David M. Smith, Solicitor, and William R. 
Tobey, Deputy Solicitor.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  This case presents a straightforward 
question of statutory interpretation:  Does the statute that 
gives federal courts of appeals jurisdiction to review decisions 
of the Federal Labor Relations Authority "other than ... 
order[s] ... involving an appropriate unit determination," 
leave district courts free to review such determinations pursu-
ant to the Administrative Procedure Act?  Answering no, we 
affirm the district court's dismissal of this challenge to an 
appropriate unit determination.

                                I.

     National Guard "dual status technicians" (mechanics, ma-
chinists, and supply technicians) are federal employees who, 
pursuant to the National Guard Technicians Act (NGTA), 32 
U.S.C. s 709, are separately employed and supervised by the 
Adjutant General of their respective State Guards.  As a 
condition of employment, they must maintain membership in 
the state unit of the National Guard for which they work.  Id. 
s 709(b).  For collective bargaining purposes, dual status 
technicians are represented by appellant, the Association of 
Civilian Technicians.  Though a national union, the Associa-
tion bargains separately on behalf of each state-based unit.

     This case began when the Association filed a petition with 
the Federal Labor Relations Authority seeking to have dual 
status technician bargaining units consolidated into a single, 
national unit.  The Federal Labor Relations Act (FLRA) 
directs the Authority to determine whether unit determina-
tion petitions are "appropriate," based on such factors as 
whether the determination "will ensure a clear and identifi-
able community of interest among the employees in the unit 
and will promote effective dealings with, and efficiency of the 
operations of the agency involved."  5 U.S.C. s 7112(a).  Ap-
plying these standards, the Authority's Regional Director 
denied the petition.  On review, the Authority acknowledged 
that some evidence--particularly the "interchange" of techni-

cians among State Guards--supported the appropriateness of 
the proposed national unit.  The Authority, however, affirmed 
the Regional Director's conclusion that more evidence justi-
fied maintaining state-based units:  Each National Guard 
state unit has "an individual mission unique to its state or 
territory";  the NGTA invests Adjutants General with "overall 
authority over all personnel and labor relations matters in 
their respective State Activities";  and national collective bar-
gaining would be ineffective because "authority over the day-
to-day employment of the technicians ... is designated by 
statute to the states."  The Association urged the Authority 
to consider the increased bargaining rights that consolidation 
would purportedly bring to union members, but the agency 
declined to do so, agreeing with the Regional Director that 
the statutory obligation to "ensure employees the fullest 
freedom in exercising the rights guaranteed under this chap-
ter," id., applies only to units already determined to be 
appropriate.  On the basis of this analysis, the Authority 
denied the petition for review.

     Invoking section 702 of the Administrative Procedure Act--
"[a] person ... aggrieved by agency action ... is entitled to 
judicial review thereof," id. s 702--the Association sued the 
Authority in the United States District Court for the District 
of Columbia, arguing that the unit determination was "arbi-
trary [and] capricious," id. s 706(a)(2)(A).  The district court 
dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction, relying on FLRA 
section 7123:  "Any person aggrieved by any final order of the 
[Federal Labor Relations] Authority other than an order 
under ... section 7112 of this title (involving an appropriate 
unit determination), may ... institute an action for judicial 
review of the Authority's order in the [appropriate] United 
States court of appeals."  Id. s 7123(a) (emphasis added).  
The district court concluded that this exception deprives not 
just courts of appeals, but all federal courts, of jurisdiction to 
review appropriate unit determinations.

     The Association appeals.  Our review is de novo.  Nat'l 
Taxpayers Union v. United States, 68 F.3d 1428, 1432 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995) ("In a case ... involving a District Court's dismiss-

al of a complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, our 
standard of review is de novo.").

                               II.

     Notwithstanding eighty-two pages of briefing, this case is 
not difficult.  FLRA section 7123 gives courts of appeals 
jurisdiction to review Authority decisions "other than ... 
order[s] under ... section 7112 of this title (involving an 
appropriate unit determination)."  5 U.S.C. s 7123(a).  The 
APA expressly provides that its general review provisions, 
pursuant to which the Association filed this suit, do not apply 
where "statutes preclude judicial review."  Id. s 701(a)(1);  cf. 
id. s 702 ("Nothing herein ... confers authority to grant 
relief if any other statute that grants consent to suit express-
ly or impliedly forbids the relief ... sought.").  Because 
FLRA section 7123 "precludes judicial review" of appropriate 
unit determinations, the district court properly held that it 
lacked jurisdiction to hear this case.

     Pointing out that FLRA section 7123 mentions only "courts 
of appeals," the Association insists that the provision does not 
bar district courts from reviewing appropriate unit determi-
nations.  Like the district court, we disagree.  We cannot 
imagine that Congress, having vested in courts of appeals 
exclusive jurisdiction to review all Authority decisions except 
those relating to appropriate unit determinations, would have 
intended that such determinations could nevertheless be re-
viewed by district courts.  See Columbia Power Trades 
Council v. United States Dep't of Energy, 671 F.2d 325, 327 
(9th Cir. 1982) ("At no point does the Act entitle a party to 
petition a district court for relief.  Given the broad purpose of 
the Act[,] ... and the limited role of the judiciary in this 
statutory scheme, it is manifestly the expressed desire of 
Congress to create an exclusive statutory scheme.") (footnote 
omitted).

     Although FLRA section 7123's clarity makes resort to 
legislative history unnecessary, we think it worth noting that 
the Joint Committee Report on the bill that became the 
FLRA declared:  "As in the private sector, there will be no 

judicial review of the Authority's determination of the appro-
priateness of bargaining units."  H.R. Rep. No. 95-1717, at 
153 (1978).  The Report does not say that there will be "no 
circuit court review";  it says there will be "no judicial re-
view."  Moreover, the Joint Committee's comparison to the 
"private sector" demonstrates that Congress had in mind a 
review scheme identical to the NLRB's, and the Supreme 
Court has determined that the National Labor Relations Act's 
preclusion of direct court of appeals review of certain matters 
also bars district court APA review.  See NLRB v. United 
Food & Commercial Workers Union, Local 23, 484 U.S. 112, 
133 (1987).  "It would be absurd," the Supreme Court de-
clared, to allow district court review of settlement determina-
tions when the NLRA expressly precludes direct review of 
such determinations in courts of appeals.  Id.

     In holding that FLRA section 7123 precludes direct review 
of Authority appropriate unit determinations, we emphasize 
that the Association remains free to obtain indirect judicial 
review by refusing to bargain, drawing an unfair labor prac-
tice charge, and appealing that charge to the Authority and 
then to a court of appeals.  See, e.g., Dep't of Energy v. 
FLRA, 880 F.2d 1163, 1163-65, 1164 n.3 (10th Cir. 1989) 
(reviewing the Authority's unit determination in the context 
of an unfair labor practice proceeding).  It is in this way, as 
the Joint Committee indicated, see supra at 4-5, that the 
FLRA parallels the NLRA.  The Association claims that the 
existence of this indirect method of review implies that direct 
review should be available as well, but we rejected a virtually 
identical argument in Physicians National House Staff Ass'n 
v. Fanning, where a union sought APA review of an NLRB 
denial of a certification petition.  642 F.2d 492, 495 (D.C. Cir. 
1980).  Pointing out that the denial occurred in the course of 
an unreviewable representation proceeding, we rejected the 
union's argument that the district court nevertheless had 
jurisdiction because the union's only other means of review 
was through an onerous unfair labor practice proceeding.  
Our analysis in Fanning applies here as well:

     [I]t may be unlikely that the correctness of these deci-
     sions may be tested in an unfair labor practice proceed-
     ing reviewable in a court of appeals, but we think this is 
     not a reason to permit District Court review.  Congress 
     has considered the likelihood that some Board decisions 
     in representation proceedings may evade all judicial re-
     view.  Nevertheless, it has rejected attempts to provide 
     review in such cases.
     
Id. at 499.

     Undeterred by all this "clear and convincing evidence" of 
Congressional intent to preclude judicial review, Abbott Labs. 
v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 141 (1967) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted), the Association offers four unper-
suasive arguments in support of its belief that the district 
court nevertheless had jurisdiction to entertain its challenge 
to the appropriate-unit determination in this case.  Citing a 
Supreme Court case, McNary v. Haitian Refugee Center, 
Inc., 498 U.S. 479 (1991), and a decision of this circuit, 
Crowley Caribbean Transportation, Inc. v. PeNa, 37 F.3d 671 
(D.C. Cir. 1994), the Association first argues that two aspects 
of the Authority's decision amount to "broad legal interpreta-
tion[s]" that the district court had jurisdiction to review even 
though they were embedded in an otherwise unreviewable 
decision.  Appellant's Opening Br. at 24.  The "broad legal 
determinations" the Association has in mind are the Authori-
ty's holding that the NGTA invests Adjutants General with 
responsibility for personnel and labor relations matters in 
their respective state activities, and the agency's finding that 
an increase in employee rights resulting from consolidation is 
not a relevant factor in appropriate unit determinations.  The 
Supreme Court, however, has generally rejected "the princi-
ple that if the agency gives a reviewable reason for otherwise 
unreviewable action, the action becomes reviewable."  Inter-
state Commerce Comm'n v. Bhd. of Locomotive Eng'rs, 482 
U.S. 270, 283 (1987) (citation and internal quotation marks 
omitted).  Although the cases the Association cites reveal 
limited exceptions to this principle, those exceptions are 
inapplicable here.  In McNary, the Supreme Court held that 

a district court could exercise subject matter jurisdiction over 
a general due process challenge to the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service's administration of "Special Agricultur-
al Worker" status, even though the controlling statute made 
individual status determinations unreviewable.  498 U.S. at 
494.  Just because district courts may in some cases review 
generic, constitutional challenges to otherwise unreviewable 
agency actions hardly means that the district court in this 
case had jurisdiction over the Association's non-constitutional, 
individualized claim.  Nor does our assumption in Crowley 
that a district court might have jurisdiction over an agency's 
articulation of its general enforcement policy, 37 F.3d at 677, 
support the Association's argument that district courts may 
review any agency legal interpretation made in the context of 
otherwise unreviewable individual adjudications.  On the con-
trary, Crowley echoes the Supreme Court's "square[ ] re-
ject[ion of] the notion of carving reviewable legal rulings out 
from the middle of non-reviewable actions."  Id. at 676 (citing 
Bhd. of Locomotive Eng'rs, 482 U.S. at 283).

     The Association next argues that the Authority's findings 
regarding the scope of Adjutant General responsibility and 
the relevance of increased employee rights are reviewable 
pursuant to the "rule" giving federal courts authority to 
review agency decisions that "erroneously disclaim jurisdic-
tion to enforce the law[.]"  Appellant's Opening Br. at 33.  In 
support of this proposition, the Association cites a Ninth 
Circuit decision, Montana Air Chapter No. 29 v. FLRA, 898 
F.2d 753 (1990).  That case, however, as well as a similar 
decision of this circuit, International Longshoremen's Ass'n 
v. National Mediation Board, 785 F.2d 1098, 1100 (D.C. Cir. 
1986), held that agency nonenforcement decisions, normally 
unreviewable, see Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 832 (1985), 
may be reviewed if they rest on the agency's erroneous belief 
that it lacks jurisdiction.  That rule does not apply here, for 
the Authority neither disclaimed jurisdiction nor declined to 
enforce the FLRA.  On the contrary, the agency affirmative-
ly exercised its statutory jurisdiction, evaluated the merits of 
the consolidation petition, and concluded that the proposed 
unit was not appropriate.

     Third, the Association attempts to bring this case within 
the ambit of Adams v. Richardson, which held that district 
courts may exercise jurisdiction over agency action that 
amounts to "an abdication of ... Congress' clear statement of 
an affirmative enforcement duty."  480 F.2d 1159, 1162 (D.C. 
Cir. 1973).  Citing the agency's same two rulings about 
Adjutant General responsibility and the relevance of in-
creased bargaining rights, the Association argues that the 
Authority abdicated its responsibility "to determine appropri-
ate bargaining units" and "to enforce [the] mandate of [sec-
tion 7112 of the Act]."  Appellant's Opening Br. at 34-35.  In 
our view, these two rulings do not come close to the "abdica-
tion" that justified district court jurisdiction in Adams.  In 
that case, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare 
declined to enforce an entire statutory scheme, Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964.  Adams, 480 F.2d at 1161.  The 
evidence showed that the Secretary, in violation of an unam-
biguous statutory directive that HEW "effectuate the provi-
sions of ... this title," 42 U.S.C. s 2000d-1, failed to take 
appropriate action to terminate federal funding to segregated 
school systems, a failure we called "a dereliction of duty," 
Adams, 480 F.2d at 1163.  The record in this case reflects no 
such dereliction.  As we indicated above, the Authority exer-
cised jurisdiction over the consolidation petition and ruled 
against the Association.  The Association's claim that the 
agency abdicated its enforcement responsibility represents 
nothing more than substantive disagreement with the agen-
cy's legal rulings.

     Finally, the Association argues that the Authority's ruling 
amounts to the kind of "open violation of statutory authority" 
that the Supreme Court found reviewable in Leedom v. Kyne, 
358 U.S. 184, 188 (1958). "The invocation of Leedom jurisdic-
tion," we have emphasized, "is extraordinary;  to justify such 
jurisdiction, there must be a specific provision of the Act 
which, although it is clear and mandatory, was nevertheless 
violated by the [agency]."  Council of Prison Locals v. Brew-
er, 735 F.2d 1497, 1501 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (citations and internal 
quotation marks omitted).  In this case, the Association 
points to no clear violation of an unambiguous statutory 

provision.  Instead, its arguments--that the Authority openly 
violated the clear mandate of the Act by determining that the 
NGTA prohibits nationwide consolidation of bargaining units 
and (again) by failing to include increased bargaining rights 
as a factor in its decision--merely repeat its disagreement 
with the agency's ruling.  This falls well short of the require-
ments for Leedom jurisdiction.  "That the [agency] may have 
made an error of fact or law is insufficient;  the [agency] must 
have acted without statutory authority."  Fanning, 642 F.2d 
at 496.

     The dismissal of this case for want of jurisdiction is af-
firmed.

                                                             So ordered.

                                                       