                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 6, 2000     Decided April 9, 2002 

                           No. 99-1507

                 Town of Stratford, Connecticut, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Federal Aviation Administration and 
                         Jane F. Garvey, 
                         Administrator, 
                           Respondents

           On Petition for Review of a Decision of the 
                 Federal Aviation Administration

     William A. Butler argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Robert H. Oakley, Attorney, United States Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, and 
Ellen Durkee, Attorney.

     Before:  Rogers and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  The Town of Stratford 
petitions for review of the Federal Aviation Administration's 
Decision concerning the Bridgeport-Sikorsky Memorial Air-
port and disposal of land from the Stratford Army Engine 
Plant.  We conclude that Stratford lacks prudential standing 
to pursue its claims that the FAA's Environmental Impact 
Statement (EIS) was inadequate under the National Environ-
mental Policy Act1 and that its remaining claims are without 
merit.  Stratford's petition is therefore denied.

                                I.

     The Bridgeport-Sikorsky Memorial Airport (BDR) belongs 
to Bridgeport, Connecticut, but actually sits in the neighbor-
ing town of Stratford.  The airport is bounded by wetlands 
and the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge, 
Great Meadows Marsh to the southwest, by the Lordship 
township to the south and east, by Connecticut State High-
way 113 (Stratford's "Main Street") to the northeast, and by 
the residential township to the northwest.  Across Main 
Street from the airport is the Stratford Army Engine Plant 
(SAEP), which has closed.  Stratford and Bridgeport have 
had a number of disputes over the airport, some of which 
focused on the property tax revenues Stratford loses because 
of the airport's municipal status.  In 1978, the disputes 
resulted in a court-approved settlement that required Bridge-
port to obtain Stratford's permission for "the acquisition of 
land for the purposes of extension of the airport runways, and 
... for the extension of any of the airport runways."  The 

__________
     1  42 U.S.C. ss 4321-4370e.  Stratford also invokes two sets of 
NEPA implementing regulations--those of the Council on Environ-
mental Quality, 40 C.F.R. 1500-17, and the Airport Environmental 
Handbook, FAA Order 5050.4A for implementation of NEPA.

airport has two runways currently in use:  Runway 6-24, 
which is the primary one, and Runway 11-29.2

     Bridgeport has filed an "Airport Master Plan" with the 
FAA that calls for the renovation of the two runways, begin-
ning with Runway 6-24, and the addition of several safety 
enhancements.  Bridgeport asserts that the concrete on Run-
way 6-24 needs replacement to make the airport safer.  Re-
placing the concrete is a "reconstruction ... of a runway," 
which requires the city to construct "a [runway] safety area 
that conforms to the dimensions acceptable to the [FAA]" at 
the time of reconstruction.  14 C.F.R. 139.309(a)(2).

     The length of a runway safety area is determined by an 
airport's "design classification," a description of the largest 
class of aircraft that uses the runway for 500 or more 
operations per year.  The category is determined by the 
design aircraft's landing-approach speed and the group by the 
design aircraft's wingspan.  The recommended safety area 
for a C-II airport is 1000 feet long by 500 feet wide at either 
end of the runway.  (By contrast, a B-II airport has a 
recommended safety area of only 600 feet by 300 feet.)  BDR 
is currently a C-II airport, the safety areas for which would 
require expansion of the airport (although not the runways 
themselves) into the space currently occupied by Main Street 
and beyond.

     After receiving Bridgeport's Airport Plan, the FAA pre-
pared an EIS evaluating various possible safety measures at 
the airport.  The EIS' Statement of Purpose and Need 
outlined its general objective of increasing safety for gener-
al/corporate and commercial aviation services.  The EIS con-
sidered three groups of alternatives.  The Preferred Alterna-
tive shifted runway 6-24 to the northeast, provided for a new 
taxiway area (which encroaches on the SAEP), provided for 
safety areas of 1000 feet on either end of the runway, placed a 
light system on a catwalk through wetlands, required the 
rerouting of Main Street through the SAEP, recommended 

__________
     2  Runways are named for their headings, to the nearest 10ø.  
Runway 6-24 runs 60ø and 240ø, depending on which way a plane 
comes in.  Runway 11-29 runs 110ø and 290ø.

annexation of four SAEP acres and placing "avigation restric-
tions covering height and electromagnetic, smoke, and light 
emissions," on an additional five,3 and created wetland im-
pacts which would require mitigation.  Importantly, the Pre-
ferred Alternative did not contemplate extending the runway 
itself.

     The FAA then issued its Decision, which followed the EIS, 
approving in most part the Airport Master Plan, including 
expanded safety areas.  Stratford petitions for review of that 
Decision on three grounds:  first, that the FAA's Environ-
mental Impact Statement was inadequate under NEPA, the 
CEQ regulations and Airport Handbook;  second, the FAA 
violated the Airports and Airways Improvement Act;4  and 
third, subsequent events require preparation of a Supplemen-
tal EIS.

     While the FAA was considering the Airport Master Plan, 
the SAEP was scheduled for closure under the Defense Base 
Closure and Realignment Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-510 
(1990), and the recommendations of the 1995 Defense Base 
Closure and Realignment Commission (collectively "BRAC"), 
and the Army was considering how to dispose of that land.  
BRAC sets forth the federal policy preference of returning 
the land of closing bases to the host community-in this case, 
Stratford.  As part of the base closure process, the Army also 
prepared an EIS.  Its Preferred Alternative was the "En-
cumbered Disposal Alternative," which would transfer the 
SAEP land to Stratford subject to restrictions preventing 
redevelopment of the property from interfering with BDR 
and from producing excessive wetland or other environmental 
impacts.  In its EIS, the Army discussed the economic effects 
of the proposed safety enhancements as well as the potential 
conflict between protecting BDR's operations and Stratford's 

__________
     3  These avigation restrictions create an imaginary geometric 
plane above which structures cannot be built for fear of interfering 
with aircraft in flight.  This plane begins at the edge of the airport 
and moves gradually upward, since the farther from the airport the 
less the chance a low-flying plane would collide with a building.

     4  49 U.S.C. ss 47101 et seq.

redevelopment plans.  The Army ultimately concluded that 
its Preferred Alternative would not be expected to cause "any 
serious disruption or impairment to redevelopment of the 
site," in part because the encumbered parcel was at the fringe 
of the SAEP in the area most prone to airport noise, which 
made it the least desirable parcel for development.  As for 
moving Main Street, the Army concluded that it would entail 
minor long term adverse impacts but would also produce 
minor beneficial effects on air quality.  The Army issued two 
decisions concerning disposal of the disputed land, one in 
January 2001, the other in November 2001.  The FAA now 
purports to rely on the Army's consideration of certain fac-
tors.

     At oral argument, we sua sponte raised the question of 
whether Stratford had been injured so that standing existed, 
and whether the case was ripe for decision.  We had two 
primary concerns:  first, the Army had not yet issued its 
decision concerning disposal of the SAEP land.  Second, 
Stratford claimed that it exercised veto power over a poten-
tial movement of Main Street, which called into question the 
likelihood of the FAA's Preferred Alternative ever being 
implemented.  After the Army issued its decision, the parties 
submitted supplemental briefing concerning standing and 
ripeness.  The FAA told us "that the Administrator ... has 
concluded that the FAA will seek to condemn the road so that 
the airport enhancements needed for safety reasons can be 
constructed at BDR."  Stratford, therefore, will no longer be 
able to exercise veto power over a movement of Main Street.  
With the issuance of the Army's decision and FAA counsel's 
representation as to condemnation, Stratford's petition is ripe 
for review.5  We are also satisfied that Stratford meets the 
requirements for Article III standing because its developmen-
tal prospects are clearly impaired.

__________
     5  Although the City of Bridgeport must still obtain certain 
permits in order for the airport redevelopment to progress, the 
Decision itself is ripe for review even if the sponsor has yet to get 
all of the permits required for construction.  See City of Bridgeton 
v. FAA, 212 F.3d 448, 436 n.6 (8th Cir. 2000).

                               II.

     Although we conclude that Stratford has suffered an inju-
ry-in-fact, there still remains the question whether it has 
prudential standing to raise its NEPA, CEQ, and Airport 
Handbook claims.  Stratford does assert that relocating Main 
Street will add almost a minute of travel time to automobile 
users of Main Street--including its emergency personnel--
but the Town does not claim that it (or anyone else) will 
suffer any environmental injury because of that delay.  Nor 
does Stratford claim that its other injury-in-fact--that but for 
the FAA's decision nine additional acres would be available 
for development--has any negative environmental conse-
quences.

     Since NEPA does not create a private right of action, 
petitioner relies on the APA, which limits prudential standing 
to an "aggrieved party" within the meaning of the substantive 
statute upon which the claim is based.  5 U.S.C. s 702;  see 
also Association of Data Processing Service Organizations v. 
Camp, 397 U.S. 150 (1970).  But we have squarely held that a 
NEPA claim may not be raised by a party with no claimed or 
apparent environmental interest.  See, e.g., ANR Pipeline Co. 
v. FERC, 205 F.3d 403, 408 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  It cannot be 
used as a handy stick by a party with no interest in protect-
ing against an environmental injury to attack a defendant.

     To be sure, the Supreme Court in Bennett v. Spear, 520 
U.S. 154 (1997), in reversing the Ninth Circuit, not surpris-
ingly recognized that the Endangered Species Act did allow a 
petitioner with only economic interests to challenge an action 
of the Fish and Wildlife Service.  That was because the 
specific section of the statute upon which the petitioners 
(irrigation districts and ranchers) relied was drafted at least 
in part to avoid needless economic dislocation.  The Court 
emphasized that a court must examine--not just the general 
aims of a statute--but the specific provision in question to 
determine whether a plaintiff or petitioner has prudential 
standing.

     Although petitioner in our case does not even suggest a 
real basis for prudential standing, the government points us 
to an Eighth Circuit case, Friends of the Boundary Waters 

Wilderness v. Dombeck, 164 F.3d 1115 (8th Cir. 1999), reason-
ing that a CEQ regulation implementing NEPA can confer 
prudential standing on a petitioner asserting an economic 
injury even if the statute does not.  The regulation provides 
that "human environment" as used in the statute "shall be 
interpreted comprehensively to include the natural and physi-
cal environment and the relationship of people with that 
environment."  40 C.F.R. 1508.14.  And the regulation fur-
ther states that:

     This means that economic and social effects are not 
     intended by themselves to require preparation of an 
     environmental impact statement.  When an environmen-
     tal impact statement is prepared and economic or social 
     and natural or physical environmental effects are interre-
     lated, then the environmental impact statement will dis-
     cuss all of these effects on the human environment.
     
Id.  The Eighth Circuit read the Bennett reference to "the 
particular provision of law upon which the plaintiff relies" to 
include a provision of an implementing regulation--even 
though the Supreme Court quite clearly in Bennett was 
referring to a particular section of a statute.

     We do not see how any agency regulation implementing a 
statute could extend prudential standing beyond the class of 
persons Congress intends, but, in any event, we do not read 
the CEQ regulation as purporting to extend prudential stand-
ing.  It does indicate that when economic and social effects 
are interrelated with natural and physical environmental ef-
fects the EIS will "discuss" all of these effects, but it does not 
require government agencies to take economic effects into 
account.  Moreover, the Town of Stratford is not even claim-
ing, as did the ranchers in Bennett, that the government's 
actions calculated to protect the environment directly harm 
its economic interests, nor does it claim that those interests 
are in any other manner interrelated with the environmental 
effects.  Instead, petitioner's assertion that the FAA's EIS is 
defective because not sufficiently sensitive to environmental 
concerns is truly unrelated--or at most "marginally relat-
ed"--to the injury it asserts, except insofar as it argues that 

the entire Airport Plan should not go forward. Clarke v. 
Securities Industry Ass'n, 479 U.S. 388, 399 (1987).  In other 
words, petitioner has not connected its claimed economic 
injury to any environmental effects caused by the allegedly 
defective EIS.  Instead, its EIS claim is simply the "handy 
stick" with which to attack the FAA.6

                               III.

     In its remaining set of challenges, Stratford argues that the 
FAA failed to comply with the Airports & Airways Improve-
ment Act (AAIA) in various ways.  It is claimed that the 
Decision does not comply with 49 U.S.C. s 47106(a)(1), which 
provides that a grant may be given to finance airport projects 
only if the Secretary is satisfied that "the project is consistent 
with plans (existing at the time the project is approved) of 
public agencies authorized by the State in which the airport is 
located to plan for the development of the area surrounding 
the airport."  The FAA responds that it is not clear that 
Stratford is a "public agency" with planning authority as that 
term is used in the statute.  And the record indicates that 
BDR has yet to apply for federal funding, making it unlikely 
that this provision has been triggered.  In any event, Strat-
ford has not shown that the Decision is not "reasonably 
consistent" with its planned redevelopment.  See Suburban 
O'Hare Comm'n v. Dole, 787 F.2d 186 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 
479 U.S. 847 (1986).  According to "Stratford Visions:  2001--

__________
     6  Stratford brings several other claims under an additional 
CEQ regulation and several provisions of the FAA's Airport Envi-
ronmental Handbook, each of which implement NEPA.  These 
include the Town's claims that the FAA's decision is arbitrary 
because it fails to consider cumulative effects, alternative safety 
measures, and potential conflicts with federal, state, and local land 
use policies, among them BRAC and the settlement between Strat-
ford and Bridgeport.  Since Stratford does not have prudential 
standing under 40 C.F.R. 1508.14, it follows that it does not have 
prudential standing under the other CEQ regulation or Airport 
Handbook provisions either.  Nor does Stratford have prudential 
standing to request preparation of a Supplemental EIS based on 
intervening events.

The Town's Plan of Development," Stratford seeks to "[e]n-
courage land use management strategies which recognize the 
airport as a legitimate use at its current location [and d]is-
courage placement of structures and objects in the vicinity of 
the airport, which would create hazards to air traffic and/or 
create risks to property and life."  Because the FAA condi-
tioned the proposed safety enhancement on Bridgeport ob-
taining the necessary federal, state, and local permits, the 
permitting process will ensure that the Airport Plan is consis-
tent with local planning.

     Stratford also asserts that the FAA failed to comply with 
49 U.S.C. s 47106(b), which provides that before the FAA 
approves a grant for airport development, the Secretary of 
Transportation must be satisfied that "the sponsor, a public 
agency, or the Government holds good title to the areas of the 
airport used or intended to be used ... or that good title will 
be acquired."  As noted above, the record does not indicate 
that Bridgeport has applied for funding yet.  Moreover, 
counsel for FAA has represented to us that the agency will 
exercise its condemnation power to eliminate any issues over 
title to the land under Main Street.  Stratford's claim that 
the FAA failed to comply with 49 U.S.C. s 47106(b)(2), which 
requires that the Secretary be satisfied that the "interests of 
the community in or near which the project may be located 
have been given fair consideration" is also without merit.  
The record reflects Stratford's self-described "extensive" in-
volvement in the decisionmaking process.

     Stratford's remaining two AAIA claims are based on 49 
U.S.C. s 47106(c), which applies to "an airport development 
project involving the location of an airport or runway or a 
major runway extension."  Under that section, the Secretary 
must obtain a certification from the Governor of Connecticut 
that the project will meet applicable air and water quality 
standards, and if the Plan is found to have a significant 
adverse effect on natural resources, the Secretary must also 
determine that "no possible and prudent alternative to the 
project exists and that every reasonable step has been taken 
to minimize the adverse effect."  The government maintains 
that the section only applies to the location of a new runway, 

or a major expansion of an existing runway, and the Airport 
Plan does not contemplate either.

     Stratford argues that the shifting of the runway 700 feet to 
the northeast, while maintaining the same compass headings, 
is a "location of [a] runway."  We are not persuaded by 
Stratford's argument that the term "location" must include 
any relocation--no matter how minor.  It seems apparent to 
us that the statutory term "location" is ambiguous.  That 
being so, the only question for us is whether, under Chevron 
U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 
U.S. 837 (1984), the FAA's interpretation is based on a 
reasonable construction, and we think that it is.

     In the alternative, the Town argues that the renovation 
must be a "major" runway extension.  The FAA has keyed 
the definition of "major" to noise impacts, defining a major 
runway expansion as one that will permit the accommodation 
of aircraft that would result in an increase in noise of three 
decibels, an interpretation the Seventh Circuit concluded was 
reasonable in Suburban O'Hare Commission, 787 F.2d at 
199-200.  As the Secretary points out, Stratford's suggestion, 
that even if the renovation was not a "major" runway exten-
sion it was a runway location, would lead to the odd result 
that a runway extension, no matter what length, would not 
trigger AAIA's requirement unless it resulted in a significant 
increase in noise, yet any partial relocation, no matter how 
minor, would trigger section (c).  But both new runways and 
major runway extensions potentially allow more aircraft and 
exposure of the surrounding areas to additional noise.  Be-
cause the Airport Plan does not contemplate either a "location 
of a runway" or a "major runway extension," section (c) does 
not apply, and Stratford's argument founders on a threshold 
reef.

     Accordingly, Stratford's petition for review is denied.

                                  