                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 2, 2001    Decided March 13, 2001 

                           No. 99-3138

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                  Thomas Fields, a/k/a Woozie, 
                            Appellant

                        Consolidated with 
                           No. 99-3139

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
              (No. 98cr00071-01) (No. 98cr00071-06)

     William Jackson Garber, appointed by the court, argued 
the cause and filed the briefs for appellant Thomas Fields.

     Thomas G. Corcoran, Jr. and Mary-Ellen Noone, appoint-
ed by the court, argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant Bernard Johnson.

     Barbara J. Valliere, Assistant United States Attorney, 
argued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were 
Wilma A. Lewis, United States Attorney, John R. Fisher and 
James H. Dinan, Assistant United States Attorneys.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  Thomas "Woozie" Fields and Ber-
nard "Tadpole" Johnson appeal from judgments of convictions 
following a jury trial in the District Court.  We affirm the 
convictions of both defendants.  However, because we find 
that plain errors in sentencing affected defendants' substan-
tial rights and undermined the fairness of the sentencing 
proceedings, we vacate the sentences and remand the case to 
the District Court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.

                          I. Background

     This case involves the prosecution and conviction of two 
members of a coterie known to the Government as the "L 
Street Crew."  In March 1998, a Federal Grand Jury in the 
District of Columbia returned a 70-count Indictment charging 
Fields, Johnson, and nine other individuals with Continuing 
Criminal Enterprise, Conspiracy to Participate in a Racke-
teer Influenced Corrupt Organization ("RICO Conspiracy"), 
and various drug trafficking, firearm, and violent offenses.  
In October 1998, Fields, Johnson, and two other defendants 
were named in a Superseding 74-count Indictment charging 
virtually the same offenses.  In May 1999, a 64-count Su-
perseding Re-typed Indictment named Fields and Johnson 
alone.

     The May 1999 Indictment charged Fields and Johnson with 
narcotics conspiracy (Count 1), RICO conspiracy (Count 3), 
the kidnaping, gang rape, and attempted murder of a young 

woman referred to herein as K.D. (Counts 12-18), firearms 
offenses in connection with that rape (Counts 37-38, and 49-
53), the attempted murder of an unknown individual in Janu-
ary 1997 (Counts 32, 33), and firearms offenses related there-
to (Counts 45 and 61).  Fields was charged, in addition to the 
above offenses, with continuing criminal enterprise (Count 2), 
assaults with a dangerous weapon (Counts 4 and 5), assaults 
with intent to kill, kidnaping, and attempted murder in aid of 
racketeering activity (Counts 6-11, 19-31), related firearms 
offenses (Counts 34-36, 39-44, 46-48, 54-60), and money 
laundering (Counts 62-64).

     During the trial, the Government presented evidence of 
attempted murders, assaults, a kidnaping, and a gang rape.  
According to the Government's theory of the case, these 
alleged crimes were motivated by the L Street Crew's desire 
to protect or expand the area in which the group sold and 
distributed drugs.  Fields took the stand during the trial and 
admitted to selling drugs to certain individuals, but denied 
that he held any leadership role with respect to the L Street 
Crew.  Johnson did not testify.

     The jury convicted Fields on 40 counts and Johnson on 16 
counts.  Both Fields' and Johnson's convictions included 
those for the rape and attempted murder of K.D.  At the 
sentencing hearing, the trial judge adopted the calculations in 
the Presentence Investigation Report ("PIR"), as well as the 
Government's proposed findings of fact and conclusions of 
law, and sentenced Fields to life plus 120 years, and Johnson 
to life plus 25 years.

                           II. Analysis

     In this appeal, Fields and Johnson seek review of myriad 
issues relating to their convictions and sentencing.  They 
assert challenges to venue, sufficiency of the evidence, admis-
sion of evidence, joinder of defendants, failure to sever certain 
counts, the firearms and other sentence enhancements, and 
calculation of their sentences in light of the Supreme Court's 
holding in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000).  
We have considered carefully all of appellants' arguments;  

most of appellants' claims require no discussion, because they 
are meritless.  There are two challenges, however, that have 
merit.  We address these claims below.

A.   Determinations of drug quantity

     Appellants contend that the sentences they received on 
Counts 1 (Narcotics Conspiracy) and 3 (RICO Conspiracy) 
were improperly enhanced beyond the statutory maximum, 
because the finding as to drug quantity was not made by a 
jury.  The PIR, prepared after the jury trial, divided Fields' 
40 counts of conviction into six groups involving substantially 
the same harm, and Johnson's 16 counts of conviction into two 
such groups.  See U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual 
s 3D1.2 (1998) (rules for grouping closely related counts).  
Counts 1 and 3 were included in Group 1, along with Counts 
62-64 (Money Laundering).  The PIR listed the base offense 
level for both defendants at 38;  this determination was 
derived from an assumption that the offenses involved more 
than the equivalent of 30,000 kilograms of marijuana.  The 
PIR attributed 173,570 kilograms to Fields and 148,862 kilo-
grams to Johnson.  In reaching these estimates, the PIR 
purported to rely on testimony provided by members of the L 
Street Crew at the trial.

     In Apprendi, the Court held that, "[o]ther than the fact of a 
prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a 
crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be 
submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt."  
120 S. Ct. at 2362-63.  It therefore follows that drug quantity 
is an element of the offense where a factual determination of 
the amount of drugs at issue may result in a sentence that 
exceeds a maximum sentence prescribed in the applicable 
statute.  See, e.g., United States v. Pratt, No. 99-4424, 2001 
WL 101457, at *6 (4th Cir. Feb. 7, 2001);  United States v. 
Aguayo-Delgado, 220 F.3d 926, 933 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 
121 S. Ct. 600 (2000);  United States v. Doggett, 230 F.3d 160, 
164-65 (5th Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 69 U.S.L.W. 3555 (U.S. 
Feb. 20, 2001) (No. 00-7819).  This court's ruling to the 
contrary in United States v. Lam Kwong-Wah, 966 F.2d 682, 
685-86 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 901 (1992), is no 

longer good law.  In light of Apprendi, it is now clear that, in 
drug cases under 21 U.S.C. ss 841 and 846, before a defen-
dant can be sentenced to any of the progressively higher 
statutory maximums that are based on progressively higher 
quantities of drugs specified in subsections 841(b)(1)(A) or 
(B), the Government must state the drug type and quantity in 
the indictment, submit the required evidence to the jury, and 
prove the relevant drug quantity beyond a reasonable doubt.

     In the instant case, the Government did not come close to 
satisfying the requirements of Apprendi.  The Indictment 
specified quantities of drugs alleged to be involved in Counts 
1 and 3, but the verdict form asked only that the jury find 
"detectable amount[s]" of marijuana, crack cocaine, and phen-
cyclidine ("PCP") in order to find the defendants guilty.  
Therefore, it cannot be found that the jury's convictions on 
those counts were based on any specific factual findings as to 
drug quantity.  It was only in connection with Count 2 
(Continuing Criminal Enterprise) that the verdict form re-
quired specific findings that defendants distributed 1.5 kilo-
grams or more of crack cocaine and 3,000 kilograms or more 
of marijuana, and the jury deadlocked on these issues.

     It is undisputed that the quantity of controlled substances 
involved was a decisive factor in the defendants' sentences.  
The sentencing range for violations of 21 U.S.C. s 841 (1994 
& Supp. IV 1998) is determined by drug quantities.  Section 
841(b)(1)(A) of Title 21 provides for a maximum penalty of life 
where the offense involves 1,000 kilograms or more of a 
mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of mari-
juana, and 21 U.S.C. s 841(b)(1)(B) provides for a maximum 
sentence of 40 years where the offense involves 100 kilograms 
or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable 
amount of marijuana.  Default statutory maximums of five to 
30 years are provided in ss 841(b)(1)(C) and (D).

     In this case, there were no substantive controlled substance 
act offenses charged under 21 U.S.C. s 841.  However, the 
Narcotics Conspiracy Count was charged under 21 U.S.C. 
s 846, and alleged a conspiracy to unlawfully possess with 
intent to distribute and to distribute controlled substances in 

excess of 1,000 kilograms or more of marijuana, 50 grams or 
more of cocaine base, and 100 grams or more of PCP, in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. s 841 (a)(1) and (b)(1)(A)(ii)-(iv), (vii).  
The RICO Conspiracy charged under Count 3 also alleged 21 
U.S.C. s 841(a) violations.

     At the sentencing hearing, the District Court adopted the 
calculations in the PIR, as well as the Government's proposed 
findings of fact and conclusions of law, and found "well above" 
the preponderance standard that 1,670 grams of crack co-
caine, 11,388 grams of PCP, and 3,490 kilograms of marijuana 
were "directly attributable to defendant Thomas Fields" dur-
ing the course of the charged conspiracy.  With respect to 
Johnson, the District Court found that 1,670 grams of crack, 
11,328 grams of PCP, and 2,182 kilograms of marijuana were 
"reasonably foreseeable and part of jointly undertaken activi-
ty by defendant Johnson, and therefore are appropriately 
attributable to him."  The life sentences imposed on appel-
lants were predicated in part on these calculations.

     The District Court's sentence enhancements contravene 
Apprendi.  However, neither defendant objected at trial to 
the District Court's determination of drug quantities, so our 
review is for plain error.  See United States v. Wolff, 195 
F.3d 37, 40 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b).  And we 
may exercise our discretion to correct an error pursuant to 
Rule 52(b) only when an "error" is "plain" or "obvious" under 
current law, affects substantial rights, and seriously affects 
the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial pro-
ceedings.  Johnson v. United States, 520 U.S. 461, 466-67 
(1997).

     The Government concedes that the imposition of life sen-
tences based on drug quantities determined by the trial judge 
at sentencing was plain error.  The Government argues, 
however, that appellants are not entitled to relief, because 
they cannot show that the error affected their substantial 
rights.  We disagree.

     The Government first asserts that substantial rights were 
not affected, because the District Court correctly determined 
that the quantity of drugs far exceeded the amount required 

under the applicable provision of s 841(b)(1).  However, in 
calculating the quantities at issue, the PIR relied heavily on 
the imprecise testimony of various cooperating witnesses, and 
the District Court simply adopted the PIR estimates.  The 
only concrete evidence of drug quantity offered at the trial 
was from the seizures in this case and the testimony of Mr. 
Joseph Bono, a forensic chemist with the Drug Enforcement 
Administration.  Government counsel acknowledged that this 
evidence did not establish that either defendant possessed 
more than 30,000 kilograms of marijuana.  The Government 
nevertheless urges us to extrapolate from the concrete evi-
dence and attribute a higher quantity of drugs to each 
defendant.  Obviously, under Apprendi, we have no authority 
to do this.  The Government was required to convince the 
jury, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendants pos-
sessed enough of a controlled substance for the District Court 
to adjust the base offense level to 38.  They failed to do that 
in this case.

     The Government next suggests that we should ignore drug 
quantity altogether and rely instead on the s 1963(a) RICO 
penalty provision.  Section 1963 states that "[w]hoever vio-
lates any provision of section 1962 of this chapter shall be ... 
imprisoned not more than 20 years (or for life if the violation 
is based on a racketeering activity for which the maximum 
penalty includes life imprisonment)."  18 U.S.C. s 1963 
(1994).  The Government maintains that appellants were 
charged with, and convicted of, Racketeering Act 21, the 
kidnaping of K.D.  Kidnaping, under the D.C. Code, carries a 
maximum sentence of life imprisonment.  D.C. Code Ann. 
s 22-2101 (1996).  Because the jury specifically found that 
appellants committed Racketeering Act 21, the Government 
asserts, the jury found facts justifying imposition of the 
statutory maximum sentence of life totally apart from drug 
quantity.  The error in this reasoning is that neither the PIR 
nor the trial judge relied on this rationale in imposing the life 
sentences.  Rather, the District Court, in raising the base 
offense level to 38 for the Group 1 offenses, relied on the 
PIR's findings on the marijuana equivalency amounts.  We 
therefore reject the Government's arguments.

     The District Court's failure to rely on concrete evidence to 
determine the base offense level for the Group 1 Counts 
undermined the fairness of the sentencing proceedings, be-
cause the error clearly affected the outcome of the case by 
substantially increasing defendants' sentences.  We cannot 
ignore this plain error.

B.   The leadership enhancement

     Appellant Fields argues that the four-level increase that he 
received for his leadership role in various offenses was im-
proper in light of Apprendi.  He further maintains that the 
testimony of the various cooperating witnesses showed that 
they had their own businesses, kept their own money, and 
that Fields was not their boss.  As noted above, the PIR 
divided the counts of conviction into six groups.  In each of 
these groups, the report recommended a four-level increase in 
the guideline range based on U.S.S.G. s 3B1.1(a), because 
Fields was an organizer or leader of criminal activity that 
involved five or more participants.

     Count 1 (Narcotics Conspiracy) of the Indictment alleged 
that the conspiracy operated as an organization controlled 
and directed by Fields.  Count 3 (RICO Conspiracy) alleged 
that Fields was the leader of the organization.  The issue of 
leadership role, however, was not submitted to the jury with 
respect to Counts 1 and 3.  Instead, it was submitted in 
conjunction with Count 2 (Continuing Criminal Enterprise) 
and the jury was deadlocked as to this count.

     Because the fact of leadership role may increase a defen-
dant's sentence beyond the prescribed statutory maximum, 
Apprendi applies.  Accordingly, the issue of leadership must 
be charged in an indictment, submitted to a jury, and proved 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  Because Fields did not argue at 
trial that leadership should have been submitted to the jury, 
however, we review the record for plain error.

     Though we have exercised our discretion to notice plain 
error with regard to the issue of drug quantity, we decline to 
do so with regard to leadership enhancement.  On the issue 
of leadership, the record evidence overwhelmingly demon-

strates that Fields managed and masterminded various of-
fenses committed by the L Street Crew.  Fields enlisted 
members of the L Street Crew to assist him in distributing 
controlled substances, including marijuana, crack cocaine, and 
PCP, directed, procured, and participated in acts of violence 
against rival drug groups, and orchestrated the kidnaping, 
sexual assault, and shooting of K.D.  Based on the sheer 
volume of largely uncontested evidence offered at trial, there 
is proof beyond a reasonable doubt that Fields held a leader-
ship role in the criminal activities for which he was convicted.

C.   The sentence enhancements for the Group 2 offenses

     Appellants contend that the sentence enhancement for 
their Group 2 offenses was improper.  We agree.  The Group 
2 offenses related to the kidnaping and attempted murder of 
K.D.  The applicable sentencing guideline for Count 12, 
armed kidnaping, is U.S.S.G. s 2A4.1(a), which provides for a 
base offense level of 24.  The PIR computed an adjusted 
offense level of 43, pursuant to U.S.S.G. s 2A4.1(b)(7)(B) and 
Application Note 5, with the rationale that the object of the 
kidnaping was to commit first degree murder, and the Dis-
trict Court adopted the finding that the attempted murder of 
K.D. would have constituted first degree murder had she 
died.  The offense of first degree murder was not submitted 
to the jury, however, and the jury made no finding beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the object of the kidnaping was to 
commit first degree murder.

     Application Note 5 to s 2A4.1 of the U.S. Sentencing 
Guidelines suggests that if an offense involved conspiracy to 
kidnap for the purpose of committing murder, or if an offense 
involved a kidnaping during which a participant attempted to 
murder the victim under circumstances that would have 
constituted first degree murder, subsection (b)(7) would refer-
ence first degree murder and result in an offense level of 43.  
We reject this commentary, and the District Court's reliance 
on it, because it is flatly at odds with the controlling Sentenc-
ing Guideline.  As the Fifth Circuit correctly noted in United 
States v. Smith, 184 F.3d 415 (5th Cir. 1999), Application 

Note 5 "violate[s] the dictates of s 2A4.1(b)(7)(B)."  Id. at 
418.

     Section 2A4.1(b)(7)(B) of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines 
explicitly directs the court to cross-reference the guideline 
applicable to the crime actually committed.  In this case, that 
crime was attempted murder.  In Stinson v. United States, 
508 U.S. 36 (1993), the Supreme Court held that, if the 
"commentary and the guideline it interprets are inconsistent 
in that following one will result in violating the dictates of the 
other, the Sentencing Reform Act itself commands compli-
ance with the guideline."  Id. at 43.  Because the Guideline 
and not the commentary controls, we find that the District 
Court erred in enhancing appellants' Group 2 offenses by 
cross-referencing the guideline applicable to first degree mur-
der.

                         III. Conclusion

     In light of the above determinations, we vacate appellants' 
sentences, and remand the case to the District Court.  With 
respect to the drug calculations, we instruct the District 
Court to re-sentence the defendants based on the amount of 
drugs as to which there can be no doubt, i.e., where drug 
quantity is established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  
On the kidnaping charge, we reverse and remand with in-
structions to sentence with reference to the Guideline, not 
Application Note 5.

                                                                      