                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 15, 2000       Decided June 27, 2000 

                           No. 99-1169

               Missouri Public Service Commission, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

             Kansas Corporation Commission, et al., 
                           Intervenors
                        Consolidated with 
                         99-1171, 99-1241

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Charles F. Wheatley, Jr. and David D'Alessandro argued 
the cause and filed the briefs for petitioners Kansas Cities 
and the Missouri Public Service Commission.  Kelly A. Daly 
entered an appearance.

     Gary W. Boyle argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner/intervenor Williams Gas Pipelines Central, Inc.  
Beverly H. Griffith, Gregory Grady and Joseph S. Koury 
entered appearances.

     Andrew K. Soto, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were John H. Conway, Deputy Solicitor and Susan 
J. Court, Acting Deputy Solicitor.  Jay L. Witkin, Solicitor, 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Williams, Henderson and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

             Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  In 1993 Williams Natural Gas 
Company,1 a natural gas pipeline company within the jurisdic-
tion of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, filed for 
a general rate increase under s 4 of the Natural Gas Act, 15 
U.S.C. s 717c.  The proceeding closed in 1999 with the 
Commission's third rehearing order.  Williams Natural Gas 
Co., 86 FERC p 61,323 (1999) ("Third Rehearing").  That and 
the underlying orders are attacked from two sides.  A host of 
Kansas cities, the Missouri Public Service Commission and 
others, which we will collectively call the "Public Service 
Commission," attack the allowed rate of return.  They argue 
that the Commission wrongly refused (a) to impute to 
Williams the capital structure of its corporate parent, or 
alternatively, (b) to adjust Williams's return on equity down-
ward to reflect its subsidiary status and the "thickness" of its 
equity ratio in comparison to that of firms in the proxy group 
used by the Commission to calculate the return on equity.  
The pipeline itself attacks on an unrelated issue, objecting to 

__________
     1 In the course of the proceedings Williams Natural Gas Compa-
ny became Williams Gas Pipelines Central, Inc.  We use "Williams" 
as shorthand.

the Commission's method of projecting the costs for cleaning 
up PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl).

     We cannot say that the Commission's use of Williams's 
capital structure and the median return on equity for the 
proxy group was arbitrary and capricious.  As to clean-up 
costs, the Commission no longer defends the $1.4 million 
annual cost recovery as a figure representative of actual cost, 
and its decision does not purport to rely on any procedural 
default by Williams;  we therefore grant Williams's petition 
and remand for further proceedings.

Capital   structure and rate of return on equity

     The Public Service Commission's brief offers a non-
exhaustive, but here uncontested, explanation of the role of 
capital structure and equity rate of return.  It points out that 
a firm's return on equity must be higher than the return on 
debt because (1) any dividends are paid out of after-tax 
earnings, whereas the firm can deduct interest on debt, and 
(2) equity is riskier.  Because the overall cost of equity is the 
product of the equity share of capital and the equity rate of 
return, these factors imply that an increase in the equity-debt 
ratio tends to increase a firm's allowable overall rate of 
return.  But there is an offset:  Because debt service has 
priority, the higher the proportion of equity capital, the lower 
the financial risk for the firm's stock, and thus, in this 
respect, the lower the necessary rate of return.  See also 
Richard J. Pierce, Jr. & Ernest Gellhorn, Regulated Indus-
tries 136-37 (3d ed. 1994).

     Williams is a wholly owned subsidiary of The Williams 
Companies ("TWC").  Williams's own capital structure is 
35.71% debt and 64.29% equity, while TWC's is 50% debt, 3% 
preferred equity, and 47% common equity.  Assuming use of 
the same equity rate of return, FERC's use of TWC's ratio 
would be an advantage for Williams's customers.

     In calculating the equity rate of return of a wholly owned 
subsidiary, the Commission has a special problem.  Since its 
shares are not traded in the market, they have no market 
price from which to infer their rate of return.  So the 

Commission looks instead to a proxy group of supposedly 
similar firms whose stock is traded, calculates their return on 
equity with the "DCF" or "discounted cash flow" method, and 
then tacks the resulting number onto the equity of the 
subsidiary.  See generally Williston Basin Inter. Pipeline 
Co. v. FERC, 165 F.3d 54, 56-57 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  North 
Carolina Utilities Comm'n v. FERC, 42 F.3d 659, 661 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994).

     Here the Commission used Williams's capital structure.  It 
found the company's business risk average, and, though not 
explicitly so labelling its financial risk, held that its overall 
risk (the amalgam of the two) was not outside the "broad 
middle range of average risk."  Third Rehearing, 86 FERC 
p 61,323, at 61,860-61.  It thus allowed Williams the median 
rate of return of the proxy group.  In doing so, it made no 
adjustment to reflect the fact that Williams's equity ratio was 
a good deal thicker than the average of the proxy group (and 
therefore presumably less risky).  Indeed, Williams's ratio 
was higher than the highest equity ratio of the proxy group--
64%, compared with 42% and 62% for the average and 
highest ratio of the proxy group, respectively.2

     We review the challenge under the arbitrary and capricious 
standard of the Administrative Procedure Act.  5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A).  The Commission must consider the relevant 
factors and draw "a rational connection between the facts 
found and the choice made."  Williston Basin, 165 F.3d at 60 
(citation and quotation marks omitted).  On the technical 
aspects of ratemaking FERC's decisions necessarily enjoy 
considerable deference.  Public Service Comm'n v. FERC, 
813 F.2d 448, 451 (D.C. Cir. 1987).

     The attack on the Commission's refusal to use TWC's 
capital structure opens with the "double leveraging" theory.  
The theory's basic concept is that the true cost of a subsid-
iary's equity capital is the overall cost of the parent's capital.  
Accordingly, the cost of the subsidiary's equity should be 
computed as the weighted average of the parent's debt and 
equity costs.  Otherwise, says the theory, shareholders of the 
__________
     2 The proxy companies and their equity ratios were:  Sonat, Inc. 
(62%), TWC (47%), Enron Corporation (43%), Panhandle Eastern 
Corporation (45%), Coastal Corporation (39%), and Transcontinen-
tal Energy Corporation (16%).

parent receive not only the higher equity returns associated 
with the parent's equity, but an artificial (doubly leveraged) 
return on the subsidiary's equity.

     Although the Commission in the first rehearing order opted 
in favor of using TWC's capital structure, Williams Natural 
Gas Co., 80 FERC p 61,158 (1997) ("First Rehearing"), even 
then it rejected double leveraging as a rationale:  "The rate of 
return to a pipeline should not depend on who owns the 
pipeline, nor on how that owner, whether a holding company 
or individual stockholders, financed its investment."  Id. at 
61,682;  see also Third Rehearing, 86 FERC p 61,323, at 
61,858-59.  The double leveraging theory would in principle 
be applicable to a pipeline owned by a single individual, or by 
a group of investors, requiring the Commission to pursue its 
inquiry into these owners' finances.  Further, an expert 
quoted by the Commission makes the point that the pipeline 
investment's true opportunity cost does not depend on the 
capital structure of the investor, but rather on the foregone 
risk-adjusted returns of alternative investments.  See James 
E. Brown, "Double Leverage:  Indisputable Fact or Precari-
ous Theory," Public Utilities Fortnightly 26, 29 (May 9, 1974), 
cited at First Rehearing, 80 FERC p 61,158, at 61,682 n.21.

     It is not for us to say whether these arguments have put 
the kibosh on the double leverage theory.  We can, however, 
say that the Public Service Commission's quick response--
individual investors would never directly own a FERC-
regulated pipeline, and if they did, they would not stand for 
such high equity ratios--is not a serious intellectual answer to 
them.  On this record we have no basis to disturb FERC's 
refusal to apply the double leveraging theory.

     The Commission nevertheless briefly flirted with the idea 
of using TWC's capital structure.  First Rehearing, 80 FERC 
p 61,158, at 61,683.  But on the next lap it dropped that 
approach, with the reasoning stated in a chronologically con-
nected case:

     Traditionally, the Commission has preferred to utilize the 
     applicant's own capital structure and will continue to do 
     so if the applicant issues its own non-guaranteed debt 
     
     and has its own bond rating.  But the Commission will 
     utilize an imputed capital structure (most often that of 
     the corporate parent) if the record in a particular case 
     reveals that the pipeline's own equity ratio is so far 
     outside the range of other equity ratios approved by the 
     Commission and the range of proxy company equity 
     ratios that it is unreasonable.
     
Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 84 FERC p 61,084, at 
61,413 (1998) ("Order 414-A"), affirmed North Carolina Utili-
ties Comm'n v. FERC, No. 99-1037 (D.C. Cir. Feb. 7, 2000) 
(unpublished opinion).  The Commission applied this policy to 
Williams on the second rehearing.  Williams Natural Gas 
Company, 84 FERC p 61,080, at 61,356 (1998) ("Second Re-
hearing").  As Williams issued its own non-guaranteed debt 
and had its own bond rating, the normal pre-conditions for 
using Williams's own capital structure were satisfied.

     We now turn to the Public Service Commission's argument 
that Williams's equity ratio is so out of line that the Commis-
sion should either have applied the caveat in the excerpt 
quoted above (calling for use of an imputed capital structure 
in cases of anomalous equity ratios), or should have adjusted 
Williams's equity rate of return down from that of the proxy 
group.  The common sense of this attack is clear.  Given that 
a high equity ratio reduces financial risk (everything else 
being equal), it would make no sense for the Commission to 
use a rate of return inferred from the market experience of a 
proxy group with much thinner equity ratios.

     But how thick is "too thick," and how much difference in 
thickness is too much?  Here the issue is whether 64% equity 
is "anomalous," bearing in mind that it is 22% above the 
proxy average but only 2% above the highest in the proxy 
group.  See supra note 2.  Judges are hardly in a position to 
play this numbers game.  Such numerical limits cannot readi-
ly be derived by judicial reasoning, Hoctor v. USDA, 82 F.3d 
165, 170 (7th Cir. 1996), though to be sure courts are driven 
to it occasionally, as in enforcement of the Administrative 
Procedure Act's mandate to ensure that agency action is not 
"unreasonably delayed."  5 U.S.C. s 706(1).  The ultimate 

choice may partake of arbitrariness--not in the sense of being 
"arbitrary and capricious," but in the sense that, while nu-
merical lines sometimes must be drawn, it is impossible to 
give a reasoned distinction between numbers just a hair on 
the OK side of the line and ones just a hair on the not-OK 
side.

     Here, it seems clear at the outset that the Commission was 
on firm ground in rejecting the idea that an equity ratio 
outside the bounds of the proxy group must automatically 
require an adjustment.  See Second Rehearing, 84 FERC 
p 61,080, at 61,355.  Assume a proxy group with ratios vary-
ing from 40% to 44%.  Insisting on an adjustment for a firm 
with one of 45% would surely impute an improbable refine-
ment to the rough inferences derived from capital markets, as 
well as raising the question just how great the adjustment 
should be.

     The Public Service Commission suggests in its brief that 
Commission precedent can provide some guidance.  In 
Transcontinental Gas Pipeline Corp., 60 FERC p 61,246 
(1992), reh'g denied 64 FERC p 61,039 (1993), FERC found 
that Transco Energy Corporation's equity ratio (the pipeline 
proposed using its parent's equity ratio) was 22% below the 
proxy average and required a different imputed capital struc-
ture to boost pipeline returns.  See North Carolina Utilities 
Comm'n, 42 F.3d at 661, 663.  FERC does not really respond 
to this argument, although it did observe in the Second 
Rehearing that the proxy group average here is brought 
down by the 16% equity ratio for one of the proxy firms 
(Transco, interestingly).  84 FERC p 61,080, at 61,358 n.31.  
Indeed, Transco's presence lowered the proxy group average 
over 5% (47.4% to 42.2%).  But as petitioners point out, if one 
outlier is to be removed, why not another (Sonat, at 62%)?  
And the double removal would put the average at 43.8%, 
which would leave Williams still well above the average and 
even more above the new top (48%).  Further, the Commis-
sion gives no explanation as to why any outlier should be 
removed, see United States Telephone Assn. v. FCC, 188 F.3d 
521, 525 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (agency eliminating outlying data 
points must explain "why the outliers were unreliable or their 

use inappropriate"), much less why a low outlier should be 
removed and a high one retained.  Had the Transco prece-
dent been properly raised, FERC's failure to offer a distinc-
tion might well have required a remand.  See Greater Boston 
Television Corp. v. FCC, 444 F.2d 841, 852 (D.C. Cir. 1970) 
("[I]f an agency glosses over or swerves from prior prece-
dents without discussion it may cross the line from the 
tolerably terse to the intolerably mute.").  But petitioners' 
exceptions before the Commission did not cite the North 
Carolina Utilities Comm'n case or make such precedent-
based arguments.3

     Nor is there much force to petitioners' argument that 
creeping stare decisis will inch equity ratios ever-higher, as 
each new peak in equity ratio will justify another, still higher 
peak.  The Commission swears off any such progression, see, 
e.g., Second Rehearing, 86 FERC p 61,232, at 61,858, and 
petitioners can identify nothing in the record to undercut its 
commitment.  A slippery slope argument is almost always 
available.  "Judges and lawyers live on the slippery slope of 
analogies;  they are not supposed to ski it to the bottom."  
Robert H. Bork, The Tempting of America:  The Political 
Seduction of the Law 169 (1990).  Especially with the Com-
mission's explicit pledge, the slope risk provides no basis for 
us to upset the Commission's judgment.

     Petitioners also claim that in looking in part to pipeline 
companies outside the proxy group in determining the rea-
sonableness of Williams's equity ratio, the Commission failed 
to provide adequate notice and thus failed to allow them an 
opportunity to offer evidence distinguishing the companies 
outside the proxy group.  But after the Commission consid-
ered pipelines outside the proxy group in the Second Rehear-
ing, petitioners made no request to supplement the record.

__________
     3 Petitioners have not been punctilious in their use of precedent, 
mistaking in their brief the facts of North Carolina Utilities 
Comm'n, 42 F.3d at 663, for those of Public Service Comm'n v. 
FERC, 642 F.2d 1335 (D.C. Cir. 1980).  See Petitioners' Opening 
Br. at 32.

     All that said, this case is somewhat puzzling.  No one 
contests the Public Service Commission's point that a thick 
equity ratio implies less risk and thus a lower rate of return, 
everything else being equal.  Yet the Commission selected a 
proxy group with widely dispersed equity ratios, from 16% to 
62%, as opposed to a proxy group nearer to Williams's capital 
structure.  Further, it is unclear why the Commission has 
taken such an interest, both in its orders and in its brief here, 
in explaining that Williams's 64% ratio is in the mainstream of 
ratios in the pipeline industry generally.  The rate of return 
is inferred from the rate of return of the proxy group, so the 
non-anomalous character of Williams's equity ratio by the 
standards of the industry generally is not self-evidently perti-
nent.

     But there are also gaps in the petitioners' attacks, which 
undermine any inference that FERC's looking to the industry 
generally had any material effect.  Given the supposed rela-
tion between equity ratio, risk, and rate of return, we should 
expect to see some effort to show it at work within the proxy 
group, or broadly among publicly traded companies generally.  
Yet petitioners offer no such analysis.  We know the direction 
of the effect of equity thickness on equity rate of return (as 
no one contests it), but we have nothing on the degree.  
Accordingly, we have no basis for thinking that relationship 
to be so strong as to make a material difference, business risk 
being held constant.  On this record, then, we cannot find 
anything arbitrary and capricious in the Commission's use of 
Williams's capital structure and the proxy group's median 
return on equity.

PCB  removal cost estimates

     Before the administrative law judge Williams presented 
evidence of $4.2 million in past unamortized costs for cleaning 
up PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl), plus projections of future 
costs.  The ALJ allowed the company to amortize the $4.2 
million over three years, with a procedure for refunding any 
amounts Williams recovered from third parties responsible 
for the PCB.  ALJ Opinion, 73 FERC p 63,015, at 65,074-75.  
Because Williams made a new s 4 rate filing in 1995, the 

issue of PCB cost recovery in the present case became 
"locked in" for the period of November 1, 1993 through July 
31, 1995.

     For this locked-in period, the Commission rejected amorti-
zation in favor of the "test period" method.  Williams Natu-
ral Gas Co., 77 FERC p 61,277, at 62,182 (1996) ("First 
Order");  see generally Southwestern Public Service Co. v. 
FERC, 952 F.2d 555 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  This method takes 
actual costs of the most recent 12-month period (the "base 
period"), subject under some circumstances to adjustment on 
the basis of data from a nine-month period following the base 
period (the "adjustment period"), and absent some anomaly 
projects them into the period covered by the rate filing.  See 
18 CFR s 154.303.

     Without looking to whether Williams had offered such test 
period figures, the Commission declared that "the $1.4 million 
annual amount the participants and the ALJ arrived at using 
an amortization method is a reasonable equivalent of WNG's 
actual PCB-related test period costs."  First Order, 77 FERC 
p 61,277, at 62,182.  It also asserted that Williams had pro-
jected 10-year costs of $20 million;  "this averages to $2 
million a year which is reasonably close to the $1.4 million 
annual amount the ALJ permitted [Williams] to recover."  Id. 
at 62,183.

     Williams did not object to use of the test period method.  
But on rehearing it did strenuously argue that the Commis-
sion was wrong to convert the amortization figures into test 
period figures.  Williams pointed to Exhibit 216 in the record, 
which stated "Test Period Actuals" and a total of 
"$3,990,768."  The Commission rejected the $3.9 million fig-
ure, however, claiming it inappropriately covered a 22-month 
period;  but in so doing the Commission cited Exhibit 24 not 
Exhibit 216. First Rehearing, 80 FERC p 61,158, at 61,680 & 
n.11.  As for Exhibit 216, the Commission stated it provided 
"no distinct record evidence" of the level of PCB costs 
"incurred over any annual period during the test period."  Id. 
at 61,680 & n.13.  The Commission offered no explanation as 

to the precise flaw in Exhibit 216's statement of "Test Period 
Actuals."

     Sticking by $1.4 million as "representative of annual PCB 
cost figures," the Commission chastised Williams for disput-
ing the figure, saying that this was the figure initially pro-
posed by Williams (albeit as a figure for amortization).  Id. at 
61,679-80.

     At oral argument the Commission abandoned any claim of 
equivalence between the $1.4 million accepted by Williams 
under the amortization theory and imposed by the Commis-
sion as a "representative" test period amount.  Clearly a 
number that emerges from taking past aggregate costs and 
amortizing them over an arbitrarily chosen future period is 
not necessarily useful for applying past experience to project 
future expenses--the basic principle of the test period meth-
od.  It could hardly satisfy the Natural Gas Act's require-
ment of substantial evidence for facts found by the Commis-
sion, 15 U.S.C. s 717r(b).  See also Public Service Comm'n, 
813 F.2d at 451.

     Instead, the Commission at oral argument seemed to de-
fend the use of $1.4 million as a response to what it claimed 
was Williams's failure to place correct test period figures into 
the record.  The Commission's brief points out that $3.2 
million of the total test period $3.9 million were incurred in 
two months, proving (in its current view) that Williams's test 
period figures were "unrepresentative."  And for the very 
first time in this seven-year saga, the Commission at oral 
argument claimed that Williams's data failed to satisfy a 
regulatory requirement of monthly cost figures during the 
test period.

     Williams maintains that Exhibit 216's "Test Period Actuals" 
was sufficient evidence.  Nothing said by the Commission up 
until oral argument has supplied a reason to believe that that 
was inadequate.  That $3.2 million in costs were incurred 
during two months of the test period may show that PCB 
removal costs come in lumps.  But it hardly shows that the 
$3.9 million annual aggregate figure was unrepresentative, a 

theory in any event never invoked in the Commission's or-
ders.

     When the Commission at oral argument asserted a require-
ment of monthly data, Williams questioned the existence of 
any such requirement and said that in fact it had supplied 
such data.  The new Commission theory is in any event the 
purest form of "appellate counsel's post hoc rationalization," 
which in the usual case we do not accept.  North Carolina 
Utilities Comm'n, 42 F.3d at 663.  Since the Commission no 
longer defends the $1.4 million figure as representative, and 
in its orders never sought to justify it as a solution to some 
procedural default by Williams, we grant the petition and 
remand the case for the Commission to address this issue.

                                           *  *  *

     The petitions of Public Service Commission are denied;  the 
petition of Williams is granted, that part of the order is 
vacated, and the case is remanded to the Commission.

                                                                So ordered.

                                                                         