                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 4, 2001   Decided January 25, 2002 

                           No. 00-7022

                       Charles E. Wiggins,
                            Appellant

                                v.

     John Henderson, Warden, D.C. Department of Corrections, 
                       Occoquan Facility, 
                             Appellee

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-7191

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 94cv02609)
                         (No. 99cv01051)

                            ---------

     A. J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender, appointed by the 
court, argued the cause and filed the briefs as amicus curiae 
for appellants.

     Charles E. Wiggins, appearing pro se, was on the brief for 
appellant Charles E. Wiggins in No. 00-7022.

     Curtis E. Crawford, appearing pro se, was on the briefs for 
appellant Curtis E. Crawford in No. 00-7191.

     Mary L. Wilson, Assistant Corporation Counsel, argued 
the cause for appellees.  With her on the brief were Robert R. 
Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, and Charles L. Reischel, Depu-
ty Corporation Counsel.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  In this case we affirm the deci-
sions of the district court to dismiss the separate petitions for 
writs of habeas corpus filed by Charles E. Wiggins and Curtis 
E. Crawford pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 2253.  The reasons for 
our decisions follow.

     The issues presented are principally procedural, and re-
quire a brief review of earlier proceedings.  In 1972, the 
United States charged Charles E. Wiggins with first degree 
murder in violation of the District of Columbia Code.  At that 
time, the current District of Columbia Superior Court did 
exist, but jurisdiction of homicides under the District of 
Columbia Code remained in the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia.  District of Columbia Court 
Reorganization Act of 1970, Pub. L. No. 91-358, title I, 
ss 111, 199(c), 84 Stat. 473, 477, 482, 486, 598 (codified in part 
at D.C. Code ss 11-502(2)(A)(v), 11-901, 11-923(b)(2)).  Wig-
gins was convicted in the district court, but we set aside the 
conviction for the prejudicial trial use of an alleged confession 
to other murders.  United States v. Wiggins, 509 F.2d 454 
(D.C. Cir. 1975).  We also set aside a second conviction.  
Following the third trial, we affirmed conviction.  See Wig-
gins v. Henderson, No. 94-2609, slip op. at 2 (D.D.C. Nov. 22, 

1999).  Wiggins is currently serving a sentence of twenty 
years to life in prison for his conviction of murder.

     Wiggins has previously been considered for parole, but 
denied it in whole or in part because of the alleged confession 
of other murders. He previously sought relief from the dis-
trict court on this ground in 1994 pro se.  The district court 
considered and denied the writ;  we affirmed summarily.  
Wiggins v. Henderson, No. 95-7097 (D.C. Cir. Jan. 24, 1996) 
(per curiam).  After he was denied parole a second time 
because of his alleged confession to other murders, he made a 
second pro se petition to the district court on September 8, 
1999 seeking either immediate release on parole or, alterna-
tively, a parole reconsideration hearing at which the confes-
sion to other murders could not be considered.  The district 
court dismissed this second petition because it raised only the 
issues previously addressed by the district court in 1995 and 
by this court in 1996.  Wiggins appealed, and we now have 
that second petition before us.  We appointed amicus to 
present arguments on behalf of Wiggins.

     Like Wiggins, Curtis E. Crawford was convicted in federal 
district court for a D.C. Code offense.  Unlike Wiggins, 
Crawford was paroled.  He was later arrested in the District 
for aggravated assault under the D.C. Code.  The United 
States Attorney notified the parole board of the new arrest, 
and the parole board issued a parole violation warrant based 
on allegations of new criminal conduct (the assault charges).  
When the D.C. Superior Court authorized Crawford's release 
on the assault charges, the authorities promptly executed the 
parole warrant and continued to hold him for the alleged 
parole violation.

     Ordinarily, revocation of parole requires a reasonably 
prompt hearing after the parolee has been deprived of his 
conditional liberty, see generally Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 
U.S. 471, 485-89 (1972), but Crawford was given none.  
When, more than two months after execution of the parole 
warrant, authorities still held Crawford but had not afforded 
him a parole revocation hearing, Crawford petitioned for a 
writ of habeas corpus.  The district court issued a show cause 

order.  Whether or not awakened by this show cause order, 
the District at last conducted a parole revocation hearing for 
Crawford.  Accordingly, the district court dismissed the peti-
tion on the grounds that it had been rendered moot by that 
intervening parole revocation hearing.  Nevertheless, Craw-
ford appealed.  As with Wiggins, we appointed amicus to 
present arguments on behalf of Crawford.

     These petitions present a procedural question of first im-
pression.  Section 2253 confers jurisdiction on this court to 
hear appeals from final orders in habeas proceedings conduct-
ed by the district court, but requires a certificate of appeala-
bility ("COA") when "the detention complained of arises out 
of process issued by a State court."  28 U.S.C. s 2253(a), (c).  
The certificate may issue "only if the applicant has made a 
substantial showing of the denial of a constitutional right."  
Id. s 2253(c)(2).  The requirement supplants the former and 
similar requirement of a certificate of probable cause.  See 
Garris v. Lindsay, 794 F.2d 722, 723-24 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (per 
curiam).  Neither Wiggins nor Crawford has requested or 
received such a COA.

     Corporation counsel for the District of Columbia, appearing 
in opposition to the respective appeals of Wiggins and Craw-
ford, argues that the convicting district court effectively sat 
as a state court for the District when it applied District law, 
and therefore that Wiggins and Crawford each must obtain a 
COA.  The statute refers to "process issued by a State 
court."  It says nothing about the process of a federal court 
acting to implement state law.  The starting point in under-
standing the statute is always the language of the legislature.  
Williams v. Taylor, 529 U.S. 420, 431 (2000).  We know of no 
instance in which Congress has ever indicated its intention 
that a federal court should become a state court for this or 
any other purpose.  If Congress were intending to do some-
thing so extraordinary, we would expect it to do so explicitly.  
We therefore conclude that the federal district court is not 
rendered a state court for purposes of this statute by its 
application of District of Columbia law.  Corporation counsel 
also argues that a COA is required because Wiggins and 
Crawford challenge decisions of the D.C. Board of Parole and 

therefore their detentions arise out of "process issued by a 
State court."  We reject that argument, however, for the 
reasons given in a related case.  See Madley v. United States 
Parole Comm'n, No. 00-5226 (D.C. Cir. Jan. 25, 2002).  Ac-
cordingly, the statute does not require or permit us to require 
a COA from Wiggins or Crawford.

     Since no COA is required, we now reach the merits of the 
respective petitions, but we discover that there are none.  
The contentions of Wiggins have been considered fully previ-
ously, and he raises no new matter.  He is detained pursuant 
to a judgment of a court of the United States.  The district 
court did not err in dismissing his petition.  28 U.S.C. s 2244.  
The contention of Crawford that he was denied a revocation 
hearing has been cured. Crawford v. Director of Dep't of 
Corr., No. 99-1051 (D.D.C. June 26, 2000).

                                                     