                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                      Filed November 9, 2001

                           No. 00-5218

           Murphy Exploration and Production Company, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

          United States Department of the Interior and 
                         Gale A. Norton, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv00570)

                            ---------

               On Appellees' Petition for Rehearing

                            ---------

     Before Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Rogers, Cir-
cuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Circuit Judge Rogers dissented.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  This matter is before us on 
motion for rehearing of our decision in Murphy Exploration 

& Production Co. v. U.S. Department of Interior, 252 F.3d 
473 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  In that decision we considered the 
appeal of a natural gas producer (Murphy) from a district 
court judgment dismissing for lack of jurisdiction Murphy's 
suit for reimbursement of mining royalty overpayments.  The 
facts are set forth in the earlier opinion.  The district court 
had held (rightly) that the suit was governed by the Federal 
Oil and Gas Royalty Simplification and Fairness Act, 30 
U.S.C. s 1724(h)(l ) ("FOGRSFA"), which requires the Secre-
tary to "issue a final decision in any administrative proceed-
ing ... within 33 months from the date such proceeding was 
commenced or 33 months from [the effective date of the Act], 
whichever is later."  If the Secretary fails to do so within the 
allotted time, she "shall be deemed to have issued a final 
decision in favor of the Secretary ... and the appellant shall 
have a right to judicial review of such deemed final ac-
tion...."  Id. at s 1724(h)(2)(B).

     While the district court correctly identified the governing 
statute, we held that the court was incorrect in its application.  
That is, that court ruled that it had no jurisdiction because 
Murphy's February 3, 1989 refund request did not constitute 
the commencement of an "administrative proceeding" within 
the meaning of FOGRSFA.  In doing so, the district court 
followed the Secretary's interpretation of section 
1724(h)(2)(B) made in the rulemaking proceeding.  For the 
reasons set forth in our original opinion, we disagreed with 
the Secretary's interpretation.  In our analysis, we concluded 
that the deference afforded agency interpretation of the 
statutes under Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), was inapplicable 
because the controverted provision of the statute conferred 
jurisdiction on the federal courts so that "we must decide, as 
an original matter, whether the district court had jurisdiction 
to hear Murphy's lawsuit."  Murphy Exploration, 252 F.3d at 
480.  We concluded for reasons fully set out at 252 F.3d 480-
82 that it had such jurisdiction.

     In the original proceedings before us, the Department of 
the Interior ("DOI") had argued "that Murphy waived its 
challenge to the agency's interpretation of FOGRSFA be-

cause it did not advance that view during the rulemaking 
process."  Id. at 478.  While recognizing that in Ohio v. EPA, 
997 F.2d 1520 (D.C. Cir. 1983), we had declined to consider an 
argument that the parties had failed to raise "during rule-
making proceedings before the Agency," id. at 1528, we 
distinguished Ohio on the ground that the record before us in 
Murphy Exploration did not reveal that Murphy had any role 
in the rulemaking proceeding and therefore could not "be said 
to have 'waived' its argument by failing to advance it during 
those proceedings."  Murphy Exploration, 252 F.3d at 478.

     After we issued our opinion, the DOI came forward with 
further record material which it sought to have us notice 
demonstrating that while we had been literally correct in our 
earlier opinion that the record before us did not reflect the 
participation of Murphy in the rulemaking proceeding, Mur-
phy had in fact participated and had not raised the argument 
that the Department was incorrectly interpreting 30 U.S.C. 
s 1724(h)(2)(B).  We accept the material proffered and allow 
the petition of the Department of the Interior only to the 
extent that we order the first full paragraph in the first 
column of 252 F.3d 478, being the same language as the only 
full paragraph on page 6 of the slip opinion in Murphy 
Exploration, stricken.1

     This revision makes no difference in the result of the case.  
Ohio v. EPA still does not bar our review.  That decision only 
restates the incontrovertible proposition that one may not 
present an argument on appeal without having first raised it 
below, i.e., in the proceedings from which the litigant appeals.  
See Ohio, 997 F.2d at 1528-29 ("Judicial efficiency is served 
because issues that are raised before the agency might be 
resolved without the need for judicial intervention.").  The 
question in Ohio was whether the petitioners had exhausted 
their administrative review, not whether they were estopped 
from advancing an argument in a different proceeding.  

__________
     1 That paragraph is the last before Section II.B of the opinion.  It 
begins, "DOI further proposes that Murphy" and ends a few 
sentences later with " 'waived' its argument by failing to advance it 
during those proceedings."  252 F.3d at 478.

Nothing in Ohio or any other authority prevents Murphy 
from pursuing its claim in a second forum, i.e., apart from the 
original rulemaking, if such a forum is otherwise available.  
As we have held before, such a forum is available to a party 
when a rule is "brought before this court for review of further 
[agency] action applying it."  Functional Music, Inc. v. FCC, 
274 F.2d 543, 546 (D.C. Cir. 1958).  As we opined in Func-
tional Music, because "administrative rules and regulations 
are capable of continuing application," were we to limit review 
to the adoption of the rule without further judicial relief at 
the time of its application, we "would effectively deny many 
parties ultimately affected by a rule an opportunity to ques-
tion its validity."  Id.  Just so here.

     For the reasons set forth in Murphy Exploration, we 
reversed the judgment of the district court that it had no 
jurisdiction.  Nothing in the petition before us convinces us 
that we erred in any fashion in that decision.

     Except to the limited extent set forth above, the petition 
for rehearing is denied.2

__________
     2 Judge Rogers would grant rehearing.  See Murphy Exploration 
& Production Co. v. U.S. Dept. of Interior, 252 F.3d 473, 483 (D.C. 
Cir. 2001) (Rogers, J., dissenting).

                             