                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 24, 2002    Decided April 19, 2002 

                           No. 99-1452

              National Wildlife Federation, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                 Environmental Protection Agency 
           and Christine Todd Whitman, Administrator, 
                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                           Respondents

           American Forest and Paper Association Inc., 
                            Intervenor

                        Consolidated with 
                    99-1454, 99-1455, 99-1456

         On Petitions for Review of a Final Rule of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     Neil S. Kagan argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioners National Wildlife Federation, et al.

     Raymond B. Ludwiszewski argued the cause for petition-
ers Alliance for Environmental Technology, et al.  With him 
on the briefs were Peter E. Seley and Scott H. Segal.  Gene 
E. Godley entered an appearance.

     Carol Ann Siciliano, Attorney, U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency, and Jon M. Lipshultz, Attorney, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, argued the cause for respondents.  With 
them on the brief was John C. Cruden, Assistant Attorney 
General.  Seth M. Barsky and Karen L. Egbert, Attorneys, 
U.S. Department of Justice, entered appearances.

     Russell S. Frye argued the cause for intervenor American 
Forest and Paper Association Inc.  With him on the brief was 
Richard Wasserstrom.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed PER CURIAM.

     PER CURIAM:  A coalition of environmental organizations 
and a Native American tribe led by the National Wildlife 
Federation (collectively "NWF") and the Alliance for Envi-
ronmental Technology, Boise Cascade Corporation, Interna-
tional Paper Company, The Mead Corporation, and Westvaco 
Corporation (collectively "Industry Petitioners") separately 
challenge the Final Effluent Limitations Guidelines, Pretreat-
ment Standards, and New Source Performance Standards for 
the Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Category.  63 Fed. Reg. 
18,504 (April 15, 1998) ("Final Rule").  Their challenge is 
confined to that portion of the Final Rule promulgated by the 
Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") under the Clean 
Water Act as applied to one subcategory of the pulp and 
paper industry--the bleached papergrade kraft and soda 
subcategory (often referred to as the "BPK" subcategory).  
The American Forest & Paper Association, Inc. intervenes in 
support of the Final Rule.  We deny the petitions.

                                I.

     The Clean Water Act of 1977 ("CWA") requires EPA to 
promulgate limitations on the discharge of pollutants into the 
waters of the United States.  33 U.S.C. s 1311 (1994).  These 
limitations are referred to as effluent limitations.  The ef-
fluent limitations are based on the discharge levels achievable 
by what EPA determines to be the "best available technology 
economically achievable" (known as the "BAT") for existing 
discharging sources (defined as "point sources" in the stat-
ute), id. s 1311(b)(2)(A), (C), (D), & (F), and a different 
technology--the best available demonstrated control technol-
ogy or "BADT"--for new pollutant sources, known as the new 
source performance standard or "NSPS," id. s 1316(b)(1)(B).  
In determining a BAT and BADT, EPA evaluates existing or 
"available" technologies and considers their cost and capabili-
ties among other factors.  Id. s 1314(b)(2)(B).  EPA then 
promulgates discharge limitations that correspond to the 
application of the identified technology but does not require 
dischargers to install that technology.

     Pursuant to a 1988 consent decree entered into by EPA in 
settlement of Environmental Defense Fund and National 
Wildlife Federation v. Thomas, Civ. No. 85-0973 (D.D.C.), 
EPA committed to reviewing effluent limitations guidelines 
under the CWA for pulp and paper mills producing bleached 
pulp.  58 Fed. Reg. 66,078, 66,089 (Dec. 17, 1993).  EPA also 
anticipated that it would be imposing substantial new air 
pollution control requirements on these mills under the Clean 
Air Act ("CAA"), 42 U.S.C. s 7412.  In order to avoid incom-
patible and potentially overly burdensome rulemaking, EPA 
commenced a "Cluster Rulemaking" that would jointly estab-
lish effluent limitations guidelines under the CWA and haz-
ardous air pollutant standards under the CAA.  Involved in 
the instant appeal is the portion of the Cluster Rules that 
apply to the BPK subcategory within the pulp and paper 
industry.  These provisions establish limitations on the dis-
charge of several pollutants as identified by EPA.  See 40 
C.F.R. ss 430.20-430.28.  These pollutants include dioxin, 
abbreviated as TCDD, furan, abbreviated as TCDF, 12 specif-
ic chlorinated phenolic pollutants, chloroform, and adsorbable 

organic halides ("AOX").  National Emission Standards & 
Effluent Limitations Guidelines, 63 Fed. Reg. 18,504, 18,542 
(Apr. 15, 1998).

     To understand these limitations and the process by which 
they were determined, we provide a brief description of the 
paper production process.  One of the components of wood 
(the basis of paper products) that must be removed during 
the pulping process is called lignin.  The process of removing 
lignin is called "delignification."  The degree of delignification 
is expressed as a "kappa" number.  Prior to bleaching, addi-
tional lignin can be removed through either of two extended 
delignification processes:  extended cooking or oxygen deligni-
fication ("OD").  Supplemental Technical Development Docu-
ment ("STDD") s 7.2.3, at 7-4 and s 7.2.6, at 7-9 (Oct. 15, 
1997).  During bleaching, traditional bleaching agents that 
are used lead to the formation of a number of pollutants that 
are ultimately discharged into external streams.  Using a 
process known as elemental chlorine free ("ECF") bleaching 
lowers chemical consumption during bleaching and thereby 
reduces the formation of undesired pollutants.  The material 
removed from the pulp in bleaching is typically discharged to 
the mill wastewater treatment system.  This wastewater is 
known as effluent;  its environmental quality at discharge 
depends in part on the quantity of lignin in the pulp remain-
ing after bleaching.

     For the model technologies, EPA considered a number of 
options, each in turn involving a package of technologies for 
prevention of pollution within a pulp mill and treatment of 
wastewater once it leaves the mill, 58 Fed. Reg. at 66,109-10, 
ultimately focusing, after public comment on additional data, 
on two technologies, referred to as Option A and Option B.  
61 Fed. Reg. 36,835, 36,838-39.  In the Final Rule, Option A 
was defined as conventional pulping followed by ECF bleach-
ing.  63 Fed. Reg. at 18,542.  Option B did the same but 
added oxygen delignification and/or extended cooking that 
resulted in a kappa number at or below 20 for softwoods and 
below 13 for hardwoods.  Id.  EPA determined that Option B 
was too costly to be the BAT, naming it instead as the BADT 
for new sources and naming Option A as the BAT.  Id. at 

18,549-53.  The projected capital cost of Option B was more 
than twice that of Option A (already almost $1 million) and 
would result in mill closures and the likely bankruptcy of 
major paper companies.  Id. at 18,550.  EPA further deter-
mined that imposing limitations based on Option B technology 
would result in little incremental reduction in toxic pollutants 
and would produce no difference in monetized water quality 
benefits.  See id. at 18,545;  61 Fed. Reg. at 36,841.  Cf. 63 
Fed. Reg. at 18,590 with 63 Fed. Reg. at 18,592.  EPA did 
adopt, however, an innovative Voluntary Advanced Technolo-
gy Incentives Program, which offered various benefits to 
mills that installed beyond-BAT technology, such as OD plus 
ECF or totally chlorine free ("TCF") processes.  63 Fed. 
Reg. at 18,593-611.

     EPA declined to establish separate limitations for mills 
bleaching exclusively hardwood or softwood, even though 
unbleached hardwood pulp contains less lignin than un-
bleached softwood pulp, in view of both the absence of 
complete data on how these mills work and the difficulty of 
applying separate limitations, as many mills pulp both hard-
wood and softwood in varying proportions, or swing between 
the two.  See, e.g., 58 Fed. Reg. at 66,167;  Proposed Techni-
cal Development Document for Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard 
Category Effluent Limitations Guidelines, Pretreatment 
Standards, and New Source Performance Standards (Oct. 29, 
1993) DCN 08517 at 2-3;  STDD at 5-7.  EPA also declined to 
set effluent limitations for color, finding that the natural 
coloring of receiving waters varies, with the result that the 
aesthetic and aquatic impacts of color discharges on a particu-
lar receiving water is driven by highly site-specific conditions, 
best left to regulation under federal and state permitting 
procedures.  63 Fed. Reg. at 18,538.

     In these appeals, the petitioners are at either extreme in 
challenging the Cluster Rules under the CWA regarding the 
BPK subcategory of the pulp and paper industry.  Essential-
ly, NWF contends that the Final Rule is too lax, because 
EPA should have based the BAT for the BPK subcategory on 
Option B, technology that EPA wrongly found too costly, 
while Industry Petitioners contend that the Final Rule is too 

strict, moving far beyond the adoption of ECF bleaching as 
the BAT and the NSPS, and thus beyond EPA's authority.  
Supporting the rule, the industry association as Intervenor 
points out that the Final Rule is not only the result of a 
unique process involving simultaneous development of air and 
water regulations, but the result of many years of research 
and analysis by both EPA and the pulp and paper industry 
and the result of a process in which environmental interest 
groups also had substantial involvement.  Who is right about 
the Final Rule as it applies to BPK in an ultimate sense is not 
the concern of the court.

     The question before the court is limited to whether EPA 
has acted arbitrarily or capriciously, or otherwise not in 
accordance with law.  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A);  see American 
Iron & Steel Inst. v. EPA, 115 F.3d 979, 1004 (D.C. Cir. 
1997).  This standard is a narrow one, Citizens to Preserve 
Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402, 415-16 (1971), and 
if the "agency's reasons and policy choices ... conform to 
'certain minimal standards of rationality' ... the rule is 
reasonable and must be upheld."  Small Refiner Lead 
Phase-Down Task Force v. EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 521 (D.C. Cir. 
1983) (citation omitted).  Furthermore, particular deference 
is given by the court to an agency with regard to scientific 
matters in its area of technical expertise. Baltimore Gas & 
Elec. Co. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 462 U.S. 87, 103 
(1983);  Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 249 F.3d 1032, 1051-
52 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  This deference extends, moreover, to the 
agency's interpretation of a statute it administers, particular-
ly in a notice and comment rulemaking context.  United 
States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 227-31 (2001);  Chevron, 
U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837, 842-
45 (1984).  In Part II, we address NWF's contentions.  In 
Part III, we address Industry Petitioners' contentions.

     In Part IV, we address Industry Petitioners' motion to 
sanction NWF counsel.

                               II.

     NWF challenges the Final Rule on seven grounds.

                                A.

     In-plant Limitations.  NWF contends that EPA lacked 
the authority to define Option B in the manner that it did.  
By specifying that Option B involved extended delignification 
that resulted in particular kappa numbers, NWF contends 
that EPA defined Option B in a way that would have imposed 
in-plant limitations on regulated entities.  Because, NWF 
contends, EPA lacks the authority to impose such limits, 
defining Option B in this way unlawfully inflated EPA's 
evaluation of Option B's cost, thus invalidating its cost-driven 
rejection of Option B as the BAT.

     NWF's contentions are not well taken.  As Intervenor 
points out, NWF's contention is based on inaccurate assump-
tions about the technical basis for EPA's decision.  There is 
nothing in the record to suggest that EPA defined Option B 
in a way that would have imposed in-plant restrictions on the 
lignin content of unbleached pulp had EPA selected Option B 
as the BAT technology.  Rather, NWF infers such limitations 
in the face of direct EPA statements to the contrary.  63 Fed. 
Reg. at 18,546.  EPA has an obligation to identify the tech-
nology options it is considering with sufficient particularity 
that the industry to be regulated as well as environmental 
groups such as NWF can review and comment upon proposed 
effluent limitation guidelines and standards.  See BASF 
Wyandotte Corp. v. Costle, 598 F.2d 637, 644-45 (1st Cir. 
1979), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 1096 (1980);  Kennecott v. U.S. 
EPA, 780 F.2d 445, 452-53 (4th Cir. 1985);  see also Connecti-
cut Light & Power Co v. NRC, 673 F.2d 525, 530-31 (D.C. 
Cir.), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 835 (1982).  Consistent with its 
obligation, the technology that EPA identified as Option B 
involved extended delignification that pulped to particular 
kappa levels for hardwoods and softwoods.  However, the 
effluent limitations deriving from that technology would not 
have required particular mills to reach kappa numbers within 
the mill prior to discharges of wastewater into external 
streams, but rather would only have placed limitations on the 
discharge amount of dioxin, furan, chloroform, AOX, and a 
collection of chlorinated phenolic pollutants.  This is evident 
from the NSPS, which reflects the limitations for new sources 

based on the operation of Option B technology.  40 C.F.R. 
s 430.25(1) & (2).  Indeed, as Intervenor points out, identify-
ing a BAT technology that included effective operation of OD 
that would result in a kappa number of 20 or less for 
softwood and below 13 for hardwood, 63 Fed. Reg. at 18,542, 
is no different than EPA's statements that Option A and 
Option B included "effective brownstock washing, i.e., wash-
ing that achieves a soda loss of less than or equal to 10 kg 
Na2SO4 per ADMT of pulp (equivalent to approximately 99% 
recovery of pulping chemicals from the pulp)," 100% substitu-
tion of chlorine dioxide for chlorine, and "efficient biological 
wastewater treatment, achieving removal of approximately 90 
percent or more of influent BOD5."  Id.  As EPA counsel 
suggested at oral argument, because mills are not required to 
employ the BAT to achieve the effluent limitations, a mill 
could implement an alternative technology that would achieve 
the limitations by making adjustments in other parameters 
and without achieving the kappa numbers associated with 
Option B.  See, e.g., Effluent Limitations Guidelines, Pre-
treatment Standards, and New Source Performance Stan-
dards dards:  Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Category, 60 
Fed. Reg. 21,592, 21,497 (May 2, 1995) (to be codified at 40 
C.F.R. pt. 439).  Thus, it is apparent that no in-plant kappa 
number requirements would have been imposed on mills had 
Option B been selected as the BAT.  Because EPA did not 
establish in-plant lignin limitations, we have no occasion to 
reach NWF's contention that EPA was without authority to 
impose in-plant technology limitations or that EPA failed to 
provide the required notice and opportunity to comment 
before imposing such limitations.

     NWF's claim is perplexing because it contends that EPA 
erred in rejecting a technology option that according to NWF 
it would have been unlawful for EPA to impose.  That is, 
NWF is simultaneously contending that the definition of 
Option B was unlawful but that EPA should have selected it 
as the BAT.  NWF cannot have it both ways.  If Option B 
was unlawful, then EPA was right to reject it.  But this is not 
the case.  NWF does not truly advocate the adoption of 
Option B;  rather, it is seeking the adoption of a non-existent 

"Option C," which would embody some but not all of the 
elements of Option B.  EPA is not obliged to develop anew a 
technology for consideration as the BAT;  rather, it must 
"survey the practicable or available pollution-control technolo-
gy for an industry and assess its effectiveness."  E.I. du Pont 
de Nemours & Co. v. Train, 430 U.S. 112, 131 (1977).  That is 
what EPA did here and we find no error in its definition of 
Option B or its rejection as the BAT.  Thus, we deny NWF's 
petition to vacate EPA's identification of Option A as the 
BAT.

                                B.

     Capital Cost Estimate for Option B.  NWF next con-
tends that EPA erred when it included the cost of installing 
oxygen delignification ("OD") on hardwood lines in its deter-
mination of the capital costs of extended delignification tech-
nology for Option B.  This is error, contends NWF, because 
OD technology is only necessary on hardwood lines to achieve 
a kappa number lower than thirteen, a goal that is an invalid 
in-plant limitation and costs for invalid limitations cannot be 
considered.  Alternatively, NWF contends that if the court 
does not view the kappa number requirement as an invalid in-
plant restriction, consideration of the costs of installing OD on 
hardwood lines is still beyond EPA's authority because that 
technology is not required for hardwood lines to meet the 
effluent limitations.  As a result, EPA's estimate of Option 
B's capital costs was grossly inflated, contributing to its 
rejection as the BAT.  NWF also contends that the cost of 
Option B was further inflated by EPA's wrongful decision to 
use the most modern OD equipment as the basis for its 
pricing analysis.  NWF finally contends, in a separate line of 
argument, that even if it was within EPA's authority to 
consider costs not necessary to achieve the effluent limita-
tions, it was arbitrary and capricious for EPA actually to 
include such costs.

     We decline to reach the merits of NWF's cost estimate 
challenges because neither NWF nor any other party before 
the agency raised any of these contentions during the admin-

istrative phase of the rulemaking process.  It is well estab-
lished that issues not raised in comments before the agency 
are waived and this Court will not consider them.  E.g. Nat'l 
Elec. Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 99 F.3d 1170, 1171 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 
1997);  Washington Ass'n for Television & Children v. FCC, 
712 F.2d 677, 681 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  Further, this principle 
does not apply only to newly raised factual issues as NWF 
suggests.  Indeed, there is a near absolute bar against raising 
new issues--factual or legal--on appeal in the administrative 
context.  Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 251 F.3d 1026, 
1036 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

     Although neither NWF nor any other party raised the 
issue that the cost of OD technology for all mills should not 
be included in the Option B cost estimates or that the 
assumption that modern equipment would be installed was 
improper, NWF attempts to justify its acknowledged failure 
to raise these issues by stating that "EPA did not provide any 
notice or opportunity to comment on its inclusion of costs to 
meet an in-plant limitation" and "the NWF Petitioners could 
not have known that EPA would impose any such in-plant 
limitation after they submitted their comments."  This claim 
is patently false.  In its BAT and Best Management Practices 
("BMP") Compliance Cost Estimates Report, EPA clearly 
states, "Option B employs reduction of the lignin content of 
the unbleached pulp through oxygen delignification (OD), 
extended cooking (EC), or both.  These extended pulping 
technologies result in a typical kappa number of approximate-
ly 15 for softwood and 10 for hardwood."  EPA went on to 
itemize the cost of Option B with reference to the individual 
component technologies that comprise that Option in Table 
2-8 of the same report.  In this Table, two separate line items 
under the headings of "Capital Cost Component" and "Oper-
ating Cost Component" are entitled "Kappa Reduction (OD/
EC)."  Those line items report costs for this component as 
not applicable ("N/A") to Option A and exceeding a total of 
$1.5 billion for Option B.  Thus, NWF had notice that EPA 
was including OD technology in Option B, that it expected 
this technology to apply to both softwoods and hardwoods, 
and that the cost of OD technology was a component of the 

total cost of Option B.  As a result, NWF's claim of no notice 
is meritless and it is left with no circumstance excusing its 
failure to raise the issue.  The cases on which NWF relies are 
to no avail.  Darby v. Cisneros, 509 U.S. 137 (1993), address-
es exhaustion of administrative remedies, not waiver of 
claims, and is thus wholly inapposite;  Nat'l Ass'n of Mfrs. v. 
Department of the Interior, 134 F.3d 1095 (D.C. Cir. 1998), is 
directly contrary to NWF's position that it has not waived its 
OD cost claims, stating that "Our cases ... require complain-
ants, before coming to court, to give the [agency] a fair 
opportunity to pass on a legal or factual argument."  Id. at 
1111 (quoting Washington Ass'n for Television & Children v. 
FCC, 712 F.2d 677, 681 (D.C. Cir. 1983)).  We thus hold that 
NWF has waived the OD costing issues and decline to pass 
on their merits.

                                C.

     Failure to Explain the Reasonableness of EPA's Eco-
nomic Assessment of Option B.  NWF next contends that 
EPA's rejection of Option B was arbitrary and capricious 
because EPA failed to demonstrate the reasonableness of its 
assessment that Option B is not affordable by the bleach 
paper kraft subcategory as a whole.  Because "we do not 
review EPA's cost figuring de novo, but accord EPA discre-
tion to arrive at a cost figure within a broad zone of reason-
able estimate," Weyerhauser Co. v. Costle, 590 F.2d 1011, 
1049 (D.C. Cir. 1978), in view of the complex nature of 
economic analysis typical in the regulation promulgation pro-
cess, NWF's burden to show error is high.  As the Fourth 
Circuit put it, "While EPA must take seriously its statutory 
duty to consider cost, courts of review should be mindful of 
the many problems inherent in an undertaking of this nature 
and uphold a reasonable effort made by the Agency."  FMC 
Corp. v. Train, 539 F.2d 973, 979 (4th Cir. 1976).  Thus, when 
reviewing economic analyses of EPA, "a court's 'inquiry will 
be limited to whether the Agency considered the cost of 
technology, along with the other statutory factors, and wheth-
er its conclusion is reasonable.' "  Chem. Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 
870 F.2d 177, 250 (5th Cir. 1989) (quoting Ass'n of Pacific 
Fisheries, 615 F.2d 794, 818 (9th Cir. 1980)).  The court 

should not "undertake its own economic study, but must 
uphold the regulations if EPA has established in the record a 
reasonable basis for its decision."  Kennecott v. EPA, 780 
F.2d 445, 456 (4th Cir. 1986);  accord Chem. Mfrs., 870 F.2d 
at 251.

     NWF contends that EPA's economic analysis was inade-
quate because it failed to give sufficient specifics to support 
the reasonableness of its conclusions regarding economic 
impact.  Reference to EPA's duties under statutory and case 
law with respect to cost assessments reveal that this conten-
tion is without merit.  EPA is statutorily required to take 
into account the cost of achieving effluent reduction.  33 
U.S.C. s 1314(b)(2)(B).  However, the court has interpreted 
this statute to mean that "the Agency need not on its own 
undertake more than a net cost-benefit balancing to fulfill its 
obligation under section 304."  Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Costle, 
590 F.2d 1011, 1048 (D.C. Cir. 1978).  Although its analysis 
may be general, EPA "has the heaviest of obligations to 
explain and expose every step of its reasoning."  American 
Lung Ass'n v. EPA, 134 F.3d 388, 392 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  This 
duty to explain arises out of the need for reviewing courts to 
be able to discern the basis for EPA's decision.  Id.

     In view of our deferential standard of review it is not 
difficult to conclude that NWF's contentions regarding EPA's 
cost analysis must fail.  NWF's chief contention is that "EPA 
failed ... to substantiate its claim by specifying the identity 
of the 'large' firm or firms, how large the firm or firms are, or 
the number of mills in the BPK subcategory owned by the 
firm or firms."  NWF Petitioner's Br. at 37.  This is not the 
type of contention that will topple an EPA cost assessment, 
particularly in the context of an economic analysis as thor-
ough and considered as the one EPA undertook in the instant 
rulemaking.  EPA provided a detailed explanation of the 
bases for its economic conclusions both in the Federal Regis-
ter, 63 Fed. Reg. 18,549-51, and in the accompanying report 
entitled "Economic Analysis for the National Emission Stan-
dards for the Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Category:  
Pulp and Paper Production--Phase I (Oct. 27, 1997)" ("Eco-
nomic Analysis").

     Specifically, EPA articulated its methodology, applied it to 
industry data, and presented the results in verbal and tabular 
form making clear the information upon which EPA based its 
conclusion that Option B's costs were too high.  In the 
Economic Analysis EPA explains that compliance costs in-
cluded both capital costs and annual operating costs.  EPA 
described its market impact analysis methodology under 
heading 3.2 of that report, explaining that it used elasticities 
to estimate market price increases and factored those into the 
financial and economic analysis.  Financial impact was de-
scribed as encompassing facility closure, employment, and 
output impacts resulting from compliance costs.  As EPA 
explained, if "the present value of post-compliance net earn-
ings is less than the salvage value of the mill ... the mill is 
projected to close because closure is more economically ad-
vantageous to the owner."  EPA went on to explain that 
"[w]hen the closure analysis projects a facility closure, all 
employment, production, and exports reported for the facility 
are considered lost."  Regarding bankruptcy analysis, EPA 
explained that it would use the Altman Z-score analysis, 
comparing pre- and post-compliance Z-scores and determin-
ing that a score dropping below 1.81 was indicative of a 
compliance-induced bankruptcy.

     EPA applied this methodology to reach several conclusions, 
which it presented in the Economic Analysis report.  It 
concluded that for the 29 public companies with facilities 
regulated by the BAT, "the final BAT/PSES option [Option 
A] results in no additional bankruptcies" while "[o]ne or more 
companies move into the 'bankruptcy likely' category with 
BAT/PSES Option B."  EPA then went on to outline the 
many adverse economic consequences associated with bank-
ruptcy which rendered any option that induced bankruptcy an 
economically unachievable alternative under the statute.  See 
33 U.S.C. s 1311 (b)(2)(A), (C), (D) & (F).  Regarding facility 
closures, EPA determined that Option B would have twice the 
adverse impact of Option A, resulting in two plant closures, a 
loss of $273 million worth of shipments, $19 million in exports, 
and 900 jobs.  The differences between Options A and B were 

exacerbated when compliance costs of the entire Cluster 
Rules were analyzed;  Option B in conjunction with the air 
quality regulations would result in 4 plant closures, lost 
shipments of $1.3 billion, $24 million in lost exports, and a loss 
of 4,800 jobs.  This is compared to two plant closures, a loss 
of $273 million worth of shipments, $19 million in exports, and 
900 jobs associated with the compliance costs of Option A 
combined with the air quality standards.

     This description of how EPA applied its methodology con-
stitutes just a portion of the detailed economic and financial 
analysis conducted and presented by EPA.  This analysis 
hardly arises to a failure to explain "the reasonableness of its 
assessment that Option B is not affordable by the BPK 
subcategory as a whole" as NWF contends.  EPA sufficiently 
fulfills its duty to explain when it makes an "attempt at 
explanation or justification" sufficient to provide the review-
ing court with a "way to know the agency's methodology."  
Engine Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 20 F.3d 1177, 1182 (D.C. Cir. 
1994).  Here, EPA offered a thorough explanation and the 
court hardly has to "guess at the theory underlying the 
agency's action."  SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196-97 
(1947).  Indeed, EPA's "theory" is clear:  Option B costs a 
certain amount, that cost renders facility closure a more 
economically advantageous option, and facility closures result 
in the loss of jobs and output formerly associated with those 
plants.

     Furthermore, any ambiguity in EPA's analysis is unrelated 
to the methods, rationales, or assumptions of its analysis.  
Rather, the ambiguity in the analysis and complained of by 
NWF relates to the specific identities of the firms adversely 
impacted in the manner that EPA predicts.  Such ambiguity 
is insufficient to undermine the explanatory value of EPA's 
analysis for two reasons.  First, because much of the firm-
specific information NWF seeks constitutes protected confi-
dential business information ("CBI") that may not be publicly 
disclosed, EPA cannot be faulted for keeping such informa-
tion confidential.  See 33 U.S.C. s 1318(b).  Second, the 
provision of the identity of the specific firms at risk of 
bankruptcy--either through naming or through the sharing 

of sufficient descriptive information to allow interested per-
sons to figure out the identity--is not a requisite of an 
adequately explained economic analysis because a plant-by-
plant analysis is not required under the statute.  Chem. Mfrs. 
Ass'n v. EPA, 870 F.2d 177, 219 n.157 (5th Cir. 1989).  EPA 
need only be concerned with the nature of the impact on the 
industry as a whole.  Id. at 238.

     In sum, EPA has provided more than an adequate explana-
tion of its economic analysis.  EPA determined through 
methods it clearly described that a certain number of bank-
ruptcies and plant closures would occur under Option B.  
EPA then determined that such economic impact rendered 
Option B economically unachievable.  Whether Firm A or 
Firm Z was the firm involved in the potential bankruptcy or 
plant closure would not alter the outcome that those bank-
ruptcies and closures would occur.  The court will not second-
guess EPA's analysis nor "undertake [its] own economic 
study";  rather, the court must "uphold the regulations if 
EPA has established in the record a reasonable basis for its 
decision."  Kennecott v. EPA, 780 F.2d 445, 456 (4th Cir. 
1986).  A reasonable basis exists here.  We thus hold that 
EPA's analysis was sufficiently detailed to provide an under-
standing of the basis of its decision and that EPA's conclusion 
that Option B was not economically achievable was not arbi-
trary and capricious.

                                D.

     Altman Bankruptcy Model.  NWF next asserts EPA 
erred in using Edward I. Altman's Z-score analysis to predict 
the likely incidence of bankruptcies in the cost analysis of 
Option B.  We may reject an agency's choice of a scientific 
model "only when the model bears no rational relationship to 
the characteristics of the data to which it is applied."  Appa-
lachian Power Co. v. EPA, 135 F.3d 791, 802 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(citing Am. Iron & Steel Inst. v. EPA, 115 F.3d 979, 1005 
(D.C. Cir. 1997);  Chem. Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 28 F.3d 1259, 
1265 (D.C. Cir. 1994)).  That is not the case here.

     NWF contends EPA's use of the Altman model is arbitrary 
and capricious because (1) the model has become outdated 

since its adoption in 1968, (2) it was devised to predict 
bankruptcies of companies smaller than those involved here, 
(3) it has an error rate of at least 15% and (4) in applying it, 
EPA collected data from only a single year.  We reject each 
objection in turn.  First, as recently as 1993 Altman con-
firmed the model's continuing reliability, noting it had been 
"quite accurate over these last 25 years and remains an 
objective, established tool."  See Edward I. Altman, Corpo-
rate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy 179 (2d ed. 1993).  
Second, as EPA points out, Altman himself has cited the 
financial decline of LTV Corp., International Harvester and 
Chrysler Corp., all large companies, to illustrate the accuracy 
of his Z-score analysis.  Id. at 197-99, 201-02.  Third, the 
15% inaccuracy rate does not seem so large as to call into 
question the model's reliability, especially given that the 
decision to enter bankruptcy vel non can be influenced by 
factors other than mere financial distress.  See id. at 197 
(characterizing "bankruptcy" as "a behavioral event" that 
"manifests due to the combined 'efforts' of an ineffective firm 
and its management and the decision on the part of creditors 
to try to recover their investment within the confines of the 
Bankruptcy Code").  Finally, although Altman recommended 
gathering multi-year data, he recognized that this might not 
always be practical and so admonished that "[t]he analyst 
interested in practical utilization of the Z-score model is 
therefore advised to be careful."  Id. at 206.

                                E.

     No Limits for Color.  Next, NWF challenges EPA's deci-
sion not to establish nationwide standards for discharge of 
"color."  EPA determined instead that color pollution should 
be "dealt with on a case-by-case basis through individual 
[National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System] permits 
or, when appropriate, through local limits."  63 Fed. Reg. at 
18,538.  NWF contends EPA lacks authority to address the 
problem of color pollution piecemeal but is required by sec-
tion 301(b)(2) of the CWA to establish a single, national 
standard.  We believe EPA acted both reasonably and within 
its authority in adopting a case-by-case approach.

   Section 301(b)(2) of the CWA governs standards for pollu-
tants such as color:

  [T]here shall be achieved--

     ... 
     
     (2)(A) for pollutants identified in subparagraphs (C), (D), 
     and (F) of this paragraph,1 effluent limitations for catego-
     ries and classes of point sources, other than publicly 
     owned treatment works, which (i) shall require applica-
     tion of the best available technology economically achiev-
     able for such category or class, which will result in 
     reasonable further progress toward the national goal of 
     eliminating the discharge of all pollutants, as determined 
     in accordance with regulations issued by the Administra-
     tor pursuant to section 1314(b)(2) of this title, which such 
     effluent limitations shall require the elimination of dis-
     charges of all pollutants if the Administrator finds, on 
     the basis of information available to him (including 
     information developed pursuant to section 1325 of this 
     title), that such elimination is technologically and eco-
     nomically achievable for a category or class of point 
     sources as determined in accordance with regulations 
     issued by the Administrator pursuant to section 
     1314(b)(2) of this title....
     
33 U.S.C. s 1311(b)(2)(A) (footnote and emphasis added).  
EPA found below that elimination of discharge is not "techno-
logically and economically achievable" for color pollutants as a 
category or class but, to the contrary, that a case-by-case 
approach was necessary because "[t]he potential for signifi-
cant aesthetic or aquatic impacts from color discharges is 
driven by highly site-specific conditions."  63 Fed. Reg. at 
18,538.2  In light of this finding, EPA's decision does not 

__________
     1 Color is among the "pollutants identified in subparagraph[ ] ... 
(F)," the catchall subparagraph for all pollutants not identified in 
subparagraph (C), (D) or (E).

     2 EPA has long adhered to this position, which it explained more 
fully in a 1982 rulemaking:

conflict with its statutory responsibilities under section 
301(b)(2) and its decision to handle color on a case-by-case 
basis must be upheld as reasonable.  Cf. Maier v. EPA, 114 
F.3d 1032 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1014 (1997) 
("When we apply the deference due an administrative agency 
which Chevron mandates, '[t]he permissive nature of the 
statute implies broad agency discretion in selecting the appro-
priate manner of regulation.'  EPA's position that the statute 
allows the agency to impose limits for [nitrogenous biochemi-
cal oxygen demand] on a case-by-case basis through the 
permitting process is a reasonable and permissible reading of 
the statute, to which we must defer.") (quoting Professional 
Drivers Council v. Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety, 706 F.2d 
1216, 1221 (D.C. Cir. 1983)).

                               III.

     Next we consider, and reject, each of the challenges raised 
by Industry Petitioners.

                                A.

     AOX Limits.  Industry Petitioners first challenge EPA's 
decision to set limits on the discharge of AOX and to require 
daily monitoring of AOX levels.  For the following reasons, 
we conclude EPA's decision was within its authority and not 
arbitrary or capricious.

__________
     The Agency is withdrawing the existing effluent limitations and 
     standards for color and we are not establishing any new ones 
     based on our evaluation that color is not a pollutant of national 
     significance in this industry.  In some cases, it has been shown 
     that color can interfere with light transmission and the process 
     of photosynthesis in the aquatic environment.  However, in 
     most instances, color is simply an aesthetic pollutant.  Thus, 
     EPA no longer believes that color is a pollutant of uniform 
     national concern in this industry.
     
 

Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard and the Builders' Paper and Board 
Mills Point Source Categories Effluent Limitations Guidelines, Pre-
treatment Standards, and New Source Performance Standards, 47 
Fed. Reg. 52,006, 52,014 (1982).

     Industry Petitioners complain EPA should not have im-
posed AOX limits because AOX is not itself harmful and it is 
a poor predictor of the presence of chlorinated pollutants that 
are harmful, notably dioxin and furan.  The petitioners ex-
plain that because ECF bleaching reduces the amount of 
dioxin and furan, which make up only a small percentage of 
total AOX,3 much more quickly than it reduces other AOX 
components, AOX levels in treated wastewater do not accu-
rately reflect the remaining levels of dioxin and furan.  In-
dustry Petitioners may be correct that AOX is not a good 
surrogate for dioxin and furan but EPA does not justify the 
AOX limits on the basis that it is.  EPA proposes AOX limits 
and testing as a means to monitor BAT/NSPS technological 
compliance at a mill and thereby to indirectly ensure reduc-
tion of dioxin and furan levels through compliance.  EPA 
notes this method is both less expensive than the alternative 
of daily measuring the specific chlorinated pollutants, see 63 
Fed. Reg. at 18,537 ("monitoring for AOX as required in 
today's rule is considerably less expensive" than monitoring 
for dioxin, furan, chloroform and the 12 regulated chlorinated 
phenolic pollutants), and more effective as well, see 63 Fed. 
Reg. at 18,537 ("[T]he presence of AOX can be readily 
measured in mill effluent, in contrast to the presence of many 
of the chlorinated organic compounds regulated in today's 
rule, which for the most part are likely to be present at levels 
that cannot be reliably measured by today's analytical meth-
ods.");  "Justification for Establishing Limitations and Stan-
dards for AOX" 1 ("Limitations on AOX provide much more 
certainty than monitoring directly for [dioxin and furan] 
because AOX is detectable when [dioxin and furan] concentra-
tions are below the analytical method minimum level.").

     In response, Industry Petitioners do not dispute that meas-
uring AOX levels is an effective means of monitoring BAT 
and NSPS compliance.  They do, however, cite cheaper alter-
natives they contend will also be effective.  First, they sug-
gest EPA could rely on weekly or monthly testing which 

__________
     3 AOX "is a measure of the total chlorinated organic matter in 
wastewaters."  63 Fed. Reg. at 18,537.

would adequately determine compliance.  EPA reasonably 
concluded below, however, that daily testing is required to 
ensure consistent and effective treatment;  otherwise a mill 
could switch its bleaching chemicals between testings.  See 
id. at 14 (With only monthly monitoring, "there is nothing to 
stop a mill running with some chlorine, and switching to ClO2 
bleaching for a few days prior to the day that [dioxin and 
furan] are monitored.").  Second, Industry Petitioners sug-
gest EPA could simply authorize mills to "certify" that they 
are in compliance in lieu of testing.  EPA responds, again 
reasonably, that certification will not prevent treatment laps-
es attributable to human error.

                                B.

     Definition of "New Source."  Industry Petitioners next 
contend that EPA unreasonably broadened the existing defi-
nition of "new source" by designating supplemental fiber lines 
as "new sources" in the Rule's preamble, and thereby subject-
ing supplemental fiber lines to Option B technology under the 
New Source Performance Standard ("NSPS").  We conclude, 
as did the relevant parties at oral argument, that this argu-
ment is "much ado about nothing" given the language of the 
regulatory text.

     Section 306 of the Act defines a "new source" as "any 
source, the construction of which is commenced after the 
publication of proposed regulations prescribing a standard of 
performance under this section which will be applicable to 
such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated in 
accordance with this section."  33 U.S.C. s 1316(a)(2);  see 
also 40 C.F.R. s 122.2 (general definition of "new source" for 
direct dischargers).  A "source" is defined as "any building, 
structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may 
be the discharge of pollutants."  33 U.S.C. s 1316(a)(3);  40 
C.F.R. s 122.29(a)(2).  If a source is designated as a "new 
source," then it must adhere to the NSPS.

     In 1984, EPA promulgated a final rule which made it clear 
that the NSPS applies only to sources that meet the "new 
source" definition in 40 C.F.R. s 122.2, as well as one of the 

following three criteria:  (i) it is constructed at a site at which 
no other source is located (i.e., a greenfield site);  (ii) it totally 
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the 
discharge of pollutants at an existing source;  or (iii) its 
processes are substantially independent of an existing source 
at the same site.  40 C.F.R. s 122.29(b)(1).  If new construc-
tion does not satisfy 40 C.F.R. s 122.2 and one of the three 
criteria set forth in 40 C.F.R. s 122.29(b)(1), then the con-
struction is generally classified as a "modification" and is not 
subject to the NSPS.

     The 1984 rule also included two factors to assist in deter-
mining whether new processes are "substantially indepen-
dent" from an existing source under 40 C.F.R. 
s 122.29(b)(1)(iii).  See National Pollutant Discharge Elimina-
tion System Permit Regulations, 49 Fed. Reg. 37,998, 38,043 
(1984).  The first factor examines the degree to which new 
processes are integrated with existing ones.  "Under this first 
factor, if the new facility is fully integrated into the overall 
existing plant, the facility will not be a new source....  
However, on the other extreme, if the only connection be-
tween the new and old facility is that they are supplied 
utilities such as steam, electricity, or cooling water from the 
same source or that their wastewater effluents are treated in 
the same treatment plant, then the new facility will be a new 
source."  49 Fed. Reg. at 38,043.  The second factor is 
whether and to what extent "the construction results in 
facilities or processes that are engaged in the same general 
type of activity as the existing source."  Id.  This factor looks 
to whether "the proposed facility is engaged in a sufficiently 
similar type of activity as the existing source," in which case 
the facility "will not be treated as a new source."  Id.

     In the Cluster Rules, EPA promulgated a new definition of 
"new source" for pulp and paper mills in the bleached paper-
grade kraft and soda and papergrade sulfite subcategories.  
See 40 C.F.R. s 430.01(j).  This new definition completely 
adopted the three criteria from the general definition in Part 
122 (compare 40 C.F.R. s 122.29(b)(1)(i), (ii) & (iii) with 40 
C.F.R. s 430.01(j)(1)(i), (ii) & (iii)).  It also clarified the 
second criterion by stating that the "total replacement of a 

fiber line" could trigger a new source determination.  Com-
pare 40 C.F.R. s 430.01(j)(1)(ii) with 40 C.F.R. 
s 122.29(b)(1)(ii);  see also National Emission Standards for 
Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Category:  Pulp and 
Paper Production, 63 Fed. Reg. 18,504, 18,552 (1998).  EPA 
thus specifically identified a particular type of construction 
that would trigger a new source determination under 40 
C.F.R. s 430.01(j)(1)(ii).  EPA also explained in the Rule's 
preamble that a "new fiber line built to supplement an 
existing fiber line" would be considered a "substantially inde-
pendent" source within the meaning of 40 C.F.R. 
s 430.01(j)(1)(iii), and would consequently be considered a 
"new source" subject to the NSPS.  See 63 Fed. Reg. at 
18,552, 18,567-68;  40 C.F.R. s 430.01(j)(1)(iii).  EPA did not, 
however, incorporate this concept into the regulatory text of 
40 C.F.R. s 430.01(j)(1)(iii);  s 430.01(j)(1)(iii) remains identi-
cal to s 122.29(b)(1)(iii).  Moreover, EPA made clear in its 
Response to Comments that its new definition was not intend-
ed to include as a new source any new facilities that "would 
not otherwise be captured by the current definition of new 
source at 40 C.F.R. 122.29(b)(1)."  EPA also explained during 
oral argument that while the preamble states an "expecta-
tion" regarding supplemental fiber lines based on the evi-
dence in the record, the "new source" definition was not 
intended to be inconsistent with its earlier definition.

     Despite the unchanged language from s 122.29(b)(1)(iii) to 
s 430.01(j)(1)(iii), Industry Petitioners and EPA devote signif-
icant portions of their briefs to arguing whether supplemental 
fiber lines are "substantially independent" such that they fit 
the definition of "new source," and, consequently, whether 
they should be subject to the NSPS.  Industry Petitioners 
argue that, through the Final Rule's preamble, EPA has 
created an irrebuttable presumption that all supplemental 
fiber lines are "substantially independent" from existing 
sources and therefore subject to the NSPS.  Industry Peti-
tioners further argue that EPA cannot, as a matter of law, 
make that presumption.  EPA must instead make indepen-
dent determinations of supplemental fiber lines based on the 
two factors in the "substantially independent" test.  At oral 

argument, Industry Petitioners stated that they would not 
object to the new source definition if we found that such an 
irrebuttable presumption was inappropriate, and instead re-
lied on the "substantially independent" test for new source 
determinations.

     We find that EPA did not establish an irrebuttable pre-
sumption that supplemental fiber lines are new sources under 
the Final Rule.  Consequently, Industry Petitioners' objec-
tion to the "new source" definition is moot.  The definition of 
"new source" included in the text of the Final Rule as it 
pertains to supplemental fiber lines is altogether unchanged 
from EPA's earlier definition of "new source."  To the extent 
the preamble suggests a change in EPA's "new source" 
determinations, that suggestion is rejected.  The preamble to 
a rule is not more binding than a preamble to a statute.  "A 
preamble no doubt contributes to a general understanding of 
a statute, but it is not an operative part of the statute and it 
does not enlarge or confer powers on administrative agencies 
or officers."  Ass'n of American R.Rs. v. Costle, 562 F.2d 
1310, 1316 (D.C. Cir. 1977) (citing Yazoo Railroad Co. v. 
Thomas, 132 U.S. 174, 188 (1889)).  "Where the enacting or 
operative parts of a statute are unambiguous, the meaning of 
the statute cannot be controlled by language in the pream-
ble."  Id.  Section 430.01(j)(1)(iii) (the section applicable to 
supplemental fiber lines) remains unchanged from EPA's 
earlier "new source" definition set forth in 40 C.F.R. 
s 122.29(b)(1)(iii).  When we examine the text of 40 C.F.R. 
s 430.01(j)(1)(iii), together with EPA's statements both in its 
Response to Comments and during oral argument that it did 
not intend to change the definition of 40 C.F.R. 
s 122.29(b)(1), there is nothing left of the Industry Petition-
ers' objection to the "new source" definition.  Permitting 
authorities will continue to make "new source" determinations 
using the regulatory text and the two factors of the "substan-
tially independent" test identified by EPA to assist in making 
such determinations--criteria that have not been changed in 
any fundamental respect from EPA's earlier rule.  In short, 
EPA did not act arbitrarily or capriciously in promulgating its 
"new source" definition.

                                C.

     Selection of Option B Technology for "New Sources."  
Industry Petitioners next challenge EPA's decision to adopt 
Option B technology as the NSPS.  See 63 Fed. Reg. at 
18,553.  Industry Petitioners object to Option B on two 
grounds:  1) extended cooking/oxygen delignification will only 
result in measurable decreases in AOX, not known pollutants;  
and 2) in light of EPA's "new source" definition applying to 
supplemental fiber lines, Option B's cost is not justified.

     We addressed, and dismissed, Industry Petitioners' first 
argument under our discussion of "AOX Limits," supra, and 
we need not repeat our analysis here.  As for Industry 
Petitioners' second argument, we find that much of it results 
from their assumption that the Rule's preamble language 
creates an "irrebuttable presumption" that supplemental fiber 
lines will be considered new sources under the Final Rule.  
We dismissed this assumption under our previous section, 
noting that it is the language of the regulatory text, and not 
the preamble, that controls.  To the extent that construction 
of a supplemental fiber line meets the long-held and un-
changed criteria of the "substantially independent" test (and 
thus constitutes a "new source"), then that supplemental fiber 
line would be subject to Option B technology--as would any 
"new source" construction.

     In any event, EPA's economic analysis concerning Option B 
technology for the NSPS was not arbitrary or capricious.  
First, appellate courts give EPA considerable discretion to 
weigh and balance the various factors required by statute to 
set NSPS.  See, e.g., BP Exploration & Oil, Inc. v. EPA, 66 
F.3d 784, 802 (6th Cir. 1995).  "The CWA does not state what 
weight should be accorded to the relevant factors;  rather, the 
Act gives EPA the discretion to make those determinations."  
Id.  Second, as Industry Petitioners concede, section 306 
requires that, when setting the NSPS, the Administrator 
must take costs into consideration, but does not require that 
she conduct a cost-benefit analysis.  "[T]he Administrator 
must inquire into the initial and annual costs of applying the 
technology and make an affirmative determination that those 

costs can be reasonably borne by the industry."  Chem. Mfrs. 
Ass'n v. EPA, 870 F.2d 177, 262 (5th Cir. 1989);  see also CPC 
Int'l, Inc. v. Train, 540 F.2d 1329, 1341 (8th Cir. 1976) 
("There is no language in s 306 requiring a cost-benefit 
analysis.  Rather, EPA is required only to take costs under 
'consideration.'  We conclude, therefore, that a cost-benefit 
analysis is not required in determining the reasonableness of 
the cost of achieving the new source standards.").  Section 
306(b)(1)(B) requires only that "[i]n establishing or revising 
Federal standards of performance for new sources ... the 
Administrator shall take into consideration the cost of achiev-
ing such effluent reduction, and any non-water quality envi-
ronmental impact and energy requirements."  33 U.S.C. 
s 1316(b)(1)(B).  This EPA has done.

     After conducting its economic analysis, EPA rejected Op-
tion B technology for existing sources because EPA conclud-
ed it would cause severe economic disruption that could not 
be reasonably borne by the pulp and paper industry.  See 63 
Fed. Reg. at 18,550-51.  With respect to its cost analysis at 
new sources, EPA concluded that "[t]he incremental capital 
cost of complying with the selected NSPS for all pollutants, 
as compared to the costs of complying with the standards 
based on the next best technology, BAT Option A, is only .5 
to 2.0% of the total capital cost of constructing either a new 
source fiber line at an existing mill or a new greenfield mill."  
63 Fed. Reg. at 18,553.  Thus implementing Option B tech-
nology would only increase the costs of constructing a new 
mill or fiber line by 0.5% to 2%.  As such, EPA concluded 
that the cost of implementing Option B technology for new 
sources was reasonable.  Indeed, Industry Petitioners con-
cede that this economic analysis alone would likely satisfy 
section 306.  Industry Petitioners instead take issue with the 
perceived "irrebuttable presumption" concerning supplemen-
tal fiber lines set out in the Rule's preamble.  Such a pre-
sumption, argues Industry Petitioners, renders EPA's eco-
nomic analysis arbitrary and capricious because EPA "failed 
to take into account the tremendous cost of retrofitting 
existing mills to accommodate the Option B technology as 
required under the expanded definition of new source."  Ac-

cording to Industry Petitioners, existing mills will, in fact, be 
required to implement Option B technology--at a cost that 
EPA has already found to be prohibitive.

     Industry Petitioners' argument depends on an expanded 
definition of "new source."  Without reliance on the expanded 
definition, Industry Petitioners have already conceded that 
EPA's economic analysis will likely pass judicial review.  
They are correct.  And because we have already rejected the 
"expanded definition" of "new source" (drawn from the Rule's 
preamble) in favor of the existing definition of "new source" 
(based on the traditional "substantially independent" test), we 
find no merit to Industry Petitioners' argument challenging 
EPA's economic analysis.

                                D.

     Monthly Effluent Limitations.  Industry Petitioners next 
object to EPA's decision to set the monthly maximum effluent 
limitation at the 95th percentile of the distribution of monthly 
measurements rather than the 99th percentile.  For the 
reasons that follow, we find that EPA did not act arbitrarily 
or capriciously in setting the monthly limitation at the 95th 
percentile.

     EPA monitors a mill's discharge of pollutants by setting 
and monitoring daily and monthly standards of performance 
that mills must achieve.  The Cluster Rules require plants to 
achieve effluent limitations that are based on the proper 
operation of mills using the model technologies.  According to 
EPA, "limitations ... are numerical values that are bounds 
on the amounts of pollutants that may be discharged and are, 
in effect, measures of how well the production processes and 
wastewater treatment systems must be operated."  The daily 
maximum limitation is a restriction on the amount of pollutant 
in any one daily sample.  The type of limitation at issue here, 
the monthly average limitation, is a restriction on the average 
of daily measurements taken during a month.

     Briefly, the limitations are derived using the following 
process:  EPA determines an average performance level, or 
long-term average, that a well-designed mill using the model 

technologies can achieve.  Recognizing variability among 
treatment processes, pollutant concentrations, sampling, and 
analysis, EPA incorporates "variability factors" into the limi-
tations to account for these sources of variability.  Because 
the variability factors for the Cluster Rules were derived 
from mills using the model technologies, EPA asserts that the 
effluent limitations "already account for any reasonable varia-
bility likely to occur and thus well operated mills implement-
ing technologies representing the appropriate levels of control 
will be capable of compliance at all times."  EPA then 
calculates limitations based on percentiles using the products 
of long-term averages and variability factors.  The chosen 
percentiles are intended to accommodate reasonably antici-
pated variability within the mill's control while at the same 
time reflect a level of performance consistent with BAT and 
BADT.

     EPA has consistently used the 99th percentile of the distri-
bution of daily measurements as the basis for daily maximum 
limitations, and has at times used the 99th percentile of the 
distribution of monthly averages as the basis for monthly 
average effluent limitations.  In its Cluster Rules, EPA set 
the daily maximum limitation for BAT technology at the 99th 
percentile, and it set the monthly maximum limitation for 
BAT technology at the 95th percentile.  Industry Petitioners 
argue that EPA deviated from past precedent by setting the 
monthly average limitations at the 95th percentile rather than 
the 99th percentile, and that EPA has designed a system that 
ensures a well-operated mill using the model technologies will 
exceed the monthly average limitations 5% of the time.

     We reject Industry Petitioners' arguments and uphold 
EPA's decision to set the monthly average limitation at the 
95th percentile.  EPA has considerable discretion in deter-
mining a technical approach that will ensure that effluent 
limitations reasonably account for expected variability in 
plant operations while still maintaining an effective level of 
control.  See Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Costle, 590 F.2d 1011, 
1056-58 (D.C. Cir. 1978).  While EPA set monthly average 
limitations at the 99th percentile for the pulp and paper 
industry in 1982 and 1986 rulemakings for Best Practicable 

Technology ("BPT") and Best Conventional Technology 
("BCT"), Industry Petitioners ignore the fact that after those 
rule-makings, EPA determined, "as a matter of policy, that 
the 95th percentile was a more appropriate choice for month-
ly average limitations in all industrial effluent guidelines 
rulemakings because the variability of monthly averages is 
less than the variability of daily measurements."  EPA has 
followed that policy in developing monthly average limitations 
in all effluent guidelines rulemakings since 1987.  It was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious for EPA to continue that 
policy here.

     EPA carefully explained that its purpose in setting the 
monthly average limitations at the 95th percentile was to 
ensure that a mill achieves the long-term average effluent 
levels.  EPA explained that the daily maximum limitations 
are set at a higher percentile level to account for the greater 
variability expected from daily measurements.  But consis-
tent compliance with the daily maximum limitation alone 
would not ensure compliance with the long-term average.  
Continuous operation at or near the daily maximum would in 
fact result in discharges that exceed the long-term average.  
Likewise, setting monthly limitations at the 99th percentile 
would not insure that the long-term average is met.  EPA 
therefore set the monthly average limitation at a lower level 
to ensure that mills operate more closely around the long-
term average.  EPA reasonably anticipated that, because 
monthly average limitations are based on averages of more 
than one daily measurement, less variability would be present 
in monthly measurements than in daily measurements.  As 
EPA observed in its Response to Comments:  "In establishing 
monthly average limitations, EPA's objective is to provide an 
additional restriction that supports EPA's objective of having 
facilities control their average discharges at the long-term 
average.  The monthly average limitation requires continuous 
dischargers to provide on-going control, on a monthly basis, 
that complements controls imposed by the daily maximum 
limitation.  In order to meet the monthly average limitation, 
a facility must counterbalance a value near the daily maxi-
mum limitation with one or more values well below the daily 

maximum limitation.  To achieve compliance, these values 
must result in a monthly average value at or below the 
monthly average limitation."

     Industry Petitioners argue that even if they employ the 
model technologies, they will still exceed the monthly average 
limitations five percent of the time.  The "fundamental flaw" 
in using the 95th percentile, according to Industry Petition-
ers, is EPA's assumption that variability of discharges can be 
adequately controlled through quality control of plant pro-
cesses and treatment procedures.  They argue that not all 
variances or exceedances will result from improper quality 
control or treatment procedures, and cite the presence of two 
elevated levels of chlorinated phenolic compounds recorded 
by mills using the model technologies.  We reject this argu-
ment.  First, EPA did not establish monthly average limita-
tions for chlorinated phenolic compounds.  The relevance of 
this argument by Industry Petitioners is therefore unclear.  
Second, Industry Petitioners completely ignore the "upset 
provision" that is available should an exceedance arise due to 
an unforeseen or unexplainable event.  If such an event 
occurs, operators may raise this "upset defense" as an affir-
mative defense in an enforcement action.  See 40 C.F.R. 
s 122.41(n).

     EPA's approach to developing monthly limitations was 
reasonable.  It established limitations based on percentiles 
achieved by facilities using well-operated and controlled pro-
cesses and treatment systems.  It is therefore reasonable for 
EPA to conclude that measurements above the limitations are 
due to either upset conditions or deficiencies in process and 
treatment system maintenance and operation.  EPA has in-
cluded an affirmative defense that is available to mills that 
exceed limitations due to an unforeseen event.  EPA reason-
ably concluded that other exceedances would be the result of 
design or operational deficiencies.  EPA rejected Industry 
Petitioners' claim that facilities are expected to operate pro-
cesses and treatment systems so as to violate the limitations 
at some pre-set rate.  EPA explained that the statistical 
methodology was used as a framework to establish the limita-
tions based on percentiles.  These limitations were never 

intended to have the rigid probabilistic interpretation that 
Industry Petitioners have adopted.  Therefore, we reject 
Industry Petitioners' challenge to the effluent limitations.

                               IV.

     Motion for Sanctions.  As a final matter, we consider 
Industry Petitioners' motion to sanction NWF counsel.  A 
summary of the events leading up to Industry Petitioners' 
motion is included below.

     EPA, acting under its authority in 33 U.S.C. s 1318(a), 
collected certain industry confidential business information 
("CBI") during the development of the Cluster Rules.  On 
November 9, 1998, NWF Petitioners filed a motion in the 
Ninth Circuit to compel production of all CBI that EPA had 
collected.  Nat'l Wildlife Fed'n v. Browner, No. 98-70506 (9th 
Cir. filed Nov. 9, 1998).  Specifically, NWF sought the num-
ber of mills with hardwood lines that used oxygen delignifica-
tion.  Both EPA and Industry Petitioners opposed the mo-
tion.  This Court (after receiving the transferred case) denied 
NWF Petitioners' motion on the ground that the CBI sought 
was "the type of sensitive information and confidential or 
trade secret information that EPA can properly withhold 
from public view."  Nat'l Wildlife Fed'n v. EPA, No. 99-1452 
(D.C. Cir. Feb. 2, 2000) (order denying motion to compel 
disclosure of information in the administrative record) (citing 
Natural Res. Def. Council v. Thomas, 805 F.2d 410, 418 n.13 
(D.C. Cir. 1986)).

     In 1999, NWF Petitioners requested information from EPA 
regarding bleached kraft mills.  In response, EPA emailed a 
computer file attachment to an NWF law clerk, who then 
forwarded the email attachment to NWF counsel on June 16, 
1999.  The file attachment contained three spreadsheets, the 
second of which contained CBI and included the notation 
"CBI" above the spreadsheet.

     According to NWF, NWF counsel opened the file, printed 
the spreadsheets, and reviewed them in May 2000 without 
immediately noticing that the second spreadsheet, which in-
cluded nine separate pages, was marked as "CBI."  He did, 

however, determine that the information contained on the 
second spreadsheet included the information he had sought in 
his motion to compel (i.e., the number of mills running 
hardwood lines).  Only after NWF counsel attempted to 
locate the information in the administrative record did he 
notice that the spreadsheet was labeled "CBI."  According to 
NWF's counsel, the CBI notation was only located on the 
first page of the second spreadsheet, and was in all other 
ways inconspicuous.

     That same day, NWF counsel consulted an attorney re-
garding his ethical obligations with respect to the CBI.  The 
attorney advised NWF counsel that a DC Ethics Opinion 
supported the position that he could use the information that 
was inadvertently disclosed to him.  NWF counsel then noti-
fied EPA's in-house counsel that he received a document 
labeled "CBI."  EPA's counsel requested return of the docu-
ment--NWF counsel forwarded the email, but informed EPA 
counsel that he intended to use the information included in 
the CBI in a brief filed under seal with this Court.  EPA's 
counsel of record then contacted NWF counsel, urged him not 
to refer to the CBI in NWF's brief, and provided him with a 
citation to the sources in the confidential portion of the 
administrative record supporting the information included in 
the CBI.  NWF Petitioners used this citation in its brief to 
this Court.

     Despite requests to return the CBI, NWF counsel refused 
on grounds he would need the information if another party 
contested the accuracy of the information in NWF's brief.  
Only after EPA stipulated to certain CBI on July 17, 2000, 
did NWF counsel return the CBI.  The next day, Industry 
Petitioners filed a motion to impose sanctions, including dis-
missing the NWF petition or, in the alternative, striking 
portions of the merits brief filed by the NWF Petitioners and 
awarding attorney fees and costs to Industry Petitioners, on 
grounds the NWF counsel improperly disclosed CBI and 
improperly used CBI to extract additional data from EPA 
and a stipulation from EPA in support of NWF's litigation 
position.

     NWF argues that its counsel acted properly throughout the 
present litigation with respect to the CBI.  NWF assures this 
Court that its counsel did not know that the email contained 
CBI when he first reviewed it, and relies on a DC Ethics 
Opinion which provides that an attorney who receives inad-
vertently disclosed information, and who has no knowledge 
that the information was disclosed inadvertently, does not act 
unethically in using that information to his advantage.  See 
District of Columbia Legal Ethics Comm., Formal Op. 256 
(1995).  (NWF does not suggest that counsel would have been 
able to use the information if he knew that it was confidential 
when he initially reviewed it.)  NWF also denies that NWF 
counsel used the CBI as a bargaining chip with EPA.  Final-
ly, NWF argues that NWF counsel did not violate this 
Court's Order denying NWF's motion to compel because the 
order was silent as to whether NWF could use information 
released to it by EPA.

     We begin and end our analysis with this Court's Order 
denying NWF's motion to compel.  NWF insists that its 
attorney did nothing wrong in retaining and using the CBI 
because our Order did not specifically address whether the 
information could be used if EPA disclosed it, but was instead 
limited to whether EPA could, in fact, disclose it.  This 
argument is disingenuous at best.  We issued our Order in 
direct response to NWF's request for CBI--the CBI it 
subsequently received, used, and retained.  Our Order stated 
clearly that "[t]he confidential business information NWF 
seeks is the type of sensitive information and confidential or 
trade secret information that EPA can properly withhold 
from public view."  The effect of our Order was simple:  
NWF requested access to the information;  we denied the 
request.  That NWF later received this information inadver-
tently in no way changes our designation of this material as 
"confidential," "sensitive," and similar to "trade secret infor-
mation," and in no way changes our position that NWF 
counsel should not have had access to it.  Because of that, we 
fail to understand how NWF counsel, after receiving the 
information and learning of the inadvertent disclosure, could 
justify retaining and using the information in his possession.

     NWF counsel, and the attorney he consulted, relied on 
ethics and judicial opinions which hold that under some 
circumstances, a privilege is waived if inadvertently released 
by the privilege holder.  In doing so, NWF counsel and his 
attorney appear to have mischaracterized the operative facts 
and been unaware of caselaw from this Circuit that closely 
resembles the question at hand:  whether the inadvertent 
disclosure of privileged or confidential information main-
tained by a third party (here, EPA) constitutes waiver.  See 
SEC v. Lavin, 111 F.3d 921 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  In Lavin, we 
noted that cases wherein a holder of the privilege inadver-
tently discloses information provide "limited guidance on 
whether disclosures by third parties over whom the holder of 
the privilege has virtually no control, i.e., involuntary disclo-
sures," constitute waiver.  Id. at 930.  We then adopted the 
reasoning of the Ninth Circuit in United States v. de la Jara, 
973 F.2d 746, 749-50 (9th Cir. 1992), holding that the privi-
lege is preserved in involuntary disclosures if the privilege 
holder has made reasonable efforts designed to protect and 
preserve the privilege.  See Lavin, 111 F.3d at 930.  In so 
holding, we observed that "[u]nless communications remain 
privileged as long as the holder has acted reasonably in 
attempting to protect them, involuntary disclosures by third 
parties may render illusory the privilege's guarantee of priva-
cy."  Id.  We find that Industry Petitioners' efforts in oppos-
ing NWF's motion to compel the CBI was indeed a reason-
able attempt to protect its confidential business information, 
and any protection afforded that information was not waived 
through the inadvertent disclosure of that information by 
EPA.

     We understand, however, that the present situation in-
volves an Order of this Court concerning trade secret infor-
mation rather than an evidentiary privilege.  The holding of 
Lavin then, while instructive, is not necessarily controlling.  
The Lavin holding does instruct us, however, to seriously 
question the propriety of counsel's actions, especially when 
taken together with the language of our Order denying NWF 
access to the very information NWF now argues it was 
entitled to use.  For these reasons, rather than impose 

sanctions against NWF counsel, we refer this matter to the 
Committee on Admissions and Grievances for its consider-
ation and such recommendation or petition to the Court as 
the Committee may see fit to present.  See In re Door, 195 
F.2d 766, 770 (D.C. Cir. 1952).

                                V.

     For the reasons stated, the petitions for review and the 
motion for sanctions are denied.

                                                                      