                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 15, 2002   Decided December 13, 2002 

                           No. 01-1314

                      Idaho Power Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

                 Arizona Public Service Company, 
                            Intervenor

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Charles G. Cole argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Gary A. Morgans and Alice E. Loughran.

     Larry D. Gasteiger, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 

the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     John D. McGrane was on the brief for intervenor.

     Before:  Edwards, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner, Idaho Power Compa-
ny, challenges two FERC orders barring Idaho Power from 
entering into a 10-year contract to provide electricity to the 
IP Merchant Group ("IP Merchant") from December 2000 
through December 2010.  See Idaho Power Co., Order Deny-
ing Petition for Declaratory Order, 94 F.E.R.C. p 61,311 
(2001) ("Order Denying Petition");  Idaho Power Co., Order 
Denying Rehearing and Clarifying Prior Order, 95 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,224 (2001) ("Order Denying Rehearing").  Before receiv-
ing the ill-fated bid from IP Merchant, Idaho Power had been 
furnishing electric transmission service to the Arizona Public 
Service Company ("APS").  APS had a "right of first refusal" 
to match the IP Merchant bid for service from Idaho Power.  
In order to exercise its right of first refusal, APS had to 
"agree to accept a contract term at least equal to [the] 
competing request" offered by IP Merchant in its bid for 
transmission service from Idaho Power.  Idaho Power Com-
pany Open Access Transmission Tariff s 2.2 ("Idaho Power 
OATT"), Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 230.  However, because it 
could only seek service from Idaho Power in 18-month incre-
ments, APS was unable to match IP Merchant's 10-year 
contract bid.  FERC nonetheless ruled that Idaho Power was 
obliged to continue providing service to APS, because the 
"transmission service requests were not substantially the 
same in all respects [due to] the dissimilarity in available 
terms of service."  Order Denying Rehearing, 95 F.E.R.C. at 
61,759.  In other words, FERC reasoned that the offers by 
APS and IP Merchant were not "substantially the same in all 
respects," and thus not competing bids, because IP Merchant 
offered a 10-year term while APS offered only an 18-month 
term.  Order Denying Petition, 94 F.E.R.C. at 62,145;  Order 
Denying Rehearing, 95 F.E.R.C. at 61,759.

     FERC's interpretation of the right of first refusal provision 
defies reason.  Idaho Power's Open Access Transmission 
Tariff ("OATT") and FERC's orders creating the applicable 
pro forma tariff provide that, in order to exercise a right of 
first refusal, "the existing firm service customer must agree 
to accept a contract term at least equal to a competing 
request by any new Eligible Customer."  Idaho Power OATT 
s 2.2, J.A. 230;  Promoting Wholesale Competition Through 
Open Access Non-Discriminatory Transmission Services by 
Public Utilities;  Recovery of Standard Costs by Public Utili-
ties and Transmitting Utilities, Order No. 888-A, F.E.R.C. 
Stats. & Regs. p 31,048 (1997) ("Order No. 888-A").  FERC 
has turned the Tariff and orders on their heads by suggesting 
that the competitor must put forward an offer identical to the 
incumbent's in order for the competing bids to be "substan-
tially the same in all respects."  Under this reasoning, the 
competitor is not allowed to make a better offer, which of 
course ensures that the incumbent never loses.  This is a 
nonsensical construction of the "right of first refusal," which 
we reject as arbitrary and capricious.  Accordingly, we grant 
Idaho Power's petition for review.

                          I. Background

A.   The Pro Forma Tariff

     In 1996, FERC promulgated a set of rules designed to 
create a more competitive environment in the electric utility 
industry.  Promoting Wholesale Competition Through Open 
Access Non-Discriminatory Transmission Services by Public 
Utilities;  Recovery of Stranded Costs by Public Utilities and 
Transmitting Utilities, Order No. 888, F.E.R.C. Stats. & 
Regs.  31,036 (1996) ("Order No. 888"), order on reh'g, Order 
No. 888-A, order on reh'g, Order No. 888-B, 81 F.E.R.C.  
61,248 (1997), order on reh'g, Order No. 888-C, 82 F.E.R.C.  
61,046 (1998), aff'd in part and remanded in part sub nom. 
Transmission Access Policy Study Group v. FERC, 225 F.3d 
667 (D.C. Cir. 2000), aff'd jurisdictional ruling sub nom. New 
York v. FERC, 535 U.S. 1 (2002).  These rules required each 
utility to separate its transmission function from its wholesale 

merchant function (i.e., the selling of electric power at whole-
sale rates).  They also required each utility to file and take 
transmission under an OATT designed to assure access to 
transmission service on a non-discriminatory basis.  FERC's 
rules specified the terms of a pro forma tariff designed to 
achieve the competitive goals of Order No. 888.  Order No. 
888 at 31,926-64.  With limited exceptions, each utility's 
OATT must conform to the non-rate terms and conditions 
specified in the pro forma tariff.  Report of the Committee on 
Electric Utility Regulation, 18 Energy L.J. 197, 200 (1997) 
("The FERC will allow deviations from the pro-forma's terms 
and conditions to reflect regional practices, but these devia-
tions are limited primarily to scheduling deadlines.  With 
very limited exceptions, the FERC has rejected all other 
deviations....").  FERC revised the pro forma tariff in 
Order No. 888-A.

     The pro forma tariff required each utility to create an Open 
Access Same Time Information System ("OASIS"), an elec-
tronic system for accepting transmission requests that would 
make them known simultaneously to all potential customers.  
While s 13.2 of the pro forma tariff specified that requests 
for long-term firm service would generally be accepted in the 
order in which they are received, Order No. 888-A at 30,515-
16, it also noted a special provision in s 2.2 for determining 
priority where an incumbent customer seeks to renew service.  
Id. at 30,516.

     Section 2.2 of the tariff provided the incumbent customer 
with a right of first refusal to match the duration offered by a 
new customer at the full OATT rate.  Section 2.2 provides, in 
relevant part:

     If at the end of the contract term, the Transmission 
     Provider's Transmission System cannot accommo-
     date all of the requests for transmission service the 
     existing firm service customer must agree to accept 
     a contract term at least equal to a competing re-
     quest by any new Eligible Customer and to pay the 
     
     current just and reasonable rate, as approved by the 
     Commission, for such service.
     
Id. at 30,511.  FERC explained in the Preamble to the pro 
forma tariff in Order No. 888-A that, "[b]ecause the purpose 
of the right of first refusal provision is to be a tie-breaker, the 
competing requests should be substantially the same in all 
respects."  Id. at 30,198.

B.   The Transmission Service Requests

     Idaho Power provides transmission service in accordance 
with the rates, terms and conditions of its OATT.  Idaho 
Power filed its OATT pursuant to FERC Order No. 888, and 
FERC accepted it as the filed rate.  Atlantic City Elec. Co., 
77 F.E.R.C. p 61,144 (1996) (non-rate terms and conditions);  
Allegheny Power Sys., Inc., 80 F.E.R.C. p 61,143 (1997) 
(rates).  Idaho Power revised its OATT pursuant to Order 
No. 888-A, and FERC accepted the revisions.  Idaho Power's 
OATT is substantially the same as the pro forma tariff that 
FERC issued.  Significantly, s 2.2 of Idaho Power's OATT is 
identical to s 2.2 of the pro forma tariff.

     APS is Idaho Power's incumbent customer, receiving ser-
vice from Borah/Brady Substation in southeastern Idaho, 
through Brownlee Substation in western Idaho, to the La-
Grande Substation in northeastern Oregon.  The history sur-
rounding the dealings between APS and Idaho Power is 
somewhat convoluted.  In 1998, APS submitted several re-
quests through Idaho Power's OASIS for long-term, point-to-
point transmission service for an eight-year period.  The 
following year, Idaho Power provided APS with a facility 
study that demonstrated that existing long-term obligations 
prevented Idaho Power from meeting APS's service request 
for the full eight-year period without constructing facility 
upgrades.  Idaho Power offered APS 100 MW of transmis-
sion service on Borah West that PacifiCorp had contractual 
rights to use, but could not due to system limitations.  How-
ever, Idaho Power cautioned that this service would terminate 
when PacifiCorp upgraded the facilities and exercised its pre-
existing rights to the capacity.

     After further negotiations between Idaho Power and APS 
failed to yield an executed service agreement, FERC directed 

Idaho Power to provide APS with partial interim transmis-
sion service.  Idaho Power Co., Order Rejecting Unexecuted 
Service Agreements, and Requiring the Filing of New Service 
Agreements and the Provision of Partial Interim Transmis-
sion Service, 90 F.E.R.C. p 61,009 (2000).  Since Idaho Pow-
er's facility study indicated that it could provide 100 MW of 
APS's requested firm point-to-point service for a term of 18 
months rather than the eight years that APS requested, 
FERC required Idaho Power to file new service agreements 
providing APS with firm transmission service for an 18-month 
term.  Id. at 61,019.  FERC also stated that APS would be 
entitled to roll over its service at the end of the 18-month 
term, if it chose not to construct additional facilities and the 
capacity committed to PacifiCorp remained available.  Id.  
This FERC order effectively restricted APS's ability to bid to 
18-month increments.

     Subsequently, on November 8, 2000, IP Merchant submit-
ted a request on Idaho Power's OASIS for 200 MW of long-
term firm point-to-point transmission service for the period 
December 1, 2000 through December 31, 2010.  The following 
day, APS sent a letter to Idaho Power stating that it was 
exercising its rollover rights for an additional 18-month peri-
od from April 1, 2001 through September 30, 2002.  Then on 
November 15, 2000, IP Merchant submitted a second request 
on Idaho Power's OASIS for an additional 200 MW of long-
term firm point-to-point transmission service.  This service 
was also from the Idaho Power system to LaGrande, for a 10-
year period from January 1, 2001 to December 31, 2010.

     On December 20, 2000, Idaho Power advised APS of its 
right of first refusal.  Idaho Power simultaneously informed 
APS that it was filing a Petition for Declaratory Order.  The 
Petition requested guidance as to whether, if APS submitted 
a 10-year or longer request for which the continuation of 
service beyond 18 months would be contingent on the continu-
ing availability of capacity over Borah West, this contingent 
request would be sufficient to match the 10-year, non-
contingent IP Merchant request.  In response to the Petition, 
APS questioned the validity of the IP Merchant transmission 
requests in light of the fact that they were not "precon-

firmed" requests, no service agreements had been executed, 
and no facilities study agreements or financial commitments 
had been proffered.  Arizona Public Service Company's Mo-
tion to Intervene, Protest and Request for Expedited Consid-
eration at 14-16, 19 n.39, Idaho Power Co., 94 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,311 (2001), J.A. 78-80, 83 n.39.  APS also argued that, 
since it is "willing to match the Idaho Merchant Group's term 
of 10 years, and to extend it for an additional 5 years, for a 
term from April 1, 2001 through March 31, 2016, to the extent 
necessary for APS to retain service," it should prevail over IP 
Merchant under OATT's tie-breaking mechanism.  Id. at 19, 
J.A. 83.  However, APS did not seek a waiver from FERC's 
order limiting it to 18-month terms so that it could compete 
fully against IP Merchant in exercising its right of first 
refusal.

C.   FERC's Orders

     Despite the shorter term offered by APS, FERC ruled in 
its initial order that APS could roll over its contract.  FERC 
acknowledged that the priority rule was designed to "pro-
vide[ ] a mechanism for allocating transmission capacity when 
there is insufficient capacity to accommodate all requesters."  
Order Denying Petition, 94 F.E.R.C. at 62,144.  However, 
FERC stated that, under Order No. 888-A, the two custom-
ers' requests had to be " 'substantially the same in all 
respects' " in order to be competing.  Id. at 62,145 (quoting 
Order No. 888-A at 30,197) (emphasis in original).  FERC 
found that the two requests were not, in fact, substantially 
the same:  Instead, it found them to be "vastly different," 
primarily because they flowed in different directions and used 
different portions of the Idaho Power system.  Id.  FERC 
also noted that "the dissimilarity in available terms of service 
also supports the variant nature of the two customers' trans-
mission service requests."  Id.  FERC further noted that 
APS expressed an intention to match the IP Merchant 
Group's 10-year offer, but was restricted from doing so by a 
prior FERC order.  Id.  Since FERC found that the re-
quests were not substantially the same in all respects, the 
agency ruled that they were not competing.  It thus ordered 
Idaho Power to give the available 75 MW to APS.  Id.

     Idaho Power petitioned for rehearing.  It first noted that a 
central factual premise for FERC's order - that the two 
requests flowed in different directions and used different 
portions of the Idaho Power system - was incorrect.  Rather, 
the requests flowed in the same direction over the 80-mile 
line in dispute.  Further, Idaho Power argued that, because 
APS had not matched the IP Merchant Group's offer, the IP 
Merchant Group should be the priority applicant.

     FERC denied Idaho Power's request for rehearing.  It 
retreated from its reliance on the alleged physical differences 
between the services, stating that, while it had "discussed the 
physical differences between the transmission service re-
quests, our primary rationale for determining that the trans-
mission service requests were not substantially the same in 
all respects was the dissimilarity in available terms of ser-
vice."  Order Denying Rehearing, 95 F.E.R.C. at 61,759.  
Since APS was limited to 18-month increments, FERC rea-
soned that "to permit IP Merchant's longer term service 
request to obtain transmission capacity at the expense of 
Arizona Public Service would inappropriately disadvantage an 
existing transmission customer."  Id.  Thus, FERC awarded 
the 75 MW of service to APS, for the 18-month period ending 
September 30, 2002.  Idaho Power now petitions this court 
for review.

                           II. Analysis

A.   Standing

     The first issue we must address is whether Idaho Power 
possesses constitutional standing to challenge FERC's orders.  
FERC argues that Idaho Power suffered no "injury in fact" 
because the utility cannot prove that FERC's orders will 
cause any monetary loss.  We reject this argument.

     The two principal forms of standing are "Article III (case 
or controversy)" and "prudential."  Article III standing en-
tails three requirements:

     First, the plaintiff must have suffered an "injury in 
     fact"--an invasion of a legally protected interest 
     
     which is (a) concrete and particularized, and (b) 
     "actual or imminent, not 'conjectural' or 'hypotheti-
     cal.' "  Second, there must be a causal connection 
     between the injury and the conduct complained of--
     the injury has to be "fairly ... trace[able] to the 
     challenged action of the defendant, and not ... th[e] 
     result [of] the independent action of some third 
     party not before the court."  Third, it must be 
     "likely," as opposed to merely "speculative," that the 
     injury will be "redressed by a favorable decision."
     
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992) 
(citations omitted);  see also El Paso Natural Gas Co. v. 
FERC, 50 F.3d 23, 26 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (describing the re-
quirements for demonstrating an injury in fact).

     FERC's only standing argument is that Idaho Power suf-
fered no injury in fact because the utility cannot prove that 
FERC's orders will cause it to lose any profits.  FERC 
points out Idaho Power's statement that FERC's orders 
required it "to enter into a contract that, for an eighteen-
month period, would generate $1,312,875, and forgo entering 
into a ten-year contract that would yield $8,752,500," Br. of 
Petitioner at 28, and states that the two amounts, adjusted 
for time differential, are equivalent.  Thus, at least for the 
next 18 months, FERC argues that "petitioner is in exactly 
the same position revenue-wise, regardless of which contract 
it is required to accept."  Br. of Respondent at 23.

     This argument is meritless.  Idaho Power has suffered an 
injury in fact because FERC's orders bind it to an 18-month 
contract with APS and preclude it from entering a long-term 
10-year contract with IP Merchant.

     As a general matter, in a perfectly competitive mar-
     ket, a long-term contract incorporates a premium for 
     stability, and a pipeline naturally values a longer-
     term transportation contract more highly, ceteris 
     paribus....  If the maximum approved rate artifi-
     cially limits a rival shipper's ability to outbid the 
     existing shipper, the rival shipper may offer a 
     
     higher-value contract by bidding up the contract 
     duration instead.
     
United Distrib. Cos. v. FERC, 88 F.3d 1105, 1140 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  "[T]he reality [is] that contract duration is a measure 
of value."  Id.  Because Idaho Power possesses a legally-
protected interest in entering a longer-term contract, it suf-
fered a cognizable injury when it was compelled to forgo a 10-
year contract with IP Merchant and instead enter a shorter-
term contract with its associated market risks.  That injury 
was immediate, concrete, and particularized.

     We have previously recognized that an agency ruling that 
replaces a certain outcome with one that contains uncertainty 
causes an injury that is felt immediately and confers standing.  
In Rio Grande Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 178 F.3d 533 (D.C. Cir. 
1999), petitioner Rio Grande Pipeline Company could either 
justify the rates for its service through 18 C.F.R. s 342.2(a), 
in which it was required to "file cost, revenue and throughput 
data supporting the proposed rate," or through s 342.2(b), 
which required only "a sworn statement that the proposed 
rate is agreed to by at least one non-affiliated person who 
intends to use the service."  Rio Grande Pipeline Co., 178 
F.3d at 536.  The major advantage to the former provision 
was that rates justified under s 342.2(b) were ineffective if a 
protest to the initial rate was filed;  after the protest, the 
carrier would be required to seek a s 342.2(a) justification.  
Id.  Rio Grande requested FERC approval pursuant to 
s 342.2(a).  FERC denied this request.  However, the agen-
cy "noted ... that since Rio Grande had supplied the affidavit 
required by s 342.2(b), and no entity had protested the 
charged rate, Rio Grande was free to charge the proposed 
rate in its transactions."  Id. at 537.  When Rio Grande 
petitioned this court for review, FERC argued that the 
petitioner had suffered no injury in fact, because it remained 
free to establish the same rates under s 342.2(b).  Id. at 539-
40.  However, we found that FERC's orders caused the 
petitioner a "present economic injury" because approval un-
der that section left the rates open to challenge at any time 
by third parties, while approval under s 342.2(a) would have 
afforded greater certainty.  Id. at 540.

     FERC argues that Idaho Power is unlikely to suffer any 
economic loss in the future because at least three parties - 

APS, the IP Merchant Group, and PacifiCorp - have ex-
pressed an interest in using that capacity for the extended 10-
year period.  However, the energy markets are notoriously 
volatile.  See Andrew S. Katz, Using the EEI-NEM Master 
Contract to Manage Power Marketing Risks, 21 Energy L.J. 
269, 271 (2000);  With Tariff Modifications, Pipelines Move to 
Reduce Credit Risk, Inside F.E.R.C., Aug. 26, 2002, LEXIS, 
News Library, News Group File (explaining that three gas 
pipelines' move to amend their tariffs to include greater 
protection from "noncreditworthy" customers "[h]ighlight[s] 
the increasingly volatile nature of energy markets and compa-
nies").  Even if market volatility did not diminish these 
parties' interest in Idaho Power's capacity, it could doubtless-
ly diminish the profits that Idaho Power could obtain in the 
future.  FERC's arguments to the contrary do not corre-
spond with the reality of the energy markets.

     The bottom line is that it is inconceivable that Idaho Power 
could be subjected to a FERC order requiring it to enter into 
a specific contract concerning the use of its property but lack 
standing to challenge that order.  See Green v. McElroy, 360 
U.S. 474, 493 n.22 (1959) (noting that there is generally 
standing to enforce "a legally protected right to be free from 
arbitrary interference with private contractual relation-
ships");  see also Lujan, 504 U.S. at 561-62 (noting that "there 
is ordinarily little question that the action or inaction has 
caused [the plaintiff] injury" when "the plaintiff is himself an 
object of the action (or forgone action) at issue").

B.   FERC's Orders

     In general, this court "gives substantial deference to 
[FERC's] interpretation of filed tariffs, 'even where the issue 
simply involves the proper construction of language.' "  Koch 
Gateway Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 136 F.3d 810, 814 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (quoting Nat'l Fuel Gas Supply Corp. v. FERC, 811 
F.2d 1563, 1569 (D.C. Cir. 1987)).

     We first look to see if the language of the tariff is 
     unambiguous--that is, if it reflects the clear intent 
     of the parties to the agreement.  If the tariff lan-
     guage is ambiguous, we defer to the Commission's 
     
     construction of the provision at issue so long as that 
     construction is reasonable.
     
Koch Gateway Pipeline Co., 136 F.3d at 814.  If the tariff's 
language is unambiguous, this court need not defer to 
FERC's interpretation.  After all, "a court need not accept 
'an agency interpretation that black means white.  However, 
if the choice lies between dark grey and light grey, the 
conclusion of the agency ... will have great weight.' "  Nat'l 
Fuel Gas Supply Corp., 811 F.2d at 1572 (quoting Consol. 
Gas Supply Corp. v. FERC, 745 F.2d 281, 291 (4th Cir. 1984)) 
(ellipses added).  It is also well understood that no deference 
is due if FERC's interpretation is inconsistent with prior 
agency interpretations.  Id. at 1571 ("If the agency's inter-
pretation of a contract has vacillated, deference might give 
the agency license to act arbitrarily by making inconsistent 
decisions without justification.").

     In this case, we reject FERC's interpretation of the "right 
of first refusal," because it is inconsistent with prior agency 
interpretations and, also, because it is nonsensical. It would 
be a great challenge indeed to devise a more backward 
interpretation of the tariff than that which FERC urges on 
the court.  FERC essentially contends that s 2.2 of the pro 
forma tariff and Idaho Power's OATT precludes a competitor 
from coming forward with a better offer than the incumbent's 
present deal.  This interpretation runs contrary to the text of 
Idaho Power's OATT, FERC Orders No. 888 and 888-A, and 
the agency's own prior interpretations.

     1.   Idaho Power's OATT
          
     FERC's interpretation is directly at odds with the language 
and logic of s 2.2 of Idaho Power's OATT.  The OATT 
provides that if "the Transmission Provider's Transmission 
System cannot accommodate all of the requests for transmis-
sion service the existing firm service customer must agree to 
accept a contract term at least equal to a competing request 
by any new Eligible Customer."  Idaho Power OATT s 2.2, 
J.A. 230.  The OATT does not provide that the competing 
request must be "substantially the same in all respects" as 
the incumbent's proposed rollover.  In fact, the definition 

contained in the tariff is consistent with the ordinary meaning 
of "competing."  The generally accepted definition of "com-
pete" is "to seek to strive for something (as a position, 
possession, reward) for which others are also contending."  
Webster's Third New International Dictionary 463 (1993).  
Likewise, the language of the tariff suggests that two offers 
are competing if there is an inability to accommodate both.

     FERC's interpretation of the tariff would nullify the lan-
guage in s 2.2 which provides that, when two requests are 
competing, the incumbent customer must change the term of 
its request to at least equal the new eligible customer's 
request.  The agency's interpretation holds that "the dissimil-
iarity in available terms of service" means that the incumbent 
has no obligation to match the longer-term competitive bid.  
Order Denying Rehearing, 95 F.E.R.C. at 61,759.  Under 
this interpretation, the incumbent would never have to change 
its term of service to match the competitor's superior offer;  
rather, the utility could not consider the competitor's offer 
precisely because it is better.  This interpretation is not only 
nonsensical;  it also relieves the incumbent of any obligation 
to "agree to accept a contract term at least equal to a 
competing request."  A tariff should not be interpreted in a 
manner that renders one of its terms meaningless.  Great 
Lakes Gas Transmission Ltd. P'ship, 93 F.E.R.C. p 61,008 at 
61,019 & n.8 (2000).  The fact that FERC's orders directly 
conflict with the plain meaning of the tariff alone merits a 
reversal.

     2.   FERC Orders No. 888 and 888-A
          
     FERC's orders also conflict with and misinterpret Orders 
No. 888 and 888-A. The Preamble to Order No. 888 provides 
that the incumbent must match the challenger's longer pro-
posed term - not that the challenger must come forward with 
an offer identical to the incumbent's.  It states that for an 
existing customer to renew its service, "the existing customer 
must agree to match the rate offered by another potential 
customer ... and to accept a contract term at least as long as 
that offered by the potential customer."  Order No. 888 at 
31,665.  Moreover, the Preamble does not suggest that two 

offers are competing when they are identical.  Instead, it 
supports the classical definition of competition by stating that 
the incumbent's obligation to match the term and price of the 
new customer's service request arises when "not enough 
capacity is available to meet all requests for service."  Id.  
There is no suggestion that the two requests must be sub-
stantially the same in all respects for this obligation to apply.

     Order No. 888-A also contradicts FERC's interpretation.  
A number of transmission customers had sought changes to 
the tariff, because, they claimed, "the Commission's right of 
first refusal provision fails to adequately protect existing 
transmission customers' rights to continued service."  Order 
No. 888-A at 30,195.  FERC rejected these complaints and 
retained the matching requirements of s 2.2:

     We reject arguments to modify the requirement in 
     section 2.2 that existing long-term firm transmission 
     customers seeking to exercise their right of first 
     refusal must agree to a contract term at least as 
     long as that sought by a potential customer.  The 
     objective of a right of first refusal is to allow an 
     existing firm transmission customer to continue to 
     receive transmission service under terms that are 
     just, reasonable, not unduly discriminatory, or pref-
     erential.  Absent the requirement that the customer 
     match the contract term of a competing request, 
     utilities could be forced to enter into 
     shorter-term arrangements that could be detrimen-
     tal from both an operational standpoint (system 
     planning) and a financial standpoint.
     
Id. at 30,197-98.  Order No. 888-A thus states clearly and 
unambiguously that the incumbent must match the new po-
tential customer's superior offer.

     FERC's notion that the challenger's offer must be substan-
tially the same in all respects to the incumbent's rollover 
provision is, in fact, based on a gross misinterpretation of one 
sentence in Order No. 888-A. Examining the full context of 
Order No. 888-A's statement that the two offers must be 
"substantially the same in all respects" makes FERC's error 
apparent.  The quoted language appears in a paragraph in 

which FERC rejected the arguments of incumbent customers 
that it could be difficult for them to match the challenger's 
superior offer.  The National Rural Electric Cooperative 
Association had argued that the incumbent's obligation to 
match the price offered by another customer should be 
capped at the maximum transmission rate that the incumbent 
customer is obligated to pay prior to the end of its contract 
term.  Id. at 30,196.  FERC responded:

     The fact that existing customers historically have 
     been served under a particular rate design does not 
     serve to "grandfather" that rate methodology in 
     perpetuity.  Because the purpose of the right of first 
     refusal provision is to be a tie-breaker, the compet-
     ing requests should be substantially the same in all 
     respects.
     
Id. at 30,198.  It is clear from this passage that FERC was 
imposing a requirement for the existing customer to come 
forward with an offer substantially the same in all respects to 
the challenger's, rather than requiring that the challenger 
come forward with an offer substantially the same in all 
respects to the incumbent's contract terms.  The challenged 
orders thus directly conflict with Orders No. 888 and 888-A, 
and grossly misinterpret the language in Order No. 888-A.

     3.   Prior FERC Interpretations
          
     The petitioner also points out that FERC's reasoning in 
this case is flatly inconsistent with the agency's decisions 
interpreting s 2.2 of the pro forma tariff.  FERC has ruled 
repeatedly that s 2.2 requires the incumbent to match the 
term of service offered by the new customer.

     For example, in Dynegy Power Marketing, Inc. v. Ameren 
Services Co., 93 F.E.R.C. p 61,201 (2000), the agency directed 
the transmission provider to grant the incumbent's request to 
roll over its service, provided that there were no competing 
requests for the service.  In discussing potential offers from 
challengers, FERC stated that "[i]f there is a competing 
request with a term exceeding [the incumbent's] request, [the 
incumbent] has the right of first refusal to match the compet-
ing request or to forfeit its own request."  Id. at 61,665 n.12.

     FERC has consistently adopted this interpretation of s 2.2 
of the pro forma tariff.  See, e.g., Promoting Wholesale 
Competition Through Open Access Non-Discriminatory 
Transmission Services by Public Utilities, 101 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,104, 2002 F.E.R.C. LEXIS 2234, at *15 ("The Commis-
sion requires existing customers to match the term of compet-
ing requests for service so that utilities will not be forced to 
enter into shorter-term agreements.");  Wisconsin Pub. Pow-
er Inc. SYS. v. Wisconsin Pub. Serv. Corp., 84 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,120, at 61,656 (1998) (holding that the incumbent must 
match the challenger's competing term).  FERC does not cite 
a single case to the contrary.  Thus, we must conclude that in 
addition to doing violence to the language of the tariff and the 
agency's prior orders, the challenged orders are inconsistent 
with prior and subsequent agency interpretations of s 2.2 of 
the pro forma tariff.

     4.   APS's System Constraints
          
     Finally, FERC suggests that APS should not be required 
to match IP Merchant's longer term offer, because APS was 
limited to 18-month terms caused by system constraints.  See 
Order Denying Petition, 94 F.E.R.C. at 62,145 ("To say that 
OATT Section 2.2 controls would create a situation where an 
offer to match a longer service term is unattainable.").  How-
ever, neither Idaho Power's OATT nor the FERC orders 
creating the pro forma tariff excuse the incumbent from 
matching a competitor's offer on these grounds.  Nowhere 
does the tariff state that an incumbent who cannot match a 
competing bid due to system constraints or contractual re-
straints nevertheless has the right to roll over its contract for 
a shorter term than the challenger offers.  FERC has not 
pointed to any phrase in the language of the tariff that would 
authorize such an exception.

     Furthermore, the history of the pro forma tariff makes it 
clear that FERC intended no such exceptions.  When some 
parties sought rehearing of Order No. 888 on the grounds 
that its rule for incumbents was too strict, FERC rejected 
their efforts to secure exceptions.  Order No. 888-A at 30,196-
97.  The agency stated, "We reject arguments to modify the 

requirement in section 2.2 that existing long-term firm trans-
mission customers seeking to exercise their right of first 
refusal must agree to a contract term at least as long as that 
sought by a potential customer."  Id. at 30,197.  Moreover, 
the agency "reject[ed] the proposition that either existing 
wholesale customers or transmission providers providing ser-
vice to retail native load customers should be insulated from 
the possibility of having to pay an increased rate for trans-
mission in the future."  Id. at 30,198.  FERC insisted on this 
rule even when some utilities claimed that adherence to it 
would place them at a competitive disadvantage.  Id. at 
30,196.

     Thus, it does not matter that APS was limited to 18-month 
increments due to system constraints at Borah West and 
preexisting rights possessed by PacifiCorp.  These are eco-
nomic factors that may always affect an incumbent's ability to 
exercise a right of first refusal.  However, these contingen-
cies of the marketplace do not alter the substantive parame-
ters of the right of first refusal.

                         III. Conclusion

     Accordingly, for the reasons enumerated above, Idaho Pow-
er's petition for review is hereby granted.  FERC's orders 
are reversed and vacated.  The case is remanded to FERC so 
that appropriate orders may be issued approving Idaho Pow-
er's proposal to enter into a 10-year contract to provide 
electrical transmission service to the IP Merchant Group.

                      