                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 5, 2001    Decided April 10, 2001 

                           No. 00-3049

                       In re:  Sealed Case

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00302-01)

     Mary Manning Petras, appointed by the court, argued the 
cause and filed the briefs for appellant.

     Suzanne Grealy Curt, Assistant United States Attorney, 
argued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were 
Wilma A. Lewis, United States Attorney, John R. Fisher, 
Mary-Patrice Brown, and John P. Gidez, Assistant United 
States Attorneys.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  This is an appeal from sentencing.  
Appellant entered into a boilerplate plea agreement, in which 

he agreed to plead guilty to two counts of a seven count 
indictment in exchange for certain assurances from the Gov-
ernment.  Among those assurances was a promise that the 
Departure Guideline Committee would authorize filing a 
s 5K1.1 motion for downward departure if it determined that 
appellant had "provided substantial assistance" to the prose-
cutor.  It is undisputed that appellant aided authorities in the 
successful prosecution of another person.  It is also undisput-
ed that appellant refused at the eleventh hour to testify 
against two different persons in an unrelated prosecution.  
The Committee did not authorize the s 5K1.1 motion.

     Believing that the Committee had violated the plea agree-
ment, appellant filed a motion with the District Court to 
compel the Government to file a s 5K1.1 motion.  The Dis-
trict Court denied appellant's motion and sentenced him to 
concurrent sentences, of 101 and 60 months, for distribution 
of cocaine and unlawful possession of a firearm.  Although 
the plea agreement is hardly a model of clarity, we nonethe-
less can find no basis upon which to overturn the judgment of 
the District Court.  The principal point in this case is that, 
despite appellant's protestations to the contrary, it cannot be 
said that the Committee violated the plea agreement.  Absent 
such a violation, the District Court had no authority to grant 
appellant's motion and thereby undermine the Government's 
discretion to determine whether or not to file a s 5K1.1 
motion.

                          I. Background

     Following arrest on a seven-count drug and weapons indict-
ment, appellant and the government entered into a standard 
written plea agreement.  In addition to pleading guilty on 
two counts of the indictment, appellant agreed to "cooperate 
truthfully, completely and forthrightly ... in any matter as to 
which the Government deems the cooperation relevant."  
Plea Agreement p 5(a).  Such cooperation included testifying 
"fully and truthfully before any Grand Jury ... and at all 
trials of cases or other court proceedings ... at which 
[appellant's] testimony may be deemed relevant by the Gov-

ernment."  Id. p 5(d).  Appellant also agreed that the Gov-
ernment would be free from all obligations under the agree-
ment if appellant "fail[ed] to specifically perform or to fulfill 
completely each and every one of [appellant's] obligations 
under [the] plea agreement."  Id. p 14.

     In exchange the Government promised not only to dismiss 
the remaining five counts of the indictment, but also to inform 
the Departure Guideline Committee of the "nature and ex-
tent" of appellant's cooperation, "or lack thereof."  Id. p 17.  
(In the District of Columbia, the Departure Committee, rath-
er than the individual prosecutor in charge of the case, 
decides whether a defendant's assistance warrants filing a 
s 5K1.1 motion, i.e., whether it is "substantial.")  If the 
Departure Committee thereafter determined that appellant 
"had provided substantial assistance in the investigation or 
prosecution of another person who has committed an offense," 
the plea agreement obligated the Government to file a depar-
ture motion pursuant to s 5K1.1.  Id. p 18.  However, the 
agreement warned that "the determination of whether [appel-
lant] has provided 'substantial assistance in the investigation 
or prosecution of another person,' pursuant to either Section 
5K1.1 ... or 18 U.S.C. s 3553(e) ... is within the sole 
discretion of the United States Attorney for the District of 
Columbia and is not reviewable by the Court."  Id. p 6.

     Appellant does not here dispute that, prior to entering into 
the plea agreement, the Government informed appellant that 
it would require his participation in two ongoing cases as part 
of the cooperation agreement.  Following entry of the plea 
agreement, appellant provided information and testimony as 
requested in the first case.  The Government here concedes 
that appellant's assistance helped, in part, to secure supersed-
ing drug indictments against several individuals who thereaf-
ter pled guilty.  Government's Br. at 9.

     The Government here also concedes that appellant provid-
ed helpful information to law-enforcement officers during the 
investigation phase of the second case.  Government's Br. at 
8.  In the midst of trial, however, appellant made an elev-
enth-hour decision not to testify as a witness, ostensibly for 

fear that something might happen to him or his family.  He 
ceased helping the Government with the case.  Nevertheless, 
the Government secured convictions.

     The prosecutor informed the Departure Committee of ap-
pellant's cooperation in both cases, and lack thereof, as well 
as appellant's reasons for refusing to testify at trial in the 
second.  In light of that information, the prosecutor recom-
mended that the Departure Committee authorize filing a 
s 5K1.1 motion seeking a "modest departure" from the Dis-
trict Court.  The Departure Committee disagreed, however, 
and refused to authorize the downward departure motion.  
Although the Departure Committee itself did not provide any 
reason for its decision, Government counsel at sentencing 
informed the District Court that two of the Departure Com-
mittee members had told him that appellant's request had 
been denied because he refused to testify at trial in the 
second case.

     Appellant filed a motion to compel the Government to lodge 
a s 5K1.1 substantial assistance motion in conformity with 
the plea agreement.  Following three different hearings and 
additional briefing on the issue, the District Court ultimately 
denied appellant's motion and sentenced him without consid-
ering a possible downward departure for his assistance in the 
two cases.  This appeal followed.

                           II. Analysis

     In the absence of a plea agreement, the Government has 
broad discretion to file a substantial assistance motion.  If the 
Government declines to file such a motion, the District Court 
can grant relief only upon a showing of unconstitutional 
motive or a failure to meet the fundamental requirement that 
the Government's actions bear a rational relationship to some 
legitimate government objective.  Wade v. United States, 504 
U.S. 181, 185-86 (1992);  accord In re Sealed Case, 181 F.3d 
128, 142 (D.C. Cir.) (en banc), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 989 
(1999).  The Government's discretion may be constrained, 
however, by a plea agreement.  When the prosecutor reneges 
on an agreement to afford a defendant the benefit of a 

s 5K1.1 motion, the District Court may, upon request, compel 
the filing of the motion if the Government's refusal amounted 
to bad faith or otherwise violated the express terms of the 
plea agreement.  In re Sealed Case, 181 F.3d at 142;  accord 
United States v. Jones, 58 F.3d 688, 692 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  In 
the instant case, the only issue before us is whether the 
Departure Committee breached the plea agreement.

     The disputed plea agreement obliges the Departure Com-
mittee to evaluate appellant's cooperation, or lack thereof, 
and determine whether that cooperation rises to the level of 
substantial assistance;  it conditionally obliges the United 
States Attorney to file a s 5K1.1 motion if the Departure 
Committee makes that determination in appellant's favor.  
Plea Agreement p 18.  But that is all.  In signing the agree-
ment, the Government did not relinquish--indeed it expressly 
preserved--its broad discretion to decide what constitutes 
substantial assistance in a given case and whether appellant's 
cooperation fits that bill:

     Your client understands that the determination of wheth-
     er your client has provided "substantial assistance in the 
     investigation or prosecution of another person," pursuant 
     to either Section 5K1.1 of the Sentencing Guidelines or 
     18 U.S.C. s 3553(e), as more fully explained later in this 
     agreement, is within the sole discretion of the United 
     States Attorney for the District of Columbia and is not 
     reviewable by the Court.
     
Id. p 6 (emphasis added).  Nevertheless, appellant here ar-
gues that the Departure Committee's unexplained refusal 
amounted to a breach of the plea agreement.  We disagree.

     The bulk of appellant's argument is, at bottom, a factual 
dispute.  Appellant asserts that "the Government," as a factu-
al matter, found that his assistance in the first case was 
substantial, but still refused to file the motion in contraven-
tion of its conditional obligation under Paragraph 18 of the 
agreement.  By employing the catch-all term "the Govern-
ment," appellant conflates the prosecutor and the Departure 
Committee.  It is true that the prosecutor assigned to appel-
lant's case believed that appellant's full assistance in the first 

case, even in conjunction with his aborted assistance in the 
second, satisfied the requirement of "substantial assistance."  
Indeed, in his report to the Departure Committee, the prose-
cutor recommended a modest departure request.  But, appel-
lant offers no record evidence that the Departure Commit-
tee--the decisionmaker of moment under the agreement--
ever determined that appellant's assistance was "substantial."

     Because the Committee offered no explanation of its deci-
sion, appellant asks this court to infer that the Committee 
agreed with the prosecutor's assessment of the quality of 
appellant's assistance but nevertheless refused to authorize 
the motion as punishment for appellant's failure to cooperate 
fully under the agreement.  If indeed appellant could some-
how demonstrate that his assistance clearly exceeded some 
objective threshold of substantialness, such a demonstration 
might allow us to make the requested inference.  But therein 
lies the problem for appellant:  there is no exogenous "objec-
tive" meaning of the term "substantial," and the agreement 
itself does nothing to provide one.  Absent some specific 
criteria in the agreement itself for assessing the quality of 
appellant's assistance, this court cannot simply presume from 
the Committee's silence that it violated the plea agreement.

     Appellant offers one possible counter.  He observes that 
whatever "substantial assistance" means under the agree-
ment, it cannot mean to "cooperate ... completely ... in any 
matter as to which the Government deems the cooperation 
relevant."  Plea Agreement p 5(a);  cf. United States v. 
Sparks, 20 F.3d 476, 478 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (holding that the 
duty to cooperate and substantial assistance provisions were 
independent of one another).  This is so, appellant argues, 
because Paragraph 18 states, "if the Departure Committee 
... after evaluating the full nature and extent of [appellant's] 
cooperation, or lack thereof, determines [appellant] has pro-
vided substantial assistance," the Government will file the 
s 5K1.1 motion.  Plea Agreement p 18 (emphasis added).  
Relying on this distinction, appellant contends that the Com-
mittee's own ex parte admissions reveal that it refused to 
authorize the motion not because appellant's assistance was 

insubstantial, but rather because he refused to testify in the 
second matter.

     "Or lack thereof" certainly implies the possibility that, in at 
least some cases, partial cooperation under the agreement 
will suffice;  it also certainly implies that the Committee will 
at least consider appellant's partial cooperation.  But the 
mere fact that Paragraph 18's boilerplate language does not 
explicitly make full cooperation a necessary condition to "sub-
stantial assistance" in every conceivable case says nothing 
about whether the Committee deemed it a necessary, suffi-
cient, or even insufficient one on the facts of appellant's case.  
Compare Jones, 58 F.3d at 691 (holding that the Departure 
Committee's refusal was not a breach of nearly identical 
boilerplate provision despite the fact that appellant had coop-
erated fully under the agreement).  A finding here that the 
Committee did not authorize the motion because appellant 
failed to testify in the second case is not inconsistent with a 
finding by the Departure Committee that the remainder of 
his assistance, standing alone, was not sufficient to merit a 
s 5K1.1 motion.

     Asserting that it is no better for this court to presume from 
the Committee's silence that the Government did not breach 
the plea agreement than to presume that it did, appellant 
argues in the alternative that the District Court should have 
granted his request for an order commanding the Departure 
Committee to provide an explanation for its decision or 
compelling the disclosure of any relevant records regarding 
the decision for in camera inspection.  As authority for this 
unusual intrusion into prosecutorial decisionmaking, appellant 
points us to the following passage from our decision in Jones:

     Because a defendant is not privy to the deliberations and 
     actions of the U.S. Attorney's Office ... a defendant will 
     face enormous difficulty in supporting [a charge of bad 
     faith].  To ameliorate this problem and to provide both 
     the trial judge and a reviewing court with information 
     that might help them weigh an allegation of bad faith, we 
     suggest that prosecutors who enter into agreements like 
     the one before us, but subsequently fail to file a section 
     5K1.1 motion, summarize for the district court what 
     information they provided the Departure Committee, 
     
     while at the same time safeguarding information that 
     could compromise an ongoing investigation or endanger 
     the defendant or others, together with any explanation, 
     similarly circumscribed, that the Committee may have 
     offered for finding the defendant's assistance to be insub-
     stantial.
     
Jones, 58 F.3d at 692.  If we grant for the moment that the 
preceding passage is more than mere suggestion, both the 
District Court and the prosecutor in the present case com-
plied with the above-outlined procedure in its entirety.  The 
prosecutor summarized for the District Court the information 
and recommendation he gave to the Committee regarding the 
nature and extent of appellant's assistance;  he provided the 
District Court with the limited ex parte explanations he had 
received regarding the Departure Committee's decision;  he 
even delivered a letter from appellant's counsel raising these 
substantive issues to the Departure Committee, which, upon 
review, affirmed its decision that a s 5K1.1 motion was not 
warranted.

     Though transparency is to be applauded, nothing in the 
Jones passage purports to allow, much less require, the 
District Court to demand an explanation or look behind the 
decision absent a more potent threshold showing of bad faith 
or unconstitutional motive.  Moreover, it is clear from the 
sentencing and motion hearing transcripts that the trial judge 
refused to demand an explanation because he was satisfied on 
the record at hand that the Departure Committee had deter-
mined that appellant's assistance was not substantial because 
he did not testify in the second case.  In short, the record 
offers nothing to support the claim that the District Court 
erred in denying appellant's request.

               * * * * *

     Though we are convinced from the record that the Govern-
ment did not breach the plea agreement in the present case, 
we pause to emphasize some of the concerns we expressed six 
years ago in Jones.  There, the Departure Committee refused 
to authorize filing a s 5K1.1 motion despite the fact that 

Jones had cooperated fully under a similar boilerplate plea 
agreement.  We held that the terms of the agreement did not 
make full cooperation a sufficient condition for finding that a 
defendant's assistance was substantial.  Nevertheless, the 
court was deeply concerned that "prosecutors might dangle 
the [boilerplate] suggestion of a section 5K1.1 motion in front 
of defendants to lure them into plea agreements, all the while 
knowing that the defendant's cooperation could not possibly 
constitute assistance valuable enough for the Departure Com-
mittee to find it 'substantial.' "  Jones, 58 F.3d at 691-92.  
The facts of the present case admittedly are not as troubling 
as Jones, for appellant here did not cooperate fully.  But the 
Government's use of the same basic boilerplate provision in 
appellant's agreement six years later raises similar concerns.

     Whereas the Government is a repeat player in this ritual, 
each defendant approaches the provisions of his plea agree-
ment anew with the understandable belief that the agreement 
and its terms are tailored to that defendant's particular 
circumstance.  By indiscriminately implying in each and ev-
ery case not only that a s 5K1.1 motion is a possibility, but 
also that partial cooperation might in a given case be suffi-
cient, the agreement is arguably deceptive.  Take appellant 
for example.  Prior to signing the agreement, appellant knew 
that the Government would be seeking his cooperation in two 
cases, each involving multiple defendants.  With that context 
in mind and faced with phrases such as "another person" and 
"or lack thereof," appellant could reasonably have believed 
that the Committee might authorize a s 5K1.1 motion if he 
assisted in at least one of the cases and that assistance led to 
the prosecution of at least one person.  Indeed, in weighing 
the costs and benefits of testifying in the second case, he may 
very well have considered the fact that his fruitful assistance 
to that point already gave him at least some chance at a 
s 5K1.1 motion.  We are therefore troubled by the Govern-
ment's suggestion at oral argument that nothing in the agree-
ment obligates the Government ever to authorize a s 5K1.1 
motion absent full cooperation.  While that may be true, the 
agreement certainly does not, as it could, make that clear.

     The value of a plea agreement to a defendant grappling 
with the question of whether or not to waive his right to a 
trial necessarily increases with the number of chances the 
plea agreement gives him to earn a substantial assistance 
motion.  A defendant is playing the odds, and those odds are 
not only a crucial term in the bargain itself but also a guide 
for informing a defendant's actions thereafter.  As currently 
written, the boilerplate provisions suggest to defendants, such 
as appellant, that their chances at a motion may be greater 
than they are.  There is no good reason for the Government 
not to take the necessary extra step to insert more explicit 
and well-tailored caveats into its plea agreements.  Indeed, 
"[t]he Government's claim that its interest in maintaining a 
reputation for fairness among criminal defendants guarantees 
judicious exercise of its ability to consider filing a section 
5K1.1 motion ... is undermined by the use of boiler-plate 
provisions."  Jones, 58 F.3d at 692 (citations omitted).

     In the end, the boilerplate s 5K1.1 provisions give defen-
dants very little, if anything, as a substantive matter, for, with 
or without the plea agreement in question, the Government 
has broad discretion to file a s 5K1.1 motion.  The Govern-
ment's continued failure to acknowledge that fact in the 
language of the plea agreement itself leads to the untoward 
conclusion that the Government fully appreciates, and does 
not wish to lose, the benefits accorded it by the imprecision of 
its boilerplate provisions.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the District 
Court is affirmed.

                                                                