                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 15, 2002   Decided December 10, 2002 

                           No. 01-5435

      Norwest Bank Minnesota National Association, et al., 
                            Appellees

                                v.

             Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (00cv01250)

     Barbara R. Sarshik, Counsel, Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, argued the cause for appellant.  With her on the 
briefs was Colleen J. Boles, Senior Counsel.

     Gloria B. Solomon argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellees.

     Before:  Edwards, Randolph, and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  On summary judgment, the dis-
trict court ruled in favor of Norwest Bank Minnesota Nation-
al Association,1 holding that Norwest had overpaid insurance 
premiums to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and 
awarding Norwest a refund of $2.8 million, with interest.  
The overpayments resulted from what the court viewed as the 
FDIC's misinterpretation of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Improvement Act of 1991.  We hold that Nor-
west's complaint was filed after the expiration of the statute 
of limitations.  We therefore vacate the order of the district 
court and remand with instructions to dismiss.

                                I.

     In 1989, in response to the savings-and-loan crisis, Con-
gress reformed the national system of deposit insurance, 
creating two insurance funds under the control of the FDIC:  
the Bank Insurance Fund ("BIF") to insure banks;  and the 
Savings Association Insurance Fund ("SAIF") to insure 
savings-and-loan associations.  The funds were to be sepa-
rately funded and administered.  Congress anticipated that 
the BIF would be in stronger financial condition for some 
time and strictly limited the ability of an insured institution to 
transfer deposits from one fund to the other fund.  An 
exception was the Oakar Amendment, named after its spon-
sor, which allowed a member of one fund to acquire a 
member of the other fund.  A SAIF member, after being 
acquired by a BIF member, would continue to have its 
acquired deposits insured by the SAIF, while the acquirer's 
deposits would remain insured by the BIF.  The financial 
institution paid the SAIF rate on part of its deposits and the 
BIF rate on the remainder of its deposits.

__________
     1 Plaintiff is now known as Wells Fargo Bank Minnesota National 
Association.  For the sake of consistency with the district court's 
orders in this case, we will continue to refer to it as Norwest.

     To determine the portion of the deposits to be insured by 
the SAIF, Congress required Oakar institutions to calculate 
their adjusted attributable deposit amount ("AADA") by add-
ing three components.  The first component was (and still is) 
the amount of deposits acquired from the SAIF bank.  12 
U.S.C. s 1815(d)(3)(C)(i).  The second component was (and 
still is) cumulative adjustments made over time using the 
third component.  12 U.S.C. s 1815(d)(3)(C)(ii).  The third 
component, prior to the 1991 amendments, was the amount 
the first two components would have increased at a rate of 
growth equal to the greater of a 7% annual increase or the 
actual annual rate of growth of deposits of the bank (exclud-
ing any deposits acquired by further acquisitions).  12 U.S.C. 
s 1815(d)(3)(C)(iii) (Supp. II 1990).

     On December 19, 1991, Congress enacted the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act, modifying 
the formula for calculating the AADA.  Section 501(a) of the 
Act eliminated the portion of the third component that pro-
vided for a minimum annual increase of 7% and instead 
provided that the actual annual growth of deposits would be 
used in all cases.  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
Improvement Act of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-242, 105 Stat. 
2236, 2389 (codified at 12 U.S.C. s 1815(d)(3)(C)(iii)).  Section 
501(b) provided that the amendment "shall apply with respect 
to semiannual periods beginning after the date of the enact-
ment of this Act."  Id., 105 Stat. at 2391;  see also 12 U.S.C. 
s 1815 note.  The dispute over the proper amount of the 
insurance assessment stems from the parties' disagreement 
about the meaning of the effective date provision.  The FDIC 
believes that the amendment did not take effect for purposes 
of calculating Norwest's insurance premiums until 1993.  
Norwest contends that its actual 1991 growth rate should 
have been applied to the calculation of premiums beginning in 
January 1992.

     Norwest owed premiums to both the BIF and the SAIF as 
a result of its acquisition of First Minnesota Savings Bank, 
FSB, in December 1990.  In January 1992, it filed the 
appropriate FDIC form calculating its AADA based on the 
greater of 7% and its actual growth rate, which was -7%.  

Applying the pre-1991 calculation method, Norwest calculat-
ed its AADA on the appropriate form supplied by the FDIC 
based on the 7% growth rate, which resulted in an inflated 
AADA, if Norwest is correct.  There was no immediate effect 
on the total amount of insurance premiums Norwest owed the 
FDIC because at that time the insurance rates for the BIF 
and the SAIF were equal.

     In 1995, the FDIC reduced the BIF assessment rate.  The 
result was that if the FDIC had erroneously interpreted the 
statute in 1992 to overstate Norwest's AADA, Norwest paid a 
higher total premium than it should have in 1995 and later 
years, because deposits that should have been assessed at the 
preferential BIF rate were assessed at the higher SAIF rate.  
The error, if any, was preserved by the second component of 
the formula, s 1815(d)(3)(C)(ii), which carries forward an 
increase in the AADA and does not allow an error in the 
growth rate in a given year to be corrected by further 
changes in a bank's deposit amounts in later years.  In 
addition, there were special assessments based on the amount 
of deposits assessed at the SAIF rate.  Norwest overpaid 
these amounts as well if it incorrectly calculated its AADA.

     Norwest disputed the alleged overcharge in a letter to the 
FDIC dated May 7, 1998, requesting a refund of the overpay-
ment of assessments resulting from the artificially high 
AADA.  The FDIC's Division of Finance denied the request 
on September 17, 1998, as did the Assessment Appeals Com-
mittee on June 2, 1999.  Norwest then filed suit against the 
FDIC in the district court on June 1, 2000, more than eight 
years after the alleged miscalculation.

     The district court found Norwest's action timely.  Applying 
the six-year limitations period in 28 U.S.C. s 2401(a),2 the 
court measured from the date of the denial by the Assess-
ment Appeals Committee on June 2, 1999.  Norwest Bank 
Minnesota, N.A. v. FDIC, No. 00-1250, slip op. at 6 (D.D.C. 

__________
     2 "Except as provided by the Contract Disputes Act of 1978, 
every civil action commenced against the United States shall be 
barred unless the complaint is filed within six years after the right 
of action accrues."  28 U.S.C. s 2401(a).

Nov. 7, 2000).  In the alternative, the court applied the five-
year period of 12 U.S.C. s 1817(g),3 measured from the time 
of the first alleged overpayment in June 1995.  Id.

                               II.

     Norwest and the FDIC agree that the proper statute of 
limitations for refund claims is 12 U.S.C. s 1817(g), rather 
than 28 U.S.C. s 2401(a). The six-year statute of limitations--
28 U.S.C. s 2401(a)--is a general, catchall provision for civil 
actions against the United States.  The five-year statute of 
limitations--12 U.S.C. s 1817(g)--applies specifically to an 
action for "the recovery of any amount paid to the [FDIC] in 
excess of the amount due to it," which precisely describes 
Norwest's complaint. When both specific and general provi-
sions cover the same subject, the specific provision will con-
trol, especially if applying the general provision would render 
the specific provision superfluous, as it would here.  See, e.g., 
Crawford Fitting Co. v. J.T. Gibbons, Inc., 482 U.S. 437, 445 
(1987).

     Statutes of limitations commonly begin the running of the 
period from the date the cause of action accrued.  3M Co. v. 
Browner, 17 F.3d 1453, 1460 (D.C. Cir. 1994);  Note, Develop-
ments in the Law--Statutes of Limitations, 63 Harv. L. Rev. 
1177, 1200 (1950).  Section 1817(g) is no exception:  the 
triggering event is when "the right accrued for which the 
claim is made."  If, as the FDIC urges, the right of action 
accrued in January 1992, the five-year period had already run 
when Norwest sent its letter to the FDIC in May 1998 and 
when it filed its suit in June 2000.

     "A claim normally accrues when the factual and legal 
prerequisites for filing suit are in place."  3M Co., 17 F.3d at 
1460;  see Bay Area Laundry & Dry Cleaning Pension Trust 
Fund v. Ferbar Corp. of Cal., 522 U.S. 192, 195 (1997);  

__________
     3 "No action or proceeding shall be brought ... for the recovery 
of any amount paid to the Corporation in excess of the amount due 
to it, unless such action or proceeding shall have been brought 
within five years after the right accrued for which the claim is 
made...."  12 U.S.C. s 1817(g).

United States v. Lindsay, 346 U.S. 568, 569 (1954);  Rawlings 
v. Ray, 312 U.S. 96, 98 (1941);  Oppenheim v. Campbell, 571 
F.2d 660, 662 (D.C. Cir. 1978).  Section 1817(g) governs not 
only the time for an "action" in court, but also the time for a 
"proceeding."  We held in 3M with respect to another statute 
of limitations that a "proceeding" included an administrative 
proceeding.  3M Co., 17 F.3d at 1455-57.  If we followed this 
line, Norwest's claim accrued when the legal and factual 
prerequisites for an administrative proceeding were in place.  
In January 1992, when the alleged miscalculation of Nor-
west's AADA occurred, Norwest could have requested a 
refund from the agency or it could have brought suit in court, 
alleging that the miscalculation resulted in an overpayment to 
the SAIF.  In other words, the legal prerequisites for "an 
action or proceeding" were then in place.  Norwest maintains 
that at that time a lawsuit or a complaint to the agency would 
have booted it nothing.  In January 1992 the assessment 
rates for the SAIF and the BIF were the same.  And so if 
Norwest had prevailed in court or in the agency, the FDIC 
likely would have responded by billing it for the identical 
amount as an underpayment to the BIF.

     One might say--the FDIC does--that even if Norwest 
succeeded in 1992 and wound up with no net recovery, it still 
would have brought about a determination of the proper 
construction of the 1991 statutory amendment and the FDIC 
would have readjusted SAIF and BIF accounts accordingly, 
not only for Norwest but also for all the other institutions in a 
similar position.  (The FDIC's Assessment Appeals Commit-
tee estimated that 75 of the 800 Oakar institutions would be 
directly affected.)  That would have had a future financial 
impact for the regulated institutions if and when BIF assess-
ment rates were lowered, and it might also have affected 
when the BIF became fully funded.  On the other hand, it is 
doubtless true that Norwest had no immediate financial in-
centive to raise the issue in 1992.  But the action or proceed-
ing could have been brought then, and it has long been 
settled that statutes of limitations begin running when the 
wrong has been committed, even if at the time "no more than 
nominal damages may be proved, and no more recovered;  but 

on the other hand, it is perfectly clear, that the proof of actual 
damage may extend to facts that occur and grow out of the 
injury, even up to the day of the verdict."  Wilcox v. Plum-
mer, 29 U.S. (4 Pet.) 172, 182 (1830).4

     Although the analogy is not perfect, Norwest's complaint is 
like a claim "for restitution of money paid through mistake."  
John P. Dawson, Mistake and Statutes of Limitation, 20 
Minn. L. Rev. 481, 495 (1936).  In such cases, courts generally 
regard the statutory period to begin to run when the payment 
is made.  "Since the payment of money is ordinarily regarded 
as final, the defendant-payee will probably change his position 
in reliance upon a reasonable belief that the money is proper-
ly his...."  Note, 63 Harv. L. Rev. at 1214.  That, according 
to the FDIC, is what happened here.

     One of the policies underlying statutes of limitations is 
repose.  3M Co., 17 F.3d at 1457.  Yet if Norwest's cause of 
action accrued when BIF and SAIF assessment rates di-
verged, and gave rise to a claim for each overpayment going 
back five years from the date of filing the claim--which is 
Norwest's position5--then the FDIC's books would never 
close.  In turn, the integrity and accuracy of the information 
used to determine the aggregate assessment bases, and 

__________
     4 We have recognized, as have other courts, limited exceptions to 
the general rule that the statute of limitations begins to run at the 
time of the wrong.  If the injuries are latent, as for example after 
an exposure to toxic chemicals, the right to sue is deemed to accrue 
when the wrong manifests itself in injury to the plaintiff.  We 
adopted this "discovery rule" in Connors v. Hallmark & Son Coal 
Co., 935 F.2d 336, 342 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  But here nothing prevented 
Norwest from learning in 1992 that its AADA may have been 
overstated, thus resulting in an overpayment to the SAIF.  As we 
stated in Connors, "if the injury is such that it should reasonably be 
discovered at the time it occurs, then the plaintiff should be charged 
with discovery of the injury, and the limitations period should 
commence, at that time."  Id.

     5 Norwest argues that each overpayment creates a new cause of 
action, and so long as a suit for a particular overpayment is 
commenced within five years after overpayment, it is timely.  Br. of 
Appellee at 28-29.

therefore the financial health of the insurance systems, would 
be placed in doubt.

     Suppose the BIF and SAIF rates remained equal until 
2030, then diverged.  If Norwest's cause of action would not 
accrue until then, a suit in 2034 would still be timely.  The 
FDIC would be forced to reallocate retroactively the assess-
ment base by increasing the amount for the BIF and decreas-
ing that of the SAIF for each year of the period, and for each 
institution affected.

     The statutory structure--which provides for independence 
of the two funds6--does not treat transfers from one fund to 
another as insignificant bookkeeping entries.  An overpay-
ment to one fund, and the interest on the overpayment in the 
fund, result in greater reserves for that fund, which inure to 
the benefit of its member institutions.  They pay less in 
insurance assessments because less money is required to 
maintain the designated reserve ratio (1.25% of the insured 
deposits of that fund).  12 U.S.C. s 1817(b)(2)(A)(iv).  On the 
other hand, the members of the fund that is paid too little 
because of an error might face a special assessment or an 
increased insurance rate if the fund dips below the designated 
reserve ratio.

     A system that allowed a revision many years or decades 
after an error would cast doubt on all of the data.  The FDIC 
could never be certain it was properly safeguarding the 
financial health of the funds.  Uncertainty might result in 
overly cautious projections (keeping extra reserves on hand 
just in case) or other problems for the FDIC, and therefore 
its regulated financial institutions and their customers.

     Further, an Oakar bank could hold onto the knowledge that 
its AADA had been improperly enhanced, and choose to sue 

__________
     6 For example, 12 U.S.C. s 1821(a)(4)(A)(ii) provides that the 
funds shall be "maintained separately and not commingled."  The 
FDIC is required to set the insurance rates such that the reserve 
ratio of 1.25% (or a higher percentage as may be determined) is 
maintained for each fund to cover future failures of financial institu-
tions insured by that fund.  See 12 U.S.C. s 1817(b)(2)(A)(i), (iv).

years later if the rates went in the direction that disadvan-
taged it (in this case, SAIF assessment rates higher than 
those of the BIF).  If the rates diverged in the other di-
rection (BIF higher than SAIF), it would be able to choose 
not to sue and benefit from the previous error.  The Oakar 
bank would be in a no-lose situation, to the detriment of the 
BIF members whose assessments would be too high each 
semiannual period.

     As against this, Norwest will suffer "damage" indefinitely 
into the future, so long as the SAIF assessment rates remain 
higher than BIF rates, and so long as it does not divest itself 
of the former savings-and-loan institution it acquired.  Each 
payment, by its lights, will be an overpayment because the 
error in 1992 will remain embedded in its adjusted attribut-
able deposit amount.  One response, although perhaps not 
entirely satisfactory, is that Norwest is in the same position 
as a person permanently disabled from an automobile acci-
dent who fails to sue within the period of limitations.  That 
person too will suffer continuing injury that cannot be recom-
pensed because the limitations period has run.  Still, we 
recognize that the result we reach may be seen as strict.  But 
we must also recognize the time-honored standard that "limi-
tations and conditions upon which the Government consents 
to be sued must be strictly observed."  Soriano v. United 
States, 352 U.S. 270, 276 (1957).

     As we have mentioned, Norwest argues that since each 
assessment is a separate payment, it may recover all pay-
ments made within the preceding five-year period, a position 
that would effectively suspend the running of the limitations 
period.  In support, Norwest invokes Keefe Co. v. Americable 
Int'l, Inc., 219 F.3d 669 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (per curiam).  Keefe 
decided a certified question of District of Columbia law in the 
context of a private dispute.  It did not interpret a federal 
statute of limitations.  At issue were a series of installment 
payments (equaling a percentage of subscriber revenues) due 
as compensation for prior assistance obtaining cable television 
contracts for U.S. military bases.  There was no single event 
that resulted in all future damages.  See Keefe Co. v. Ameri-
cable Int'l, Inc., 755 A.2d 469, 476 (D.C. 2000).  The District 

of Columbia Court of Appeals held that the local statute of 
limitations did not bar an action to recover installment pay-
ments that accrued within the limitations period.  See id. at 
478 (answering the certified question);  see also Bay Area 
Laundry & Dry Cleaning Pension Trust Fund, 522 U.S. at 
195 ("[E]ach missed payment creates a separate cause of 
action with its own six-year limitations period.").  In contrast, 
here the alleged miscalculation in 1992 of Norwest's AADA 
was the cause of all of the future overpayments.  The D.C. 
Court of Appeals, in deciding the certified question in Keefe, 
recognized that the outcome might have been different if 
there had been a dispute over the interpretation of the 
contract that would "govern throughout the life of the con-
tract."  Id. at 477 (quoting Air Transp. Ass'n of Am. v. 
Lenkin, 711 F. Supp. 25, 27 (D.D.C. 1989), aff'd per curiam 
on other grounds, 899 F.2d 1265 (D.C. Cir. 1990)).  In Len-
kin, the district court, interpreting District of Columbia law, 
held that the limitations period for a tenant's claim of over-
payment of rent based on the landlord's alleged misinterpre-
tation of a lease provision commenced when the tenant first 
received notice of the landlord's interpretation.  Lenkin, 771 
F. Supp. at 27.  The statute of limitations barred the com-
plaint even though further payments would be incorrectly 
inflated, if the tenant's interpretation was correct.  Id.

     Norwest also seeks to extend the period of limitations on 
the ground that the six-year period of limitations in the 
general statute (28 U.S.C. s 2401(a)) only started running in 
1999, after the FDIC finally rejected its refund claim, so that 
if it sued for a refund within six years of that date it was 
entitled to recover all overpayments within six years of its 
suit.  This cannot possibly be right.  Norwest initiated no 
administrative action until May 1998, when it requested a 
refund in a letter to the FDIC.  By then the limitations 
period had already expired.  If Norwest's claim was untimely, 
as we have determined it was, the FDIC's rejection of the 
claim could not make it timely. Norwest relies upon Sendra 
Corp. v. Magaw, 111 F.3d 162 (D.C. Cir. 1997), for the 
proposition that when an agency reopens a matter it creates a 
right of judicial review.  But we cannot see how the FDIC 

Assessment Appeals Committee's decision to treat the claim 
for a refund on the merits, while noting in a footnote that it 
appeared to be untimely under s 1817(g), somehow waived 
the statute of limitations defense in judicial proceedings.

     The district court's judgment in favor of Norwest cannot 
stand because the complaint was filed after the expiration of 
the five-year statute of limitations provided by 18 U.S.C. 
s 1817(g).  The judgment of the district court is vacated and 
the case is remanded with instructions to dismiss because the 
action was untimely.

                                                            So ordered.

          