                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 5, 2000   Decided February 23, 2001 

                           No. 00-5081

                 Elouise Pepion Cobell, et al., 
                            Appellees

                                v.

       Gale A. Norton, Secretary of the Interior, et al., 
                            Appellants

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-5084

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96cv01285)

     David C. Shilton, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellants.  With him on the briefs were 

Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, John A. Bryson, 
and Charles W. Findlay, Attorneys.

     Thaddeus Holt argued the case for appellees.  With him on 
the brief were Dennis Gingold, Keith Harper and Lorna K. 
Babby.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  This case involves a class action 
suit by beneficiaries of Individual Indian Money ("IIM") trust 
accounts against Interior Secretary Gale A. Norton and other 
federal officials who serve, in their official capacities, as 
trustee-delegates on behalf of the federal government.  IIM 
trust beneficiaries filed suit alleging breach of fiduciary 
duties.  Specifically, plaintiffs sought a declaratory judgment 
delineating appellants' trust obligations to IIM trust benefi-
ciaries and injunctive relief to ensure that such trust obli-
gations are carried out.  After a lengthy trial, the district 
court concluded that the federal government and its officers 
have been derelict in their duties, and issued a remand to the 
Interior and Treasury Departments so that appellants could 
discharge their fiduciary obligations.  The district court fur-
ther retained jurisdiction and ordered appellants to file quar-
terly reports detailing steps taken in fulfillment of their 
duties.  Although the decision did not resolve every issue 
raised by plaintiffs, the district court certified the order for 
interlocutory appeal.

     Appellants challenge the district court's delineation of their 
trust obligations and assert that the district court exceeded 
its authority in ordering equitable relief for plaintiffs.  We 
find that the district court had before it ample evidence to 
support its finding of ongoing material breaches of appellants' 
fiduciary obligations.  Notwithstanding the fact that appel-
lants have taken significant steps towards the discharge of 
the federal government's fiduciary obligations, appellants 
clearly have yet to fulfill their trust duties.  The relief 
ordered was well within the district court's equitable powers.  
While we order the district court to modify the characteriza-

tion of some of its findings, we generally affirm its judgment 
and order.

                          I. Background

     The federal government has substantial trust responsibili-
ties toward Native Americans.  This is undeniable.  Such 
duties are grounded in the very nature of the government-
Indian relationship.  "[A] fiduciary relationship necessarily 
arises when the Government assumes ... elaborate control 
over forests and property belonging to Indians." United 
States v. Mitchell ("Mitchell II"), 463 U.S. 206, 225 (1983).  It 
is equally clear that the federal government has failed time 
and again to discharge its fiduciary duties.  Here, there is no 
dispute that appellants, as trustee-delegates of the federal 
government, have failed to discharge fully their fiduciary 
obligations.  The issue we confront is whether the district 
court properly delineated the contours of the obligations owed 
by the Interior Secretary, Treasury Secretary and other 
officials, and whether such officials have been so derelict in 
their obligations to justify the relief ordered by the district 
court.

     A.   The Government-Indian Trust Relationship
          
     The federal government-Indian trust relationship dates 
back over a century.  The trusts at issue here were created 
over one hundred years ago through an act of Congress, and 
have been mismanaged nearly as long.  To appreciate truly 
the nature and extent of the government's responsibilities, 
and appellants' failure to discharge them, it is necessary to 
review the history of the government-Indian trust relation-
ship.

     Since the founding of this nation, the United States' rela-
tionship with the Indian tribes has been contentious and 
tragic. America's expansionist impulse in its formative years 
led to the removal and relocation of many tribes, often by 
treaty but also by force.  See, e.g., Cherokee Nation v. 
Georgia, 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) 1 (1831).  Official policy sought to 
encourage westward migration of Indian tribes by offering to 
exchange unsettled lands in the West for Indian land in the 

East.  See, e.g., The Indian Removal Act of 1830, ch. 
CXLVIII, 4 Stat. 411.  Unofficial policy encouraged the forc-
ible dislocation of Indian tribes.

     In the second half of the nineteenth century, the policy of 
relocation was replaced with one of assimilation.  At that time 
the federal government began to divide Indian lands into 
individual parcels, taking lands that had been set aside for 
Indian tribes and allotting them to individual tribe members.  
See Felix S. Cohen, Handbook of Federal Indian Law 98 
(1982 ed.).  "The objectives of allotment were simple and 
clear cut:  to extinguish tribal sovereignty, erase reservation 
boundaries, and force assimilation of Indians into the society 
at large."  Yakima v. Yakima Indian Nation, 502 U.S. 251, 
254 (1992);  see also Muscogee (Creek) Nation v. Hodel, 851 
F.2d 1439, 1441 (D.C. Cir. 1988) ("Allotment was justified as a 
means of accomplishing the then current policy of assimila-
tion.").  Once tribal lands were allotted in fee to individual 
Indians, white settlers could purchase the lands for settle-
ment.  Allottees, by divorcing themselves from the tribal 
estate, also became subject to federal and state jurisdiction on 
the same terms as other citizens.

     This assimilationist policy began with individually negotiat-
ed treaties and was eventually enacted into federal law with 
passage of the General Allotment Act of 1887, also known as 
the "Dawes Act," ch. 119, 24 Stat. 388 (as amended at 25 
U.S.C. s 331 et seq.).  Under the General Allotment Act, 
beneficial title of the allotted lands vested in the United 
States as trustee for individual Indians.  The trust was to last 
for 25 years or more, at which point a fee patent would issue 
to the individual Indian allottee.  During the trust period, 
individual accounts were to be set up for each Indian with a 
stake in the allotted lands, and the lands would be managed 
for the benefit of the individual allottees.  Indians could not 
sell, lease, or otherwise burden their allotted lands without 
government approval.  Where tribes resisted allotment, it 
could be imposed.  See Act of June 28, 1898, ch. 517, 30 Stat. 
495 ("Curtis Act").  While the Dawes Act may not have 
achieved assimilation, it did result in the widespread transfer 
of land from Indians to white settlers.  As the district court 

found, from 1887 to 1934, an estimated 90 million acres, 
accounting for approximately two-thirds of all Indian lands, 
left Indian ownership.  Cobell v. Babbitt, 91 F. Supp. 2d 1, 8 
(D.D.C. 1999) ("Cobell V").

     Allotment of tribal lands ceased with enactment of the 
Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 ("IRA"), 48 Stat. 984 
(codified as amended at 25 U.S.C. s 461 et seq.).  Lands 
already allotted remained so, but the IRA provided that 
unallotted surplus Indian lands would be returned to tribal 
ownership.  25 U.S.C. s 463.  Rather than undo the assimila-
tionist allotment polices, the 1934 Act extended the trust 
period for allotted lands indefinitely.  Id. s 462.  The federal 
government retained control of lands already allotted but not 
yet fee-patented, and thereby retained its fiduciary obli-
gations to administer the trust lands and funds arising there-
from for the benefit of individual Indian beneficiaries.  These 
lands form the basis for the Individual Indian Money ("IIM") 
accounts that are at the heart of this case.

     After passage of the IRA, federal Indian policy changed yet 
again.  In the 1950s, Congress adopted a "termination poli-
cy," whereby it sought to release Indian tribes from federal 
supervision and terminate the government-Indian relation-
ship.  As Assistant Interior Secretary Gover testified at trial, 
the policy was "specifically" aimed at "severing ... the trust 
relationship."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 8.  In some cases, 
the U.S. withdrew recognition of Indian tribes altogether.  
Id. at 9.

     The termination policy was no more successful than earlier 
assimilation efforts, and was soon replaced with the current 
policy of "self-determination and self-governance."  Id. at 9.  
In 1975 Congress enacted the Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Assistance Act, Pub. L. No. 93-638, 88 Stat. 2203 
(1975), which, among other things, authorizes tribes to as-
sume some of the management functions currently imposed 
on the Bureau of Indian Affairs ("BIA") and Office of Trust 
Fund Management.  In particular, a tribe may contract with 
BIA to manage trust accounts, including IIM accounts, for 
the tribe or its members.  Such contracts must be approved 

unless BIA determines that the tribe lacks the accounting or 
management capabilities to fulfill the contract.  See Cobell V, 
91 F. Supp. 2d at 9.  Where such capacity is lacking, BIA is 
to assist tribes in developing the necessary capabilities to 
manage IIM accounts themselves.  See id.  In sum, because 
of BIA's own fiduciary obligations to IIM trust beneficiaries, 
it must ensure that a tribe can fulfill the fiduciary obligations 
attendant to trust management before transferring control.

     B.   Federal IIM Trust Responsibilities
          
     Because the United States holds IIM lands in trust for 
individual Indian beneficiaries, it assumes the fiduciary obli-
gations of a trustee.  " '[W]here the Federal Government 
takes on or has control or supervision over tribal monies or 
properties, the fiduciary relationship normally exists with 
respect to such monies or properties (unless Congress has 
provided otherwise) even though nothing is said expressly in 
the authorizing or underlying statute (or other fundamental 
document) about a trust fund, or a trust or fiduciary connec-
tion.' "  United States v. Mitchell ("Mitchell II"), 463 U.S. 
206, 225 (1983) (quoting Navajo Tribe of Indians v. United 
States, 224 Ct. Cl. 171, 183 (1980)).  As a result of allotment, 
individual Indians became beneficiaries of the trust lands, but 
lost the right to sell, lease, or burden the property without 
the federal government's approval. The federal government 
also probates estates related to Indian trust lands and re-
ceives and distributes income from the lease of allotted lands.  
Income generated from the trust lands is to be paid to the 
individual beneficiaries.

     Under current law, the Secretary of the Interior and the 
Secretary of the Treasury are the designated trustee-
delegates for the IIM trust.  Each Secretary, or his desig-
nates, has specific fiduciary responsibilities that must be 
fulfilled lest the United States breach its fiduciary obligations.  
Several governmental agencies have specific trust obligations.  
These include, among others, BIA, Office of Trust Funds 
Management ("OTFM"), and Office of the Special Trustee 

("OST").  (Their responsibilities are extensively detailed in 
the decision below.  See Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 9-12.)

     BIA is responsible for trust land management, including 
the approval of leases and land transfers, and income collec-
tion.  See id. at 9.  As noted above, BIA is also required to 
contract with qualifying tribes for the management of IIM 
accounts.  OTFM, with the assistance of the Treasury De-
partment, deposits IIM land revenues, maintains the individu-
al IIM accounts, and ensures that money is distributed to 
IIM account holders or special deposit accounts where money 
cannot be distributed to the individual account holder.  OST, 
created in 1994 by the Indian Trust Fund Management 
Reform Act, oversees IIM trust reform efforts.  25 U.S.C. 
ss 4042-43.

     While the Interior Department is responsible for executing 
most of the federal government's trust duties, the Treasury 
Department has substantial trust responsibilities as well.  In 
particular, Treasury holds and invests IIM funds at the 
Interior Department's direction and provides accounting and 
financial management services.  See Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d 
at 11.  The Treasury Department maintains only a single 
"IIM account" for all IIM funds, rather than individuated 
accounts for each individual IIM beneficiary, leaving the 
maintenance of individualized accounting records to OTFM.  
OTFM relies upon the Treasury Department's accounting 
records to reconcile its own IIM records.  Of note, when 
OTFM issues a check to an IIM trust beneficiary, the amount 
is deducted from the relevant fund, even though the money 
remains in the Treasury's general account.  Thus, the IIM 
beneficiary loses any interest that would be accrued between 
issuance and cashing of the check.  The district court found 
that while "this time lapse may be short in the private sector, 
it can be much longer in the IIM trust context because 
OTFM often has incorrect addresses for the recipients."  Id. 
at 12.

     The federal government does not know the precise number 
of IIM trust accounts that it is to administer and protect.  At 
present, the Interior Department's system contains over 

300,000 accounts covering an estimated 11 million acres, but 
the Department is unsure whether this is the proper number 
of accounts. See id. at 10.1  Plaintiffs claim that the actual 
number of accounts is far higher, exceeding 500,000 trust 
accounts.  See id.

     Not only does the Interior Department not know the 
proper number of accounts, it does not know the proper 
balances for each IIM account, nor does Interior have suffi-
cient records to determine the value of IIM accounts. As the 
district court found, "[a]lthough the United States freely 
gives out 'balances' to plaintiffs, it admits that currently these 
balances cannot be supported by adequate transactional docu-
mentation."  Id.  Current account reconciliation procedures 
are insufficient to ensure that existing account records, re-
ported account balances, or payments to IIM beneficiaries are 
accurate.  As the Interior Secretary testified at trial, the 
Department is presently unable to render an accounting for a 
majority of the IIM trust beneficiaries.  Trial Transcript at 
3762.  As a result, the government regularly issues payments 
to trust beneficiaries "in erroneous amounts--from unrecon-
ciled accounts--some of which are known to have incorrect 
balances." Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 6.  Thus, the district 
court concluded, and the government does not deny, that "[i]t 
is entirely possible that tens of thousands of IIM trust 
beneficiaries should be receiving different amounts of mon-
ey--their own money--than they do today.  Perhaps not.  
But no one can say...."  Id.

     C.   The Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act 
          ("1994 Act")
          
     Concern over federal mismanagement of the IIM trust 
funds is not new.  The General Accounting Office, Interior 
Department Inspector General, and Office of Management 
and Budget, among others, have all condemned the misman-
agement of the IIM trust accounts over the past twenty 
years.  See, e.g., U.S. General Accounting Office, Financial 
Management:  BIA's Management of the Indian Trust Funds, 

__________
     1 Note that these figures are in addition to land and accounts held 
in trust for tribes.

GAO/T-AIMD-93-4 (1993);  U.S. General Accounting Office, 
Financial Management:  Status of BIA's Efforts to Reconcile 
Indian Trust Fund Accounts and Implement Management 
Improvements, GAO/T-AIMD-94-99 (1994);  Misplaced Trust:  
The Bureau of Indian Affairs' Mismanagement of the Indian 
Trust Fund, H.R. Rep. No. 102-499, at 2-3 (1992) (citing 
critiques of IIM trust management by Interior Department 
IG, OMB, and others).  Time and again Interior Department 
officials pledged to address these concerns.  Yet, as Interior 
officials readily acknowledge, there has been little progress at 
reforming the management of IIM trust accounts.  See Cobell 
V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 32-33 (citing Interior Department's 
factual stipulations);  Trial Transcript at 3768 (testimony of 
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt acknowledging that "[t]he 
fiduciary obligation of the United States government is not 
being fulfilled").

     Beginning in 1988, Congress held oversight hearings on 
Interior's management of the Indian trust accounts.  These 
hearings led to a report, Misplaced Trust:  The Bureau of 
Indian Affairs' Mismanagement of the Indian Trust Fund, 
H.R. Rep. No. 102-499 (1992) [hereinafter "Misplaced Trust"], 
which harshly criticized the Interior Department's mishan-
dling of the trust accounts.  Consistent with prior analyses, 
the report found, "significant, habitual problems in BIA's 
ability to fully and accurately account for trust fund moneys, 
to properly discharge its fiduciary responsibilities, and to 
prudently manage the trust funds."  Id. at 2.  Interior's 
persistent failure to meet its obligations led the congressional 
investigators to conclude that top officials "have utterly failed 
to grasp the human impact of its financial management of the 
Indian trust fund."  Id. at 5.  To address these concerns, 
Interior commissioned an independent study which deter-
mined that reconciling the IIM trust accounts could cost over 
$200 million.  See Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 13.  Yet "[e]ven 
that expenditure would have yielded only a 'reconciliation' of 
approximately eighty-five percent reliability."  Id.  Once 
again the Interior Department pledged reforms;  once again 
there was little improvement.

     In 1994, Congress enacted the Indian Trust Fund Manage-
ment Reform Act ("1994 Act"), Pub. L. No. 103-412 (1994).  
This law recognized the federal government's preexisting 
trust responsibilities.2  It further identified some of the Inte-
rior Secretary's duties to ensure "proper discharge of the 
trust responsibilities of the United States."  25 U.S.C. 
s 162a(d).  These "include (but are not limited to) the follow-
ing":

    t    "Providing adequate systems for accounting for and 
          reporting trust fund balances";
          
    t   "Providing adequate controls over receipts and dis-
          bursements";
          
    t   "Providing periodic, timely reconciliations to assure 
          the accuracy of accounts";
          
    t   "Preparing and supplying ... periodic statements of 
          ... account performance" and balances to account 
          holders;  and
          
    t    "Establishing consistent, written policies and proce-
          dures for trust fund management and accounting."
          
Id.

     There is no dispute that the federal government owes IIM 
beneficiaries--the plaintiffs/appellees--these duties.  The dis-
trict court so found and the Interior Department conceded as 
much at trial.  See, e.g., Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 32-33.  
While arguing that plaintiffs' claims should be evaluated on 
the basis of what is contained in the Act alone, the Interior 
Department did not dispute that these duties "must be inter-
preted in light of the common law of trusts and the United 
States' Indian policy."  Id. at 33.  Most significantly, the 
Interior Department stipulated that many of the duties owed 
under the 1994 Act were not being fulfilled.  See id. (listing 
Interior Department stipulations).  In other words, the feder-

__________
     2 That the law recognized, rather than created, the government's 
IIM trust duties is clear from the Act's text and structure. Indeed, 
Title I of the Act is titled "Recognition of Trust Responsibility."

al government readily acknowledges that it is in breach of at 
least some of the fiduciary duties owed to IIM beneficiaries.

The Office of the Special Trustee & the High Level Imple-
     mentation Plan

     The 1994 Act created the Office of the Special Trustee for 
American Indians ("OST") "to provide for more effective 
management of, and accountability for the proper discharge 
of, the Secretary's trust responsibilities" and ensure proper 
reform measures are implemented. 25 U.S.C. s 404(1).  The 
Special Trustee ("ST") is a sub-cabinet level officer appointed 
by the President and confirmed by the Senate who reports 
directly to the Interior Secretary.  Id. s 4042(b).  The ST is 
required to develop a "comprehensive strategic plan" for trust 
management reform and an appropriate reform timetable to 
ensure "proper and efficient discharge of the Secretary's 
trust responsibilities."  Id. s 4043(a)(1).  The ST is also to 
oversee a "fair an accurate accounting" of the trust accounts 
and submit annual reports to Congress.  Id. s 4043(b)(2)(A) 
and (f).  Despite these responsibilities, the ST only has 
"general oversight" responsibilities;  decision-making authori-
ty for IIM trust management remains with the Secretary of 
the Interior.  Id. s 4043(b)(1).

     The first ST under the Act was Paul Homan.  In April 
1997, Homan submitted a "strategic plan" to the Secretary 
and Congress pursuant to the 1994 Act.  Among other things, 
the plan called for the reorganization of Indian trust fund 
management and the centralization of record-keeping, 
changes that may have required legislative authorization.  
The Interior Secretary opted to implement portions of the 
strategic plan, including the upgrade of computer systems, 
the clean-up of trust records, and the elimination of process-
ing backlogs.  The Secretary's plan, known as the High Level 
Implementation Plan ("HLIP"), was issued in July 1998.  As 
drafted, the HLIP consisted of twelve "subprojects" which 
focus on ensuring the accuracy of information regarding the 
IIM trust accounts and developing uniform policies and pro-
cedures to guide trust management in the future.  These 
subprojects included data cleanup, clearing probate backlogs, 

improving records management, and establishing internal 
controls to prevent future mismanagement.

     The HLIP is designed to overcome numerous gaps and 
deficiencies in the Interior Department's record-keeping and 
trust management.  Those identified by the district court as 
"central" to this case are the following:

    t    Data Cleanup--The records upon which the govern-
          ment must rely to fulfill its trust duties are woefully 
          deficient.  In particular, the Interior Department 
          does not have complete or accurate information on 
          the identities or whereabouts of all trust beneficia-
          ries, nor does the Department have complete land 
          title records.  For instance, as of 1998, there were 
          over 46,000 IIM trust accounts without current ad-
          dresses for the beneficiary and over 123,000 ac-
          counts without a Social Security or Tax Identifica-
          tion number.  To address these concerns, the HLIP 
          calls for the inventorying of existing documents from 
          IIM trust offices around the country and the recon-
          ciliation of conflicting records.  However, the trial 
          court found "no written plan" to obtain "missing 
          information" necessary for compiling complete land 
          title records.  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 17.
          
    t   Probate Backlog--The Bureau of Indian Affairs has 
          a probate backlog of approximately 12,000 cases, 
          some or all of which could affect the payments owed 
          to individual trust beneficiaries.  There is currently 
          "no formal plan" to address this backlog.  There is, 
          however, a "reinvention team" that is to address 
          probate concerns and fractionated interests in land.  
          Id.
          
    t   Appraisal Program--The trial court found evidence 
          of an estimated 212,000 title defects.  These defects 
          can impact the processing of leases which can, in 
          turn, impact the government's ability to render an 
          accounting for the trust beneficiaries.  Under the 
          HLIP, the Interior Department plans to reduce the 
          
          backlog, at least in part, "by re-defining when ap-
          praisals are required as a matter of Interior policy." 
          Id. at 18.
          
    t   Computer Systems--The Interior Department does 
          not have computer systems in place capable of track-
          ing trust resources and relevant data.  The current 
          system, known as the "legacy" system, is not capable 
          of performing this function.  The HLIP calls for the 
          acquisition and implementation of two new computer 
          systems to replace the legacy system:  the Trust 
          Fund Accounting System ("TFAS") and the Trust 
          Asset and Accounting Management System 
          ("TAAMS").  Id.
          
    t   Records Management--The Interior Department 
          acknowledges that adequate record-keeping is es-
          sential if the Department is to fulfill its fiduciary ob-
          ligations to the IIM trust beneficiaries.  Yet, as In-
          terior stipulated at trial, the current record-keeping 
          system is woefully inadequate.  To address this con-
          cern, the HLIP establishes a "records management 
          group" to develop a plan for transferring financial 
          records from BIA to OST and maintaining trust 
          records into the future.  Id. at 20-21.
          
     Despite OST's substantial responsibilities, Congress did not 
provide for funding of OST in the 1994 Act, nor has the 
Interior Department sought funding for OST in its depart-
mental budget requests sufficient to meet the ST's estimated 
costs.  In January 1999, the Interior Secretary announced his 
unilateral reorganization of OST, prompting Homan's resigna-
tion.3

__________
     3 Thomas Thompson was acting ST at the time of trial. In 
February 2000, then-President Clinton nominated Thomas N. Slo-
naker for the position, who at the time of briefing was awaiting 
Senate confirmation.

     There are also trust management problems at the Treasury 
Department.  In response to plaintiff's charges, the Treasury 
Department stipulated to the following problems and reme-
dies:

    t   Illegal Document Policies--The Treasury Depart-
          ment regularly allows the destruction of documents 
          over six years and seven months old in conformity 
          with the National Archives and Records Administra-
          tion's document destruction schedule.  At present, 
          no effort is made to ensure that IIM trust records or 
          other documents that could be needed to conduct an 
          adequate accounting are preserved.  As a result, 
          IIM trust records necessary for an accounting of the 
          trust accounts have been irretrievably lost.  The 
          Treasury Department has agreed to develop a rec-
          ord retention schedule for trust documents for the 
          purposes of this litigation and into the future.  Id. at 
          23.
          
    t   Time Lapse in Fund Availability--There can be a 
          time lapse between the deposit of funds with the 
          Treasury Department and the investment of those 
          funds by the Interior Department on behalf of IIM 
          trust beneficiaries.  The Treasury Department has 
          agreed to facilitate investment when funds are ini-
          tially deposited.  Id. at 22.
          
    t   Lost Interest on IIM Checks--According to plain-
          tiffs, some IIM beneficiaries lose interest during the 
          delay between the time a check is issued and when 
          that check can be presented for payment.  Treasury 
          has agreed to conduct a study of the alleged time 
          lapse and resulting lost interest.  Id. at 22-23.
          
     The Treasury Department further stipulated to the devel-
opment of new systems and procedures that could potentially 
fulfill the Department's fiduciary obligations.  Id. at 22.

     D.   District Court Proceedings
          
     On June 10, 1996, appellees filed this class-action suit "to 
compel performance of trust obligations."  They alleged that 

the federal government's trustee-delegates, including the Sec-
retaries of the Interior and Treasury, breached the fiduciary 
duties owed to plaintiffs by mismanaging the IIM trust 
accounts.  On February 4, 1997, the district court certified 
the named plaintiffs under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
23(b)(1)(A) and (b)(2) as class representatives for all present 
and former IIM account beneficiaries. Cobell v. Babbitt (Co-
bell I), 30 F. Supp. 2d 24, 28 (D.D.C. 1998).  On May 5, 1998, 
the district court bifurcated the case for trial.  Phase I would 
address "fixing the system" or reforming the management 
and accounting of the IIM trusts so as to meet the federal 
government's fiduciary responsibilities.  Phase II will address 
historical accounting of the accounts.

     On November 5, 1998, the district court rejected the gov-
ernment's motion to dismiss and for summary judgment.  
The court found that the government waived sovereign immu-
nity pursuant to Section 702 of the Administrative Procedure 
Act. Id. at 30-35. The court also dismissed some of plaintiffs' 
claims for money damages and held that the government's 
fiduciary duties to IIM trust beneficiaries were not ministeri-
al in nature and therefore could not be compelled by manda-
mus.  Id. at 35-36.

     Later in 1998, the court held Interior Secretary Bruce 
Babbitt, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, and Assistant 
Interior Secretary Kevin Gover in contempt of court for 
failing to comply with the court's production orders and 
imposed monetary sanctions.  See Cobell v. Babbitt ("Cobell 
II"), 37 F. Supp. 2d 6 (D.D.C. 1999) (holding defendants in 
contempt of court for failing to make good faith effort to 
comply with discovery order);  Cobell v. Babbitt ("Cobell IV"), 
188 F.R.D. 122 (D.D.C. 1999) (awarding sanctions).  As trust-
ee delegates these officials had a clear obligation to maintain 
trust records and furnish such records to beneficiaries upon 
request, yet they were unable to provide such records and 
related documents to the court in response to an Order of 
Production.  See Cobell II, 37 F. Supp. 2d at 23.  The district 

court found that these officials had failed to make a good faith 
effort to produce such information.  Indeed, the district court 
found that the defendants "proposed a stipulated order to the 
court and then immediately improperly instructed their field 
personnel on what documents were required to be produced."  
Id. at 28.  The egregious nature of this conduct was only 
compounded by the Treasury Department's contemporaneous 
destruction of documents potentially responsive to the court's 
production order, and the failure of government officials "to 
apprise the court or the plaintiffs of the defendants' unwill-
ingness and self-inflicted inability to comply" with the produc-
tion orders.  Id. at 28, 31.

     On June 7, 1999, the district court denied the government's 
motion for summary judgment on some of the plaintiffs' 
claims.  In addition, the court found that the federal govern-
ment waived its sovereign immunity against a suit for injunc-
tive and declaratory relief for the breach of trust duties.  See 
Cobell v. Babbitt ("Cobell III"), 52 F. Supp. 2d 11 (D.D.C. 
1999).

     The court held a six-week trial on the Indians' claims, and 
issued its opinion on December 21, 1999.  After satisfying 
itself that it had jurisdiction over plaintiffs' claims, the district 
court found that the federal government had breached some 
of the fiduciary duties owed to plaintiffs.  Among the district 
court's specific conclusions were:

    t   under the 1994 Act defendants must provide IIM 
          trust beneficiaries with "an accurate accounting of 
          all money in the IIM trust held in trust for the 
          benefit of plaintiffs, without regard to when the 
          funds were deposited," Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 
          58;
          
    t    under the 1994 Act defendants must "retrieve and 
          retain all information concerning the IIM trust that 
          is necessary to render an accurate accounting" for 
          the trust beneficiaries, id.;
          
   t   the Interior Secretary and Assistant Secretary must 
          "establish written policies and procedures" for:  a) 
          "collecting from outside sources missing information 
          
          necessary to render an accurate accounting of the 
          IIM trust";  b) "the retention of IIM-related trust 
          documents necessary" for an accurate accounting;  c) 
          "computer and business systems architecture neces-
          sary" for an accurate accounting;  and d) "the staff-
          ing of trust management functions necessary" for an 
          accurate accounting, id.;
          
    t   the Treasury Secretary owes IIM trust beneficiaries 
          "the statutory trust duty to retain IIM trust docu-
          ments" necessary for an accurate accounting, id.
          
The court further found that the defendants were in violation 
of the above-mentioned fiduciary duties, ordered them to 
come into compliance with their duties and remanded the 
required actions to the defendants for further proceedings 
"not inconsistent" with the court's opinion.  Id.  The court 
rejected plaintiffs' plea for the appointment of a special 
master to oversee the government's compliance with its fidu-
ciary duties.  Id. at 49.

     The court did not rule for the plaintiffs on all counts, 
however.  The court dismissed their pure common-law claims 
as well as those claims alleging obstruction of the Special 
Trustee.  Id. at 28-31, 51-52.  The court retained continuing 
jurisdiction over the case for the next five years, during which 
time the defendants are required to submit quarterly status 
reports summarizing the government's progress in meeting 
its fiduciary duties to the IIM trust beneficiaries.  Id. at 58-
59.

     The court certified its order for interlocutory appeal under 
28 U.S.C. s 1292(b) "[t]o the extent that the court's order is 
not 'otherwise appealable.' "  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 57.  
The defendants appealed, alleging that the district court 
improperly construed the nature and extent of the govern-
ment's fiduciary duties to IIM trust beneficiaries.  Specifical-
ly, appellants take issue with the district court's finding of 
specific trust obligations, including a judicially enforceable 

duty to account, and the district court's conclusion that trust 
reforms have been unlawfully withheld or unreasonably de-
layed.  Further, appellants allege that the district court 
lacked sufficient basis to award equitable relief and that the 
relief awarded was unwarranted.

                         II. Jurisdiction

     A.   Subject Matter Jurisdiction
          
     Although appellants have not renewed their jurisdictional 
challenge to plaintiffs' claims, we must assure ourselves that 
we have jurisdiction.  Plaintiffs' claims allege breach of trust 
obligations grounded in federal law and plaintiffs seek en-
forcement of their federal rights.  Plaintiffs' claims thus 
"arise under" the laws of the United States, granting federal 
court jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. s 1331.  See, e.g., Robbins 
v. Reagan, 780 F.2d 37, 43 (D.C. Cir. 1985);  Association of 
National Advertisers, Inc. v. FTC, 617 F.2d 611, 619 (D.C. 
Cir. 1979).

     B.   Sovereign Immunity
          
     The federal government claimed sovereign immunity below, 
but did not renew this claim on appeal.  As the court below 
noted, section 702 of the Administrative Procedure Act waives 
federal officials' sovereign immunity for actions "seeking re-
lief other than money damages" involving a federal official's 
action or failure to act.  5 U.S.C. s 702.  Insofar as the 
plaintiffs seek specific injunctive and declaratory relief--and, 
in particular, seek the accounting to which they are entitled--
the government has waived its sovereign immunity under this 
provision.  See Bowen v. Massachusetts, 487 U.S. 879, 894-95 
(1988).  That plaintiffs rely upon common law trust principles 
in pursuit of their claim is immaterial, as here they seek 
specific relief other than money damages, and federal courts 
have jurisdiction to hear such claims under the APA.

     C.   Final Agency Action
          
     Whether there is a final agency action is also a jurisdiction-
al question.  With a few exceptions, if there is no final agency 
action, there is no basis for review of the government's 

decision or policy.  One exception occurs where plaintiffs 
claim that a governmental action was unlawfully withheld or 
unreasonably delayed.

     When the district court rejected the government's motion 
to dismiss in November 1998, it held that the HLIP itself 
constitutes final agency action.  Cobell I, 30 F. Supp. 2d at 33. 
This conclusion was based on a concession made by govern-
ment counsel at oral argument on the motion.  Id. At trial, 
however, appellants argued that there was no final agency 
action for the court to review.  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 
35-36.  Appellants' new position was that the HLIP was not a 
final agency action because it was (and continues to be) a 
"work in progress."  Id. at 36.  The court rejected this 
argument holding that the preexisting accounting system 
used to administer the IIM trust constituted a final agency 
action capable of review.  Id.;  see also Cobell I, 30 F. Supp. 
2d at 33-34.  It is the existing system, and not any proposed 
reform or replacement that "aggrieves plaintiffs today."  Co-
bell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 36.

     Although the government does not press the issue, this 
conclusion by the district court is questionable.  While a 
single step or measure is reviewable, an on-going program or 
policy is not, in itself, a "final agency action" under the APA.  
See Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation, 497 U.S. 871, 890 
(1990).  A plaintiff "cannot seek wholesale improvement of [a] 
program by court decree, rather than in the offices of the 
Department or the halls of Congress, where programmatic 
improvements are normally made."  Id. at 891.

     This is not to say that the district court lacked jurisdiction 
to hear plaintiffs' claims, however.  Where a federal court has 
jurisdiction to hear challenges to an agency action it also has 
jurisdiction over claims of unreasonable delay.  See Telecom-
munications Research and Action Center v. FCC, 750 F.2d 
70, 75 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  As this court has noted in the past, 
where "an agency is under an unequivocal statutory duty to 
act, failure so to act constitutes, in effect, an affirmative act 
that triggers 'final agency action' review."  Sierra Club v. 
Thomas, 828 F.2d 783, 793 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  see also Public 

Citizen Health Research Group v. Commissioner, 740 F.2d 
21, 32 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  Were it otherwise, agencies could 
effectively prevent judicial review of their policy determina-
tions by simply refusing to take final action.

     In the case at bar, it is clear that the federal government 
has been under an obligation to discharge the fiduciary duties 
owed to IIM trust beneficiaries for decades.  It is also clear 
that refusing to hear plaintiffs' claims could unduly prejudice 
their rights as trust beneficiaries.  The district court's find-
ings of fact, largely unchallenged by the government, make 
clear that insofar as the federal government owes trust 
beneficiaries a duty to maintain records and provide an 
accounting, delaying review is tantamount to denying review 
altogether.  The district court further concluded that appel-
lants' extensive delay in discharging their fiduciary duties was 
unreasonable.  In such circumstances, federal courts may 
exercise jurisdiction to compel agency action "unlawfully 
withheld or unreasonably denied."  5 U.S.C. s 706.

     Even assuming, as appellants argue, that the 1994 Act 
effectively reset the clock for a finding of unreasonable delay, 
appellants' "reasonable time to discharge" its fiduciary obli-
gations "has expired."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d. at 48.  The 
district court's judgment came down over six years after 
passage of the 1994 Act.  During that time, deadlines were 
missed, documents destroyed, and, in the words of the district 
court, appellants had yet to progress much beyond planting 
the "seed" for discharging their fiduciary obligations.  See id. 
at 20.  Courts owe substantial deference to agency preroga-
tives in fulfilling their legal obligations, especially where 
Congress intervenes to address longstanding problems, as it 
did with the 1994 Act.  But this does not require courts to 
turn a blind eye when government officials fail to discharge 
their duties.

     As a general rule, Section 706 of the APA "leaves in the 
courts the discretion to decide whether agency delay is unrea-
sonable." Forest Guardians v. Babbitt, 174 F.3d 1178, 1190 
(10th Cir. 1999).  The legal standard used to determine 
whether agency delay is unreasonable is a question of law to 

be reviewed de novo by this court.  However, the factual 
findings that underlie that determination are only to be 
overturned if the district court's findings are clearly errone-
ous.

     For good reason, courts are reluctant to upset existing 
agency priorities, unless the delay is "egregious."  See Tele-
communications Research and Action Center, 750 F.2d at 79.  
An agency's own timetable for performing its duties in the 
absence of a statutory deadline is due "considerable defer-
ence."  Sierra Club v. Gorsuch, 715 F.2d 653, 658 (D.C. Cir. 
1983).  Moreover, "a finding that delay is unreasonable does 
not, alone, justify judicial intervention."  In re Barr Labs., 
Inc., 930 F.2d 72, 75 (D.C. Cir. 1991).4

     In reviewing an unreasonable delay claim, this court consid-
ers four factors:

     First, "the court should ascertain the length of time that 
     has elapsed since the agency came under a duty to 
     act"....  Second, "the reasonableness of the delay must 
     be judged 'in the context of the statute' which authorizes 
     the agency's action."...  Third, the court must examine 
     the consequences of the agency's delay....  Finally, the 
     court should give due consideration in the balance to 
     "any plea of administrative error, administrative conve-
     nience, practical difficulty in carrying out a legislative 
     mandate, or need to prioritize in the face of limited 
     resources."
     
In re International Chemical Workers Union, 958 F.2d 1144, 
1149 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (citations omitted).

     Considering the first two factors, it is beyond question that 
the government has delayed fulfilling its trust obligations for 
many years.  The district court specifically found that IIM 
trust beneficiaries have been denied their rights--in particu-
lar their right to an accounting--for decades.  See Cobell V, 
91 F. Supp. 2d at 47 (noting that IIM beneficiaries have 
waited "a century" for "an accurate accounting" which is the 

__________
     4 But see Forest Guardians, 174 F.3d at 1191 ("once a court 
deems agency delay unreasonable, it must compel agency action.").

"most basic fiduciary duty").  That Congress enacted its own 
remedial statute to address this unconscionable delay does 
not mitigate the egregious amount of time plaintiffs have 
waited for, as discussed below, the 1994 Act is not the source 
of plaintiffs' rights.  Rather, it is designed to help rectify the 
government's longstanding failure.  Given the record before 
it, the district court reasonably concluded that absent court 
intervention, discharge of the government's fiduciary obli-
gations may yet be far off.

     Appellants note that the 1994 statute provides no deadlines 
for the reforms at issue.  Failure to provide a statutory 
timetable may indicate that Congress sought to leave the 
timing of reform to agency discretion.  But the lack of a 
timetable does not give government officials carte blanche to 
ignore their legal obligations.  This is particularly true where, 
as here, the act of outlining specific steps toward reform was 
enacted against a background of agency delay dating back 
many years.

     The district court noted that the consequences of further 
agency delay are potentially quite severe.  Documents neces-
sary for a proper accounting and reconciliation have been lost 
or destroyed, and the district court found little reason to 
believe that this would change in the near future.  "The 
longer defendants delay in creating the plans necessary to 
render an accounting, the greater the chance that plaintiffs 
will never receive an actual accounting of their own trust 
money."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 47.  Given that many 
plaintiffs rely upon their IIM trust accounts for their financial 
well-being, the injury from delay could cause irreparable 
harm to plaintiffs' interests as IIM trust beneficiaries.  Thus 
it seems that "the interests at stake are not merely economic 
interests in [an administrative scheme], but personal interests 
in life and health."  Public Interest Health Research Group v. 
Auchter, 702 F.2d 1150, 1156 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (citation omit-
ted).

     Concern for "administrative convenience" certainly coun-
sels against interfering with the government's reform priori-
ties.  See Grand Canyon Air Tour Coalition v. FAA, 154 

F.3d 455, 476 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("Although the APA gives 
courts the authority to 'compel agency action unlawfully 
withheld or unreasonably delayed,' we are acutely aware of 
the limits of our institutional competence in the highly techni-
cal area at issue in this case."(citations omitted)).  Yet neither 
a lack of sufficient funds nor administrative complexity, in 
and of themselves, justify extensive delay, nor can the gov-
ernment claim that it has become subject to unreasonable 
expectations.  Federal officials were aware of their fiduciary 
obligations long before the passage of the 1994 Act-let alone 
the initiation of this action-and yet little progress has been 
made in discharging those duties.  What little progress the 
government has made appears more due to the litigation than 
diligence in discharging its fiduciary obligations.  See Mis-
placed Trust H.R. Rep. No. 102-499, at 5 (noting that "the 
only thing that seems to stimulate a flurry of activity at the 
Bureau [of Indian Affairs] is an impending appearance ... 
before a congressional committee").  See also Cobell V, 91 
F. Supp. 2d at 20 n.15 (noting that the "positive steps taken 
by defendants toward bringing themselves into compliance 
with the law" have "not come easily").  For these reasons, we 
find no basis for disturbing the district court's conclusion that 
appellants unreasonably delayed the discharge of their fidu-
ciary obligations, nor for upsetting the district court's exer-
cise of jurisdiction under 5 U.S.C. s 706 on this basis.

                         III. Discussion

     Appellants contend that the district court erred in finding 
that the Secretary of the Interior committed "four statutory 
breaches of IIM trust duties ... that warrant prospective 
relief."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 40.  They challenge both 
the district court's conclusions that specific measures were 
required under the 1994 Act for the government to fulfill its 
fiduciary obligations and its provision of prospective equitable 
relief awarded.  Specifically, the government argues that the 
1994 Act does not require the creation of written policies and 
procedures covering the four areas identified by the district 
court.

     To the extent that appellants contest the district court's 
conclusions defining the federal government's fiduciary obli-
gations to IIM trust beneficiaries, they raise questions of law 
that we review de novo.  Yet insofar as appellants challenge 
factual findings, we will uphold the district court unless its 
findings are clearly erroneous.  Such findings include the 
district court's determination whether the steps taken by 
appellants in recent years toward fulfilling their legal obli-
gations have been sufficient, or whether there has been 
unreasonable delay in discharging the government's fiduciary 
duties.

     Applying these standards, the government is incorrect to 
the extent that it assumes that the 1994 Act forms the basis 
for its fiduciary obligations.  The 1994 Act did not create 
these obligations any more than it created the IIM trust 
accounts.  As noted above, the 1994 Act was a remedial 
statute designed to ensure more diligent fulfillment of the 
government's obligations.  It recognized and reaffirmed what 
should be beyond dispute--that the government has long-
standing and substantial trust obligations to Indians, particu-
larly to IIM trust beneficiaries, not the least of which is a 
duty to account.  While the district court erred in character-
izing some specific actions as material breaches that were 
themselves merely indicia of appellants' breach, there is 
ample evidence in the record to support the district court's 
broader conclusion that appellants' failure to take reasonable 
steps toward the discharge of their trust obligations constitut-
ed a breach of their fiduciary duties.  Once this conclusion 
was reached, the district acted well within its power to 
provide modest equitable relief, requiring appellants to do 
little more than develop plans to ensure proper discharge of 
their duties within a reasonable time.  The district court did 
not exceed its powers with this order, nor with its decision to 
maintain jurisdiction over the case.

     A.   The Trust Relationship
          
     There is no doubt that the federal government has a long-
standing fiduciary obligation to IIM trust beneficiaries.  
"[T]he law is 'well established that the Government in its 

dealings with Indian tribal property acts in a fiduciary capaci-
ty.' "  Lincoln v. Vigil, 508 U.S. 182, 194 (1993) (quoting 
United States v. Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, 480 U.S. 700, 
707 (1987)).  In the leading case on Indian trust responsibili-
ties, United States v. Mitchell ("Mitchell II"), the Supreme 
Court was clear:

     A fiduciary relationship necessarily arises when the Gov-
     ernment assumes such elaborate control over forests and 
     property belonging to Indians.  All of the necessary 
     elements of a common-law trust are present:  a trustee 
     (the United States), a beneficiary (the Indian allottees), 
     and a trust corpus (Indian timber, lands, and funds).
     
463 U.S. 206, 225 (1983) (citing Restatement (Second) of 
Trusts s 2, cmt. h (1959)).

     This rule operates as a presumption.  See Loudner v. 
United States, 108 F.3d 896, 900 (8th Cir. 1997) (" '[T]here is a 
presumption that absent explicit language to the contrary, all 
funds held by the United States for Indian tribes are held in 
trust.' " (quoting Rogers v. United States, 697 F.2d 886, 890 
(9th Cir. 1983))).  Therefore, courts correctly recognize a 
trust relationship even where it is not explicitly laid out by 
statute.  Specifically, " 'where the Federal Government takes 
on or has control or supervision over tribal monies or proper-
ties, the fiduciary relationship normally exists with respect to 
such monies or properties (unless Congress has provided 
otherwise) even though nothing is said expressly in the 
authorizing or underlying statute (or other fundamental docu-
ment) about a trust fund, or a trust or fiduciary connection.' "  
Mitchell II, 463 U.S. at 225 (quoting Navajo Tribe of Indians 
v. United States, 224 Ct. Cl. 171, 183 (1980)).

     It is no doubt true that "the government's fiduciary respon-
sibilities necessarily depend on the substantive laws creating 
those obligations."  Shoshone-Bannock Tribes v. Reno, 56 
F.3d 1476, 1482 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  see also Mitchell II, 463 
U.S. at 224 (the relevant statutes and regulations "define the 
contours of the United States' fiduciary responsibilities.");  
National Wildlife Federation v. Andrus, 642 F.2d 589, 611 
(D.C. Cir. 1980) ("[A] trust responsibility can only arise from 

a statute, treaty, or executive order." (citation omitted)).  
This does not mean that the failure to specify the precise 
nature of the fiduciary obligation or to enumerate the trust-
ee's duties absolves the government of its responsibilities.  It 
is well understood that "[t]he extent of [a trustee's] duties 
and powers is determined by the trust instrument and the 
rules of law which are applicable."  Restatement (Second) of 
Trusts s 201, at 442 (1959).  It is the nature of any instru-
ment that establishes a trust relationship that many of the 
duties and powers are implied therein.  They arise from the 
nature of the relationship established.

     While the government's obligations are rooted in and out-
lined by the relevant statutes and treaties, they are largely 
defined in traditional equitable terms.  "Where Congress 
uses terms that have accumulated settled meaning under 
either equity or the common law, a court must infer, unless 
the statute otherwise dictates, that Congress means to incor-
porate the established meaning of these terms."  NLRB v. 
Amax Coal Co., 453 U.S. 322, 329 (1981).  Courts "must infer 
that Congress intended to impose on trustees traditional 
fiduciary duties unless Congress has unequivocally expressed 
an intent to the contrary."  Id. at 330.  Much as the Supreme 
Court has regularly turned to the Restatement and other 
authorities to construe trust responsibilities, it is appropriate 
for the district court to consult similar sources.

     Despite the imposition of fiduciary duties, federal officials 
retain a substantial amount of discretion to order their priori-
ties.  In Lincoln v. Vigil, for example, the Supreme Court 
held that the government's fiduciary relationship with Indians 
"could not limit" an agency's discretion "to reorder its priori-
ties" as among beneficiaries.  508 U.S. 182, 195 (1993).  In 
Lincoln, the Court rejected a challenge to the Indian Health 
Service's decision to discontinue a health program for handi-
capped Indian children in one region of the country in order 
to devote greater resources to a national program.  Nonethe-
less, the Secretary "cannot escape his role as trustee by 
donning the mantle of administrator" to claim that courts 
must defer to his expertise and delegated authority.  Jicaril-
la Apache Tribe v. Supron Energy Corp., 728 F.2d 1555, 1567 

(10th Cir. 1984) (Seymour, J., concurring in part and dissent-
ing in part), adopted as majority opinion as modified en 
banc, 782 F.2d 855 (10th Cir. 1986).

     The Secretary has an "overriding duty ... to deal fairly 
with Indians."  Morton v. Ruiz, 415 U.S. 199, 236 (1974).  
This duty necessarily constrains the Secretary's discretion.  
When faced with several policy choices, an administrator is 
generally allowed to select any reasonable option.  Yet this is 
not the case when acting as a fiduciary for Indian beneficia-
ries as "stricter standards apply to federal agencies when 
administering Indian programs."  Jicarilla, 728 F.2d at 1567.  
Summarizing federal case law on fiduciary obligations owed to 
Indian tribes, the Tenth Circuit concluded that where "the 
Secretary is obligated to act as a fiduciary ... his actions 
must not merely meet the minimal requirements of adminis-
trative law, but must also pass scrutiny under the more 
stringent standards demanded of a fiduciary."  Id. at 1563.  
The federal government has "charged itself with moral obli-
gations of the highest responsibility and trust" in its relation-
ships with Indians, and its conduct "should therefore be 
judged by the most exacting fiduciary standards."  Seminole 
Nation v. United States, 316 U.S. 286, 297 (1942);  cf.  Mus-
cogee (Creek) Nation v. Hodel, 851 F.2d 1439, 1445 n.8 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988) (giving "careful consideration to Interior's interpre-
tation" of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act, but not deferring 
to it).

     B.   The 1994 Act
          
     The crux of appellants' argument is that there was no 
material breach of their fiduciary obligations as defined by 
the 1994 Act.  Specifically, appellants contend that the dis-
trict court found obligations beyond those enumerated in the 
Act, when Congress had intended that OST would determine 
the proper content and timing of policies and procedures to 
discharge appellants' fiduciary obligations.  Therefore, inso-
far as this process has yet to be completed, appellants 
contend that there is no basis for the district court to find 
that appellants unlawfully withheld or unreasonably delayed 
discharge of their obligations.

     The fundamental problem with appellants' claims is the 
premise that their duties are solely defined by the 1994 Act.  
The Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act reaffirmed 
and clarified preexisting duties;  it did not create them.  It 
further sought to remedy the government's long-standing 
failure to discharge its trust obligations;  it did not define and 
limit the extent of appellants' obligations. While appellants 
are right to quibble with some of the district court's specific 
findings, the premise upon which much of their appeal rests is 
unsustainable.

     The trust nature of the federal government's IIM responsi-
bilities was recognized long before passage of the 1994 Act. 
See Felix S. Cohen, Handbook of Federal Indian Law, 630-31 
(1982 ed.).  As early as 1831, the Supreme Court recognized 
that the relationship between Indians and the federal govern-
ment was like "that of a ward to his guardian."  Cherokee 
Nation v. Georgia, 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) 1, 17 (1831) (Marshall, 
C.J.).  Half a century later, in upholding a statute placing 
certain crimes between Indians under federal jurisdiction, the 
Court again noted that "Indian tribes are the wards of the 
nation" and reaffirmed that the federal government owes 
Indians a "duty of protection."  United States v. Kagama, 118 
U.S. 375, 383, 384 (1886).  The fiduciary nature of the govern-
ment's duty was made explicit in Seminole Nation v. United 
States, 316 U.S. 286 (1942).  In Seminole Nation the Court 
applied the "most exacting fiduciary standards" of the com-
mon law in assessing the government's discharge of its duties.  
Id. at 297.  And in Mitchell II, the Court reiterated the 
existence of a "general trust relationship" which imposes 
"distinctive obligation[s]" in addition to those established by 
statute.  463 U.S. at 225 (citation omitted).

     Enactment of the Indian Trust Fund Management Reform 
Act in 1994 did not alter the nature or scope of the fiduciary 
duties owed by the government to IIM trust beneficiaries.  
Rather, by its very terms the 1994 Act identified a portion of 
the government's specific obligations and created additional 
means to ensure that the obligations would be carried out.  
Indeed, the 1994 Act explicitly reaffirmed the Interior Secre-
tary's obligation to fulfill the "trust responsibilities of the 

United States."  25 U.S.C. s 1629(d).  From this express 
language, "we must infer that Congress intended to impose 
on trustees traditional fiduciary duties unless Congress has 
unequivocally expressed an intent to the contrary."  NLRB v. 
Amax Coal Co., 453 U.S. 322, 330 (1981).

     Section 101 of the 1994 Act states that the Interior Secre-
tary's "proper discharge of the trust responsibilities shall 
include (but are not limited to)" eight enumerated actions, 25 
U.S.C. s 1629(d) (emphasis added).  In other words, the 
government has other trust responsibilities not enumerated in 
the 1994 Act.  See Puerto Rico Mari. Shipping Auth. v. ICC, 
645 F.2d 1102, 1112 n.26 (D.C. Cir. 1981) ("It is hornbook law 
that the use of the word 'including' indicates that the specified 
list ... that follows is illustrative, not exclusive."  (citation 
omitted)).  Moreover, applicable canons of statutory construc-
tion counsel against interpreting a statute creating a new 
remedy to eliminate prior remedies and in favor of construing 
a statute affecting Indians in a manner favorable to Indians.  
See 2B s 50.05 Sutherland, Statutory Construction, at 109 
(5th ed. Norman J. Singer ed. 1992);  see also Rosebud Sioux 
Tribe v. Kneip, 430 U.S. 584 (1977);  United States v. Santa 
Fe Pacific R.R. Co., 314 U.S. 339 (1941).

     Section 101 of the 1994 Act does not create "trust responsi-
bilities of the United States."  Rather it lists some of the 
means through which the Secretary shall discharge these 
preexisting duties.  For instance, the first listed duty is 
"[p]roviding adequate systems for accounting for and report-
ing trust fund balances."  25 U.S.C. s 162a(d)(1).  This would 
not be necessary to discharge the government's trust respon-
sibilities were not the government already obliged to account 
for and report trust fund balances.  Rather than exhaust the 
list of duties owed by the federal government to IIM trust 
beneficiaries, the 1994 Act clarified and augmented aspects of 
the government's preexisting obligations to facilitate their 
fulfillment.

     This view of the federal government's fiduciary duties is 
supported by Mitchell II which held that "a fiduciary rela-
tionship necessarily arises when the government assumes 

such elaborate control over ... property belonging to Indi-
ans"--in particular where, as here, "[a]ll of the necessary 
elements of a common-law trust are present."  463 U.S. at 
225.  The general "contours" of the government's obligations 
may be defined by statute, but the interstices must be filled 
in through reference to general trust law.  While Mitchell II 
involved a claim for damages, nothing in that decision or 
other Indian cases would imply that appellants are not enti-
tled to declaratory or injunctive relief.  Such remedies are 
the traditional ones for violations of trust duties.

     Appellants imply that the district court did not show suffi-
cient deference to their roles as administrative officials 
charged with developing and implementing policies and proce-
dures to ensure the discharge of the federal government's 
obligations.  Appellants thus imply, but do not argue, that 
their interpretation of the 1994 Act, and the obligations that it 
imposes, is due deference under Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. 
NRDC, 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  Assuming that the 1994 Act is 
ambiguous, this does not enable the government to escape 
liability by interpreting away its fiduciary obligations.  While 
ordinarily we defer to an agency's interpretations of ambigu-
ous statutes entrusted to it for administration, Chevron defer-
ence is not applicable in this case.  The governing canon of 
construction requires that "statutes are to be construed lib-
erally in favor of the Indians, with ambiguous provisions 
interpreted to their benefit."  Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe of 
Indians, 471 U.S. 759, 766 (1985).  Therefore, even where the 
ambiguous statute is one entrusted to an agency, we give the 
agency's interpretation "careful consideration" but "we do not 
defer to it."  Muscogee (Creek) Nation v. Hodel, 851 F.2d 
1439, 1445 n.8 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  This departure from the 
Chevron norm arises from the fact that the rule of liberally 
construing statutes to the benefit of the Indians arises not 
from ordinary exegesis, but "from principles of equitable 
obligations and normative rules of behavior," applicable to the 
trust relationship between the United States and the Native 
American people.  Albuquerque Indian Rights v. Lujan, 930 
F.2d 49, 59 (D.C. Cir. 1991);  see also County of Oneida v. 
Oneida Indian Nation of New York State, 470 U.S. 226, 247-

48 (1985) (Court resolves ambiguity in favor of Indian claims);  
Pueblo of Sandia v. Babbitt, 231 F.3d 878, 880 (D.C. Cir. 
2000).  Thus, even if the statutory language did not make 
clear that the government's duties predate and extend beyond 
those enumerated in the 1994 Act, the Interior Department 
would retain its fiduciary obligations to IIM trust beneficia-
ries.

     C.   Duty to Account
          
     Holding that appellants' fiduciary duties predate the 1994 
Act does not dispose of all their claims.  Having determined 
the source of appellants' obligations, we must now consider 
what those duties entail, at least with respect to the claims at 
hand.  Specifically, we must consider the nature and extent of 
the fiduciary duty to account appellants owe to IIM trust 
beneficiaries.

     Appellants' challenge focuses on the district court's conclu-
sion that the IIM trust beneficiaries are entitled to a com-
plete historical accounting of their trust accounts.  The gov-
ernment maintains that no such right is conferred by the 1994 
Act.  Rather, the Act delegates responsibility for determining 
the nature and scope of an accounting to the Interior Depart-
ment.  The accounting required by Section 102 of the Act is 
merely a prospective right and, according to appellants, "does 
not speak to the extent to which the Secretary must inquire 
into the correctness of past transactions."  Reply Brief for 
Appellants at 17.  While appellants concede that "some type 
of review of past transactions may indeed be necessary to 
accurately state opening balances," this does not mean that 
the plaintiffs have a judicially enforceable right to a complete 
historical accounting.  Id.  Even were the plaintiffs entitled 
to such an accounting, appellants contend that the Interior 
Department, and not the court, would have the authority to 
determine the nature and scope of the accounting.

     Contrary to appellants' claims, Section 102 of the 1994 Act 
makes clear that the Interior Secretary owes IIM trust 
beneficiaries an accounting for "all funds held in trust by the 
United States for the benefit of an Indian tribe or an individ-
ual Indian which are deposited or invested pursuant to the 

Act of June 24, 1938."  25 U.S.C. s 4011(a) (emphasis added).  
"All funds" means all funds, irrespective of when they were 
deposited (or at least so long as they were deposited after the 
Act of June 24, 1938).  Therefore, the 1994 Act reaffirms the 
government's preexisting fiduciary duty to perform a com-
plete historical accounting of trust fund assets.

     Appellants place substantial weight on the fact that Title 
III of the 1994 Act instructs the ST to oversee any accounting 
or account reconciliation conducted by Interior.  Under Sec-
tion 303(b)(2)(A) the ST "shall monitor the reconciliation" of 
trust accounts and ensure that there is "a fair and accurate 
accounting of all trust accounts."  Id. s 4043(b)(2)(A).  Fur-
ther, Section 304 of the Act requires the Interior Secretary to 
report on any account reconciliation that takes place and what 
steps will be taken to resolve disputes over account balances.  
Id. s 4044.  Section 101 of the Act, on the other hand, 
specifies numerous actions that must be taken by the govern-
ment, but does not dictate the nature or scope of any account-
ing.  See id. s 162a(d).

     Yet Title III of the 1994 Act does not vindicate the govern-
ment's position as these provisions merely detail the oversight 
functions of the ST, not the fiduciary responsibilities of the 
federal government.  The language in Title III, if anything, 
supports plaintiffs' claims, as it requires the ST to "ensure" 
that BIA "provides the account holders, with a fair and 
accurate accounting of all trust accounts." Id. s 4043(b)(2)(A) 
(emphasis added).  Appellants never explain how one can give 
a fair and accurate accounting of all accounts without first 
reconciling the accounts, taking into account past deposits, 
withdrawals, and accruals.  Indeed, the government's own 
expert acknowledged that one could not determine an accu-
rate account balance without confirming historical account 
balances.

     Even were the language of the 1994 Act ambiguous, this 
would not redeem appellants' position, as we follow the same 
rules of construction with regard to Indian trust expectations 
discussed above.  Courts "must be guided by that 'eminently 
sound and vital canon' that 'statutes passed for the benefit of 

Indian tribes ... are to be liberally construed, doubtful 
expressions being resolved in favor of the Indians.' "  Bryan 
v. Itasca County, 426 U.S. 373, 392 (1976) (citations omitted);  
see also Alaska Pacific Fisheries v. United States, 248 U.S. 
78, 89 (1918) ("[s]tatutes passed for the benefit of dependent 
Indian tribes ... are to be liberally construed, doubtful 
expressions being resolved in favor of the Indians.");  Musco-
gee (Creek) Nation, 851 F.3d at 1445 n.8 (courts should 
consider, but not defer, to agency interpretations of statutes 
concerning the federal government's obligations to Indians);  
Jicarilla, 728 F.2d at 1563 ("[W]henever doubt or ambiguity 
exists in federal statutes or regulations, such doubt is re-
solved in favor of the tribes.").  Again, as we noted above, the 
canon of liberality of construction in favor of the Indians acts 
with its "special strength" even where a federal agency would 
in other cases enjoy the implied authority to implement 
ambiguous statutory language supporting a competing inter-
pretation.  Albuquerque Indian Rights, 930 F.2d at 59;  see 
also Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe of Indians, 471 U.S. 759, 766 
(1985) (noting that "the standard principles of statutory con-
struction do not have their usual force in cases involving 
Indian law").

     Not only does the 1994 Act plainly reaffirm the govern-
ment's preexisting duty to provide an accounting to IIM trust 
beneficiaries, but it is plain that such an obligation inheres in 
the trust relationship itself.  "The obligation of a trustee to 
provide an accounting is a fundamental principle governing 
the subject of trust administration."  White Mountain 
Apache Tribe of Arizona v. United States, 26 Cl. Ct. 446, 448 
(1992) (citing G.T. Bogert, Trusts s 141, at 494 (6th ed. 
1987)).

     The 1994 Act requires that the Interior Department per-
form an "adequate" accounting.  This indicates that the ac-
counting must be sufficient to serve the purposes for which a 
trust accounting is typically conducted.  By this standard, the 
district court's conclusion that the management of a trust and 
rendering of an adequate accounting requires the locating and 
retention of records, operational computer systems, and ade-
quate staffing was, in plaintiffs' words, "self-evident."  Any-
thing less would produce an inadequate accounting.

     This conclusion is reinforced by basic common law trust 
principles.  It is black-letter trust law that "[a]n accounting 
necessarily requires a full disclosure and description of each 
item of property constituting the corpus of the trust at its 
inception." Engelsmann v. Holekamp, 402 S.W.2d 382, 391 
(Mo. 1966);  see also Black's Law Dictionary (7th ed. 1999) 
(defining accounting as "the report of all items of property, 
income, and expenses" prepared by the trustee for the benefi-
ciary). Under traditional equitable trust principles, "[t]he 
trustee's report must contain sufficient information for the 
beneficiary readily to ascertain whether the trust has been 
faithfully carried out."  White Mountain Apache Tribe, 26 Cl. 
Ct. at 449.

     Appellants maintain that even if an accounting is required, 
the district court overstepped its bounds by defining the 
nature of the accounting required.  This argument both mis-
represents the district court's opinion and misconstrues the 
relevant trust law principles.  The district court made clear 
that it was "not ruling upon what specific form of accounting, 
if any," is required by the 1994 Act or the government's 
preexisting fiduciary obligation.  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 
40, n.32.  Rather, it noted that an accounting is, in fact, 
required, and that such an accounting must be "of all money 
in the IIM trust held in trust for the benefit of plaintiffs, 
without regard to when the funds were deposited."  Id. at 58.  
The district court explicitly left open the choice of how the 
accounting would be conducted, and whether certain account-
ing methods, such as statistical sampling or something else, 
would be appropriate.  Such decisions are properly left in the 
hands of administrative agencies.

     Claiming the role of administrator, however, does not ab-
solve the government of its enforceable obligations to the IIM 
trust beneficiaries.  As noted above, appellants may not 
escape from their fiduciary obligations by appealing to their 
roles as administrators of a federal program.  In those capac-
ities, they are trustee delegates of the federal government 
who owe substantial fiduciary duties to IIM trust beneficia-
ries.  "If the Secretary is obligated to act as a fiduciary ... 
then his actions must not merely meet the minimal require-

ments of administrative law, but must also pass scrutiny 
under the more stringent standards demanded of a fiduciary."  
Jicarilla, 728 F.2d at 1563.

     Appellants also argue that whatever right to an accounting 
plaintiffs may have, the district court erred insofar as it 
determined that such a right was judicially enforceable.  The 
only action for an accounting that could be judicially com-
pelled, according to the government, would be an accounting 
accompanying an action for money damages in the court of 
claims under the Tucker Act.  According to appellants, 
Mitchell II provides that plaintiffs can seek monetary dam-
ages in a Tucker Act claim, but not declaratory or injunctive 
relief because these "prospective equitable remedies are total-
ly inadequate."  463 U.S. at 227.  No common law claim for 
an accounting is cognizable, and even if it were, such a claim 
has been waived by the plaintiffs' failure to file a cross-appeal 
on that claim.

     Here again, appellants misconstrue the relevant case law.  
We have already determined that there is federal jurisdiction 
to hear plaintiffs' claims insofar as the federal government 
has unreasonably delayed or unlawfully withheld performance 
of its trust duties.  Federal courts have repeatedly recog-
nized the right of Native Americans to seek relief for breach-
es of fiduciary obligations, including suits for monetary dam-
ages under the Tucker Act where prospective remedies would 
be inadequate.  Indeed, this is the clear import of Mitchell II.  
See 463 U.S. at 226 n.31, 227.  "It is fundamental that an 
action for accounting is an equitable claim and that courts of 
equity have original jurisdiction to compel an accounting." 
Klamath and Modoc Tribes v. United States, 174 Ct. Cl. 483, 
487 (1966).

     This position should not come as a surprise to appellants, 
as it has been the official position of the federal government.  
In 1996 (prior to the filing of the initial complaint in this case) 
the Interior Department's Solicitor issued an opinion that 
government trustees have an "affirmative duty ... to make a 
full and proper accounting."  Nothing in the 1994 Act, nor 
any other federal statute, acts to limit or alter this right.

     D.   Breach
          
     Based upon the foregoing facts and recognition of the 
federal government's broad fiduciary obligations to IIM trust 
beneficiaries, particularly a duty to render a complete and 
accurate historical accounting, the district court found several 
specific breaches on the part of appellants.  Specifically, the 
district court found that a) appellants failed to provide plain-
tiffs with "an accurate accounting of all money in the IIM 
trust held in trust for the benefit of plaintiffs, without regard 
to when the funds were deposited";  b) appellants in both the 
Interior and Treasury Department failed to "retrieve and 
retain all information concerning the IIM trust that is neces-
sary to render an accurate accounting" for the trust beneficia-
ries;  c) the Interior Secretary and Assistant Secretary failed 
to "establish written policies and procedures" for collecting 
and retaining necessary documents and information, imple-
menting "computer and business systems architecture neces-
sary" and ensuring sufficient "staffing of trust management 
functions" to fulfill such obligations.  Cobell V, 91 
F. Supp. 2d at 58. As discussed separately below, the court 
also found that the Treasury Secretary failed to retain IIM 
trust documents necessary for an accurate accounting. Id.

     Appellants do not contest the district court's factual find-
ings;  appellants have failed to do what the district court 
concluded they failed to do.  Nor do appellants forcefully 
maintain that those steps which they have taken toward 
discharging their fiduciary obligations come anywhere close 
to those steps necessary to fulfill the obligation to provide an 
accounting.  Even were these findings challenged, there is 
more than enough substantial evidence to support the district 
court's findings in this regard.

     Appellants do object to the district court's conclusions, 
however.  Specifically, appellants argue that the district court 
found specific breaches of obligations that do not exist.  Save 
for the first breach listed--that of failing to render an ac-
counting--appellants have a point.  While there is a specific 
duty to provide a complete accounting, there is no specific 
duty to, for example, implement particular policies or retrieve 

information either in the 1994 Act or elsewhere.  This does 
not vindicate appellants' position, however, for while appel-
lants may not have breached a specific duty to perform the 
particular tasks identified by the district court, such as imple-
menting a IIM trust management computer system, appel-
lants' failure to take such steps provides ample support for 
the district court's ultimate conclusion that appellants have 
unreasonably delayed the discharge of their fiduciary obli-
gations to IIM beneficiaries, and that there is little reason to 
believe that, absent court intervention, these duties will be 
discharged any time soon.

     The government's broad duty to provide a complete histori-
cal accounting to IIM beneficiaries necessarily imposes sub-
stantial subsidiary duties on those government officials with 
responsibility for ensuring that an accounting can and will 
take place.  In particular, it imposes obligations on those who 
administer the IIM trust lands and funds to, among other 
things, maintain and complete existing records, recover miss-
ing records where possible, and develop plans and procedures 
sufficient to ensure that all aspects of the accounting process 
are carried out.  As the district court concluded, this may 
well include an obligation to develop or obtain computer 
software capable of tracking and reconciling fund data, hire 
staff sufficient to execute management duties, and implement 
specific plans to ensure that all reasonable efforts are made 
to provide the most complete and accurate historical account-
ing of IIM trust funds that is possible.  The failure to 
implement a computer system is not itself the breach.  Rath-
er it is indicative of appellants' failure to discharge their 
fiduciary obligations in a reasonably prompt manner.  It is 
the latter which constitutes the breach.

     There are similar problems with some of the district court's 
other specific findings of breach.  For instance, one provision 
in Section 101 of the 1994 Act requires "[e]stablishing consis-
tent, written policies and procedures for trust fund manage-
ment and accounting."  25 U.S.C. s 162a(d)(6).  Another 
requires the Interior Secretary to provide "adequate staffing 
... for trust fund management and accounting."  Id. 
s 162a(d)(7).  The district court concluded that the Depart-

ment of Interior had breached a duty to have "written policies 
and procedures for the staffing of trust management func-
tions."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 40.  This may technically 
overstate the case.  There may not literally be a duty to have 
such written policies and procedures.  Were there a means of 
ensuring discharge of appellants' fiduciary obligations absent 
such steps, there would be no breach.  Nonetheless, though 
the failure to take such steps may not constitute a breach, it 
surely provides substantial evidence that such a breach has 
occurred.

     In sum, there are numerous provisions of the 1994 Act 
which appellants, by their own stipulation, are unable to meet.  
Most significantly, the government cannot provide an ade-
quate accounting or reconciliation and does not provide the 
required reports to IIM trust beneficiaries, nor did the 
district court find any basis for believing that such obligations 
would soon be met. Thus the district court's conclusions that 
certain types of policies and plans would be necessary for the 
government to discharge its fiduciary obligations are sustain-
able.  It is clear that the federal government will be unable to 
provide an adequate accounting without computer systems, 
staffing, and document retention policies that are adequate 
for the task.  At the same time, defendants should be afford-
ed sufficient discretion in determining the precise route they 
take, so long as this threshold is met.  The actual legal 
breach is the failure to provide an accounting, not its failure 
to take the discrete individual steps that would facilitate an 
accounting.  Thus, while the district court must amend its 
opinion on remand to account for this distinction, there is no 
need to alter the district court's order, as the bottom line is 
the same:  By failing to take reasonable steps toward the 
discharge of the federal government's fiduciary obligations to 
IIM trust beneficiaries, appellants breached their duties.

     E.   The Treasury Department
          
     Appellants specifically object to the district court's decision 
to award relief against the Treasury Department.  Treasury 
stipulated it would take actions to preserve trust-related 
documents, which the district court acknowledged might "sat-

isfactorily discharge" the Department's duties.  Cobell V, 91 
F. Supp. 2d at 51.  Moreover, appellants argue, there is no 
proof that the documents destroyed by the Treasury Depart-
ment included anything "necessary" to render an accounting 
of the IIM trust accounts.  At a more fundamental level, the 
government challenges the court's finding of any breach by 
the Treasury Department for failing to retain trust-related 
documents. While the 1994 Act does impose obligations upon 
the Treasury Department, there are no enumerated docu-
ment retention obligations in the Act.  Congress gave no 
indication that the government's trust responsibilities re-
quired it to alter the record destruction schedules set for the 
Treasury Department by the National Archives and Records 
Administration ("NARA").

     Appellants have stipulated that the federal government is 
the IIM beneficiaries' trustee and that the Treasury Secre-
tary is a trustee-delegate.  A trustee is required to preserve 
those documents necessary to fulfill the trustee's obligations 
to trust beneficiaries. This includes maintaining those docu-
ments that are necessary for an accounting.  Therefore, 
insofar as the Treasury Department has records and docu-
ments that are necessary to perform an adequate accounting, 
the district court was correct in holding that the Department 
must maintain these records.  The Treasury Department's 
failure to maintain such documents is a breach of its fiduciary 
duty.  The destruction of potentially relevant IIM-related 
trust documents that may have been necessary for a complete 
accounting is clear evidence that the Department committed 
such a breach.  See id. at 50 n.35 (citing Pls. Ex. 152, 
Treasury Declarations Re:  Document Destruction, June 18, 
1999).5  As noted above, in the context of Indian trust obli-
gations "the Government, in both its executive and legislative 
branches, is held to a high standard of conduct, one consonant 
with its 'moral obligations of the highest obligation and 

__________
     5 The Special Master's Report released after trial, but prior to the 
court's decision, detailed additional cases in which Treasury failed 
to safeguard documents potentially necessary for an accounting.

trust.' "  Jicarilla, 728 F.2d at 1563 (quoting Seminole Na-
tion v. United States, 316 U.S. at 297).

     Although the NARA guidelines direct the Treasury Depart-
ment to destroy check records more than six years and seven 
months old, this cannot excuse the Treasury Department 
from its fiduciary obligations under the 1994 Act.  Another 
agency's development, in consultation with the Treasury De-
partment, of document retention regulations which allow for 
the destruction of trust-related documents cannot relieve the 
Treasury Department of its responsibilities.  Not only are 
NARA's record retention schedules modified regularly to 
account to each agency's particular needs at a given point in 
time, but NARA typically approves the record retention 
schedule proposed by the agency.  Thus, there is no basis for 
Treasury to contend that it was unable to maintain the 
records under federal rules.

     F.   Relief
          
     Upon concluding that appellants committed several sub-
stantial breaches of their fiduciary obligations to IIM benefi-
ciaries, the district court issued an order to compel those 
actions which had been unlawfully withheld or unreasonably 
delayed. Specifically, the district court remanded the required 
actions to appellants so that they may begin to discharge the 
duties found by the court.  Furthermore, the court retained 
jurisdiction over the matter in order to "ensure that defen-
dants are diligently taking steps to rectify the continuing 
breaches of trust."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 58.  Finally, 
the court ordered that appellants prepare a revised HLIP 
and file "quarterly status reports setting forth and explaining 
the steps that defendants have taken to rectify the breaches 
of trust declared by the court."  Id. at 59.

     There is no question that appellants have made significant 
steps toward the discharge of the federal government's fidu-
ciary obligations.  See, e.g., id. at 18 (noting acquisition of 
Trust Fund Accounting System (TFAS) software);  id. at 20 
& n.15 (noting development of high-level records management 
plan).  The district court, however, as the finder of fact, 
heard substantial evidence that these efforts were, at best, a 

day late and a dollar short.  Thus, while appellants acquired 
new computer systems to track trust resources, inadequate 
efforts were made to ensure that the data entered into the 
new systems would be accurate.  See id. at 18-19, 48-49.  
The district court reasonably concluded that appellants had 
unreasonably delayed the discharge of these duties by failing 
to ensure the provision of a complete historical accounting.  
As explained in detail above, this court is duly deferential to 
the burdens under which administrative agencies must oper-
ate, and recognizes that courts should not disrupt their 
timetables and priorities lightly.  Nonetheless, there is ample 
evidence that appellants unreasonably delayed their actions to 
the detriment of IIM beneficiaries, to whom appellants owe 
the highest fiduciary obligations.

     Appellants maintain that there is no basis in law for the 
district court to provide the relief granted in its decision, even 
if legal violations of appellants' fiduciary obligations occurred.  
Specifically, insofar as plaintiffs sought relief under the APA, 
the district court exceeded its power by ordering the Interior 
and Treasury Departments to take the specific actions toward 
fulfilling their fiduciary obligations.  Moreover, insofar as the 
court's injunctive commands resemble mandamus, they are 
precluded given the lack of a "clear, ministerial duty" that 
could be enforced in such a fashion.  Appellants' arguments 
are unavailing.

     Federal courts have repeatedly recognized the right of 
Native Americans to seek relief for breaches of fiduciary 
obligations, including suits for monetary damages under the 
Tucker Act where prospective remedies would be inadequate.  
See United States v. Mitchell ("Mitchell II"), 463 U.S. 206, 
226 n.31, 227 (1983).  "It is fundamental that an action for 
accounting is an equitable claim and that courts of equity 
have original jurisdiction to compel an accounting." Klamath 
and Modoc Tribes v. United States, 174 Ct. Cl. 483, 487 
(1966).6

     In Mitchell II, the Supreme Court (and the federal govern-
ment) simply assumed that Indian beneficiaries could pursue 

__________
     6 This is distinct from the question whether the district court can 
itself perform the required accounting, as we discuss below.

equitable relief against the government for its breach of 
fiduciary duties.  At issue was whether beneficiaries could 
seek monetary damages where injunctive or declaratory re-
lief would be insufficient.  Mitchell II, 463 U.S. at 227.  
Indeed, the district court only considered such relief.  There-
fore, there is no basis for concluding that plaintiffs are 
somehow precluded from seeking an historical accounting, 
provided that they can overcome the relevant jurisdictional 
requirements discussed below.

     More importantly, the district court acted well within its 
broad equitable powers in ordering specific relief.  "[I]f a 
right of action exists to enforce a federal right and Congress 
is silent on the question of remedies, a federal court may 
order any appropriate relief."  Franklin v. Gwinnett County 
Public Schools, 503 U.S. 60, 69 (1992) (emphasis added).  As 
this court has concluded in other contexts, "courts are pre-
sumed to possess the full range of remedial powers--legal as 
well as equitable--unless Congress has expressly restricted 
their exercise."  Crocker v. Piedmont Aviation, Inc., 49 F.3d 
735, 749 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  This means that the district court 
has substantial ability to order that relief which is necessary 
to cure the appellants' legal transgressions:

     The essence of equity jurisdiction has been the power of 
     the Chancellor to do equity and to mould each decree to 
     the necessities of the particular case. Flexibility rather 
     than rigidity has distinguished it.  The qualities of mercy 
     and practicality have made equity the instrument for nice 
     adjustment and reconciliation between the public interest 
     and private needs as well as between competing private 
     claims.
     
Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 321 U.S. 321, 329-30 (1944);  see also 
Brown v. Board of Education ("Brown II"), 349 U.S. 294, 300 
(1955) ("Traditionally, equity has been characterized by a 
practical flexibility in shaping its remedies and by a facility 
for adjusting and reconciling public and private needs."  
(footnote omitted)).

     "Once a right and a violation have been shown, the scope of 
a district court's equitable powers to remedy past wrongs is 

broad, for breadth and flexibility are inherent in equitable 
remedies." Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 
402 U.S. 1, 15 (1971).  Because the agencies involved delayed 
performance of their legal obligations, the court was justified 
in fashioning equitable relief that would ensure the vindica-
tion of plaintiffs' rights.  That this case involves decades-old 
Indian trust funds rather than segregated schools does not 
change the nature of the court's remedial powers.

     One factor the district court cites in support of its ordered 
relief is the government's "historical record of recalcitrance" 
in performing its trust duties.  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 54.  
Additionally, the APA confers authority on the court to order 
agency action that has been unlawfully withheld or unreason-
ably delayed.  At the same time, the court properly notes 
that it "cannot 'become ... enmeshed in the minutiae' of 
agency administration."  Id. (quoting Bell v. Wolfish, 441 
U.S. 520, 562 (1979)). It is proper for a court to allow the 
government "the opportunity to cure the breaches of trust 
declared" by the court.  Id.

     The federal government characterizes the ordered relief--
the promulgation of regular reports and updates to the court 
while it retains jurisdiction--as excessive interference in the 
federal government's administration of the IIM trust.  Be-
cause there are no clear, specific "ministerial" duties, the 
government contends, there should not be mandatory injunc-
tive relief akin to that provided in a writ of mandamus.  
These are sound legal principles.  However, the district 
court's ordered relief is relatively modest.  The government 
must develop written policies and procedures, but the court 
does not tell the government what these procedures must 
entail.  This seems consonant with the judicial policy of 
granting agencies that have acted in an unlawful manner 
"discretion to determine in the first instance," how to bring 
themselves into compliance.  Global Van Lines, Inc. v. ICC, 
804 F.2d 1293, 1305 n.95 (D.C. Cir. 1986).  As the district 
court noted, in such cases "the proper course is to remand the 
case for further agency consideration in harmony with the 
court's holding."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 54-55 n.36 
(citation omitted).

     The level of oversight proposed by the district court may 
well be in excess of that countenanced in the typical delay 
case, but so too is the magnitude of government malfeasance 
and potential prejudice to the plaintiffs' class.  Given the 
history of destruction of documents and loss of information 
necessary to conduct an historical accounting, the failure of 
the government to act could place anything approaching an 
adequate accounting beyond plaintiffs' reach.  This fact, com-
bined with the longstanding inability or unwillingness of 
government officials to discharge their fiduciary obligations, 
excuse court oversight that might be excessive in an ordinary 
case.

     The government is correct that the court imposed continual 
reporting requirements that may be in excess of that which 
would be minimally required to discharge the government's 
duties.  However, it does not seem that the district court's 
remedies are disproportionate to the nature of the govern-
ment's breach.  Moreover, while the court should (and did) 
remand to the agency for the proper discharge of its obli-
gations, the court should not abdicate its responsibility to 
ensure that its instructions are followed.  This would seem 
particularly appropriate where, as here, there is a record of 
agency recalcitrance and resistance to the fulfillment of its 
legal duties.  See In re Center for Auto Safety, 793 F.2d 1346, 
1354 (D.C. Cir. 1986).  While a court's retaining of jurisdic-
tion of five years may be unusual, federal courts regularly 
retain jurisdiction until a federal agency has complied with its 
legal obligations, and have the authority to compel regular 
progress reports in the meantime.  See, e.g., In re United 
Mine Workers of Amer. Int'l Union, 190 F.3d 545, 546 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999) (retaining jurisdiction and requiring status reports 
pending completion of agency action);  Northern States Power 
Co. v. U.S. Dep't of Energy, 128 F.3d 754, 760 (D.C. Cir. 1997) 
(retaining jurisdiction pending agency's compliance with 
court's mandate);  Air Line Pilots Ass'n, Int'l v. CAB, 750 
F.2d 81, 88-89 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (retaining jurisdiction and 
ordering periodic progress reports).  Of course, nothing pro-
hibits the appellants from moving for reconsideration should 

they be able to demonstrate at some time in the future that 
adequate compliance has been achieved.

     G.   Future Proceedings
          
     This case is on appeal from the first of two trial phases.  In 
its initial scheduling order of May, 5, 1998, the district court 
announced its intention to hold a second phase of the trial for 
the purpose of "correcting the accounts."  In its opinion, the 
district court explained what this entails:  "In general terms, 
[the second phase] will involve the government bringing 
forward its proof on IIM trust balances and then plaintiffs 
making exceptions to that proof."  Cobell V, 91 F. Supp. 2d at 
31.  The district court also identified "significant legal issues" 
to be resolved in the second phase, such as whether relevant 
statutes of limitations preclude some of plaintiffs' claims, the 
use of statistical sampling, and the precise scope of the 
certified class.  Id. at 31 n.22.  Presumably, the district court 
plans to wait until a proper accounting can be performed, at 
which point it will assess appellants' compliance with their 
fiduciary obligations.

     Although appellants object to the second phase of the trial, 
they do so largely on the grounds that IIM beneficiaries have 
no judicially enforceable right to an accounting at all--a claim 
with which we dispose above.  Until the district court has 
undertaken the second phase of the trial, and specific objec-
tions to its actions or jurisdiction are brought, it is premature 
for this court to rule on the precise scope of the district 
court's planned proceedings.  Nonetheless, we expect the 
district court to be mindful of the limits of its jurisdiction.  It 
remains to be seen whether in preparing to do an accounting 
the Department takes steps so defective that they would 
necessarily delay rather than accelerate the ultimate provi-
sion of an adequate accounting, and the detection of such 
steps would fit within the court's jurisdiction to monitor the 
Department's remedying of the delay;  beyond that, supervi-
sion of the Department's conduct in preparing an accounting 
may well be beyond the district court's jurisdiction.  Again, 
however, until these proceedings have begun, and specific 

objections are brought, these are questions we cannot ad-
dress.

                          IV. Conclusion

     The Interior Department has failed to discharge the fidu-
ciary duties it owes to IIM beneficiaries for decades.  Despite 
passage of the 1994 Act, the Department is still unable to 
execute the most fundamental of trust duties--an accurate 
accounting.  While the district court may have mischaracter-
ized some of the government's specific obligations, its broader 
conclusion that government officials breached their obli-
gations to IIM beneficiaries is in accordance with the law and 
well-supported by the evidentiary record.  Therefore, we 
affirm the order of the district court and remand the case to 
that court for further proceedings.

                                                                   