                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 14, 2000      Decided April 28, 2000 

                           No. 96-1459

                   MCI WorldCom, Inc., et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

           Competitive Telecommunications Association, 
                              et al., Intervenors

                        Consolidated with
               96-1477, 97-1009, 97-1676, 98-1003, 
                    98-1007, 99-1240, 99-1242

                    On Petitions for Review of Orders of the Federal 
                         Communications Commission.

     Donald B. Verrilli, Jr. argued the cause for petitioners and 
supporting intervenors.  With him on the briefs were Thomas 

F. O'Neil III, Matthew B. Pachman, Jodie L. Kelley, Mark 
C. Rosenblum, Roy E. Hoffinger, David W. Carpenter, Peter 
D. Keisler, Paul J. Zidlicky, Robert M. McDowell, Leon M. 
Kestenbaum, Michael B. Fingerhut, James M. Smith, Mi-
chael J. Shortley, III, Gail L. Polivy, Charles C. Hunter, and 
Catherine M. Hannan.  Jay C. Keithley, David J. Gudino, 
Dana Frix, Genevieve Morelli, and Richard S. Whitt entered 
appearances.

     John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, argued the cause for respon-
dents. With him on the brief were Joel I. Klein, Assistant 
Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, Catherine G. 
O'Sullivan and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys, Christopher J. 
Wright, General Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-
sion, Susan L. Launer, Deputy Associate General Counsel, 
and Laurence N. Bourne, Counsel.  Richard K. Welch, Coun-
sel, entered an appearance.

     Henry D. Levine, Ellen G. Block, and James S. Blaszak 
appeared on the brief for intervenors in support of respon-
dents.

     Before:  Silberman, Randolph, and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Silberman, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners, the large long-
distance telecommunications carriers, seek review of an FCC 
order prohibiting them from filing tariffs with the Commis-
sion.  We reject their petition.

                                I.

     Commission efforts to move to a nontariff environment for 
interexchange carriers--insofar as those carriers do not exer-
cise market power--have not had an easy time with this court 
and the Supreme Court.  For over six decades a tariff regime 
was mandated by the Communications Act of 1934, which 
requires the FCC to review telecommunications carriers' 
tariffs to ensure their reasonableness.  See 47 U.S.C. ss 201-

202.  The Act requires carriers to file their tariffs with the 
FCC, see 47 U.S.C. s 203(a), and they are prohibited from 
charging consumers except as provided in the tariffs. See 47 
U.S.C. s 203(c) (establishing what is popularly known as the 
"filed-rate doctrine").  Starting in the early 1980s, the Com-
mission tried to prohibit tariff-filing by nondominant carri-
ers--in essence, those other than AT&T--but that effort was 
successfully challenged in this court in MCI Telecommunica-
tions Corp. v. FCC, 765 F.2d 1186 (D.C. Cir. 1985), where we 
struck down "mandatory detariffing" as inconsistent with the 
1934 Act.

     There remained some confusion as to whether the FCC's 
surviving "permissive detariffing" policy for nondominant car-
riers--allowing those carriers to choose whether to file tar-
iffs--was premised on an agency nonenforcement position, 
subject to only very limited judicial review, or whether it 
constituted a substantive regulatory framework.  AT&T, by 
filing a complaint against MCI with the Commission over 
MCI's non-filing (as it had a right to do under section 208 of 
the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. s 208(a)), put the cat 
among the canaries and forced the Commission, by defending 
MCI, to embrace the substantive position which we had 
rejected.  The result was more Commission reversals, see 
American Tel. & Tel. Co. v. FCC, 978 F.2d 727 (D.C. Cir. 
1992); American Tel. & Tel. Co. v. FCC, 1993 WL 260778 
(D.C. Cir. 1993), this time affirmed by the Supreme Court.  
See MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. American Tel. & Tel. 
Co., 512 U.S. 218 (1994).  The upshot of all of this was that 
the Commission simply could not suspend (permissively or 
mandatorily) the tariff-filing obligations for interexchange 
carriers, whether they had market power or not.

     The landscape changed, however, when Congress passed 
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which requires the FCC 
to

     forbear from applying any regulation or any provision of 
     this chapter to a telecommunications carrier or telecom-
     munications service, or class of telecommunications carri-
     ers or telecommunications services, in any or some of its 
     
     or their geographic markets, if the Commission deter-
     mines that--
     
     (1) enforcement of such regulation or provision is not 
     necessary to ensure that the charges, practices, classifi-
     cations, or regulations by, for, or in connection with that 
     telecommunications carrier or telecommunications ser-
     vice are just and reasonable and are not unjustly or 
     unreasonably discriminatory;
     
     (2) enforcement of such regulation or provision is not 
     necessary for the protection of consumers;  and
     
     (3) forbearance from applying such provision or regula-
     tion is consistent with the public interest.
     
47 U.S.C. s 160(a).1

     Armed with this new statutory authority, the FCC moved 
once more to detariff the interstate, domestic, interexchange 
services of nondominant carriers--now all of the interex-
change companies.  In a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 11 
F.C.C. R. 7141 (1996), the Commission tentatively concluded 
that the 1996 Act required it to "forbear from applying" the 
tariffing requirement to nondominant carriers, and that per-
mitting carriers to file tariffs at all would not be in the public 
interest.  It thus announced its intention to implement man-
datory detariffing by "forbearing from applying" s 203(a) of 
the 1934 Act.  Following a comment period the FCC con-
firmed that enforcement of the tariffing provision is neither 
necessary to ensure just and reasonable, nondiscriminatory 
rates, nor necessary for the protection of consumers, and 
ordered mandatory detariffing.  See Second Report and Or-
der, 11 F.C.C.R. 20730, 20742-47, 20750-53 (1996).

     In their comments, petitioners did not dispute the Commis-
sion's tentative conclusion that tariffing was no longer neces-

__________
     1 The 1996 Act was passed in the expectation that telecommunica-
tions carriers would actively seek detariffing.  See 47 U.S.C. 
s 160(c) ("Any telecommunications carrier, or class of telecommuni-
cations carrier, may submit a petition to the Commission requesting 
that the Commission exercise the authority granted under this 
section with respect to that carrier or those carriers....").

sary, but argued that the Commission's intention to order 
mandatory detariffing--rather than permissive detariffing--
both exceeded the Commission's statutory authority and was 
unreasonable.  They claimed that under the 1996 Act the 
FCC may forbear from enforcing s 203, but cannot actually 
forbid the filing of tariffs.  Petitioners also complained that 
detariffing would lead to their customer relationships being 
governed by state contract laws, which, in some cases, might 
require the execution of a new contract whenever the carrier 
would want to change its rates.  According to petitioners, the 
necessity of mailing new contracts to customers would in-
crease their transaction costs resulting in higher prices for 
consumers, make casual-calling options more difficult, and 
hinder their ability to respond quickly to competitors' price 
changes.  See id. at 20755-56.2  If tariffs were permitted, 
petitioners claimed, they could still negotiate individual con-
tracts with large customers, but also file tariffs for millions of 
mass-market consumers, the optimal result for both groups.  
In response to objections by consumer groups that carriers 
might negotiate contracts with individual customers and then 
rely on the filed-rate doctrine to collect higher tariff rates, 
petitioners argued that courts would not apply the doctrine 
because permissive detariffing would gut its rationale:  the 
filed rate would no longer be the only lawful rate.  See id. at 
20757.

     The Commission rejected petitioners' statutory and prac-
tical arguments.  The FCC concluded that outside the filing 
requirement of s 203(a) there was no provision granting 
carriers a right to file tariffs, so its forbearance authority 
under the 1999 Act inherently contemplated mandatory detar-
iffing.  It found petitioners' proposed distinction between 
large and small customers immaterial, because the competi-
tive benefits of detariffing would be felt by both.  The 
Commission was also concerned that courts might not inter-
pret the interplay of permissive detariffing and the filed-rate 
doctrine quite as petitioners suggested, and that carriers 

__________
     2 Casual calling refers to collect calls, credit-card calls, or dial-
around calling.

would use the continued existence of the filed-rate doctrine to 
refuse to negotiate individualized contracts with customers.  
The risk that tariffs might serve to facilitate price fixing was 
also a factor cited by the Commission in its order, but in 
response to two petitions for reconsideration the Commission 
abandoned this rationale.  See id. at 20760, 20765-67, 20772;  
Order on Reconsideration, In re Policy and Rules Concern-
ing the Interstate, Interexchange Marketplace, 12 F.C.C.R. 
15014 (1997);  Second Order on Reconsideration and Erra-
tum, In re Policy and Rules Concerning the Interstate, 
Interexchange Marketplace, 14 F.C.C.R. 6004 (1999).

     Petitioners challenge both the order and the reconsidera-
tion orders, and raise before us the same concerns presented 
to the Commission.  They argue that the mandatory detariff-
ing order is ultra vires because the FCC lacks statutory 
authority to forbid the filing of tariffs.  Petitioners claim 
alternatively that the order is arbitrary and capricious be-
cause the Commission's preference for mandatory detariffing 
over permissive detariffing is not supported by facts or logic, 
the Commission failed to respond to a third alternative ad-
vanced by AT&T, and the Commission based its decision in 
part on a misunderstanding of the filed-rate doctrine.

                               II.

     We begin with petitioners' argument that the 1996 Act does 
not give the FCC authority to implement mandatory detariff-
ing--it cannot forbid the filing of tariffs.  The Act states that 
the FCC "shall forbear from applying any regulation or any 
provision of this chapter ... if the Commission determines 
that (1) enforcement ... is not necessary [to ensure rates are 
just, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory], (2) enforcement ... 
is not necessary for the protection of consumers, and (3) 
forbearance from applying such provision or regulation is 
consistent with the public interest."  47 U.S.C. s 160(a) (em-
phasis added).  Petitioners urge that under the plain lan-
guage of the statute the Commission is empowered merely to 
exercise its discretion not to enforce a provision under such 
circumstances.  In other words, to forbear is to "refrain from 

action," see Pet. Br. at 17 (citing, e.g., Black's Law Dictionary 
329 (5th ed. 1983));  nonenforcement is therefore forbearance, 
but barring the doors of the FCC to lawyers bearing tariff 
filings and throwing out extant tariffs, both affirmative acts, 
are not.

     Petitioners offer in support of their interpretation our 
opinion in American Telephone & Telegraph, where we stated 
that the FCC "went beyond mere forbearance ... by making 
detariffing mandatory and by telling non-dominant carriers 
that it would no longer even accept their rate filings...."  
978 F.2d at 729-30.  But we ourselves have used the word 
forbear in two different ways.  In MCI Telecommunications, 
we said "forbearance was made mandatory" and the Commis-
sion "changed the permissive forbearance arrangement into a 
mandatory one."  765 F.2d at 1191 n.4, 1189.  So it is hardly 
open to us to deny the ambiguity which accompanies the 
statutory use of that term--particularly when Congress acted 
against a backdrop of our decisions.  Moreover, the crucial 
phrase in the statute is not "forbear from enforcing" but 
rather "forbear from applying," which suggests a broader 
authority.  As the Commission correctly points out no provi-
sion of the Communications Act except s 203(a) requires 
tariffing, and no provision gives a carrier a positive right to 
file a tariff, so if it forbears from applying s 203(a) the 
Commission's staff is not obliged to accept filings.  We there-
fore think that the Commission's interpretation of the Act is 
entitled to Chevron deference.  See Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. 
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 
(1984).3

     Petitioners alternatively claim that the Commission's order 
is arbitrary and capricious, and, to use the Act's terminology, 
against the "public interest" because its stated objectives 
easily can be met by adopting a permissive-detariffing re-
gime, and therefore the extra transaction costs imposed on 
the carriers--and passed through to consumers--are unnec-

__________
     3 Petitioners seem to argue that the delegation of the authority to 
"forbear" implicitly precludes authority to forbid but that is even 
more of a stretch.

essary.  The major thrust of petitioners' arguments is that 
the Commission inadequately responded to their comments, 
and therefore the case should be remanded to the FCC so as 
to require the agency to do so.  (It is worth noting that we 
have stayed the Commission's order so the status quo favors 
the petitioners for so long as they can maintain it.)

     The Commission, as we have mentioned, wishes to disen-
tangle the interexchange carriers' prices from the filed-rate 
doctrine.  The Commission has long been concerned that the 
necessity of filing tariffs hinders competitive responsiveness. 
And, according to consumer representatives' comments pre-
sented to the FCC, the filed-rate doctrine has been used by 
the carriers as a shield to avoid individual contract negotia-
tions with large and small users, thereby reducing competi-
tion among carriers.  Petitioners argue that streamlined tar-
iff procedures already adopted by the FCC, see Tariff Filings 
Requirements for Nondominant Common Carriers, 8 
F.C.C.R. 6752 (1993), and carriers' ability to file tariffs for 
individual consumers have obviated those concerns.  But the 
Commission reasonably disagreed, in part relying on the 
consumers' reported experience under those procedures, and 
in part because it was wary that the filed-rate doctrine might 
be interpreted by state and federal courts to interfere with 
free-market behavior.  See Second Report and Order, 11 
F.C.C.R. at 20760-61;  20766-67.

     Perhaps the most interesting argument in the case relates 
to an AT&T ex parte letter (suitably filed) sent after the 
comment period ended.  In a rather downplayed alternative 
argument AT&T suggested in a single paragraph that if the 
Commission's interpretation of forbearance was legitimate 
(which of course AT&T denied) the Commission could elimi-
nate certain problems with tariffs--and thereby move to only 
permissive detariffing--if it would forbear from enforcing--or 
even forbid the application of--the filed-rate doctrine, 47 
U.S.C. s 203(c).  The Commission did not respond to this 
rather subtle suggestion and petitioners contend that that 
failure alone requires a remand.  The FCC argues that 
AT&T's comment was only a throwaway, inconsistent with 
petitioners' primary argument that mandatory forbearance is 

ultra vires, and not even part of its formal comment, so we 
should not regard the issue as properly presented to the 
Commission under 47 U.S.C. s 405(a).  If that were so, we 
would not have jurisdiction to consider the point.  We do not 
think that is quite correct, although it is a close question.

     Petitioners note that the Commission's order refers to 
several ex parte filings received after the filing in issue here.  
See Second Report and Order, 11 F.C.C.R. at 20781-82 nn. 
253 & 254.  AT&T's filing was not long, and the relevant 
paragraph concluded a discussion on one of the key issues of 
the proceeding:  whether the filed-rate doctrine would be an 
impediment to permissive detariffing.  The paragraph--even 
though presented as an alternative argument--does suggest 
that forbearance from s 203(c) would eliminate the possibility 
of carriers' invoking the filed-rate doctrine.  Therefore, we 
think the argument was presented--if barely--to the Com-
mission.

     Still, it is one thing to preserve a point for judicial review 
and quite another to raise the issue with sufficient force to 
require an agency to formally respond.  An agency is not 
obliged to respond to every comment, only those that can be 
thought to challenge a fundamental premise.  See Grand 
Canyon Air Tour Coalition v. FAA, 154 F.3d 455, 468 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998) ("An agency must ... demonstrate the rationality 
of its decisionmaking process by responding to those com-
ments that are relevant and significant.") (emphasis added).  
In this case, AT&T's late ex parte alternative comment does 
not seem to us to be forceful enough to have obliged the 
Commission to squarely confront it.  Certainly the Commis-
sion made clear its concern that if tariffs were permitted it 
could not foresee how the judiciary (in this case, probably 
state courts) would treat the filed-rate doctrine.  It seems 
obvious to us that the Commission would not have wished to 
risk the doctrine's continued employment even had AT&T's 
device been tried.4

__________
     4 Since the filed-rate doctrine is applied by courts, even if it has 
its genesis in the 1934 Act, the Commission's concern about the 

     Moreover, as we read the Commission's decision the es-
sence of its reasoning was a desire to put the interexchange 
carriers under the same market conditions as apply to any 
other nonregulated provider of services in our economy.  The 
Commission concluded that "a regime without nondominant 
interexchange carrier tariffs for interstate, domestic, interex-
change service is the most pro-competitive, deregulatory sys-
tem."  Second Report and Order, 11 F.C.C.R. at 20760.  It 
thought the public interest would best be served by "estab-
lishing market conditions that more closely resemble an 
unregulated environment."  See id.  It noted that the "par-
ties that oppose complete detariffing have not shown that the 
business of providing interstate, domestic, interexchange ser-
vices offered by nondominant interexchange carriers should 
be subject to a regulatory regime that is not available to 
firms that compete in any other market in this country."  Id. 
at 20763.  And, importantly, the Commission found that 
permitting carriers to file tariffs on a voluntary basis would 
undermine the competition-enhancing effect of detariffing.  
See id. at 20760.5  Under such circumstances, remand is not 
necessary for the agency to consider the proposed alternative.  
See Center for Science in the Public Interest v. Department 
of the Treasury, 797 F.2d 995, 1004 (D.C. Cir. 1986).

     Tariff filing, in other words, in the Commission's view is an 
undesirable deviation from the market--at least where there 
are no market imperfections.  Petitioners contend that the 
Commission could not foreclose a permissive detariffing with-
out more justification than simply a desire to embrace the 
free market.  We think, however, the Commission was enti-
tled to value the free market, the benefits of which are rather 
well established.  Indeed, the 1996 Act provides that "[i]f the 
Commission determines that ... forbearance will promote 

__________
filed-rate doctrine is not unreasonable and is certainly not, as 
petitioners claim, legally erroneous.

     5 The agency rejected an alternative similar to AT&T's without 
even referring to the danger of judicial mishandling of the filed-rate 
doctrine;  the focus was squarely on competition.  See id. at 20766-
67.

competition ... that determination may be the basis for a ... 
finding that forbearance is in the public interest."  47 U.S.C. 
s 160(b).  It was certainly reasonable to move regulation in 
that direction even if it ostensibly raises transaction costs for 
the carriers.6

                            *  *  *  *

     The petition for review is denied.

                                                        So ordered.

__________
     6 The Commission did not, as petitioners contend, ignore the 
probability of increased transaction costs.  It simply found them 
insignificant compared to the competitive benefits of detariffing.  
See Second Report and Order, 11 F.C.C.R. at 20764.

              