                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 14, 1999   Decided January 21, 2000 

                           No. 98-1534

                         Billy Proffitt 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

             Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
              Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

     Frank J. Eisenhart argued the cause for the petitioner.  
Arthur W. Leibold, Jr. entered an appearance.

     Jack D. Smith, Deputy General Counsel, Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, argued the cause for the respondent.  
Christopher J. Bellotto and Lawrence H. Richmond, Counsel, 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, were on brief.

     Robert B. Serino, L. Robert Griffin and Douglas B. Jordan, 
Counsel, United States Department of Treasury, were on 
brief for amicus curiae.

     Before:  Silberman, Ginsburg and Henderson, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Dissenting Opinion filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  In 1998 the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) removed Bil-
ly Proffitt as director of Tennessee State Bank of Gatlinburg, 
Tennessee (Bank) and prohibited him from further partic-
ipation in the banking industry.  The FDIC acted pursuant to 
its removal authority under section 8(e), 12 U.S.C. s 1818(e), 
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act), 12 U.S.C. 
ss 1811 et seq. It ruled that 28 U.S.C. s 2462, which imposes 
a five-year statute of limitations on "an action ... for the 
enforcement of any ... penalty," does not limit a section 8(e) 
removal and prohibition action because the sanction is reme-
dial, not punitive.  Relying on Johnson v. SEC, 87 F.3d 484, 
488 (D.C. Cir. 1996), which defined "penalty" as used in 
section 2462 as any "punishment imposed by the government 
for unlawful or proscribed conduct, going beyond compensa-
tion of the wronged party," we conclude that the FDIC's 
section 8(e) removal action imposes a penalty and therefore 
triggers the five-year statute of limitations.  We also conclude 
that the limitations period can be triggered separately under 
section 8(e)'s alternative "effects" language and therefore the 
FDIC's action was timely because it was brought within five 
years of when the Bank "suffered financial loss."  12 U.S.C. 
s 1818(e)(1)(B)(i).  Finally, because the FDIC's section 8(e) 
removal and prohibition order imposes a penalty, due process 
does not require the FDIC to consider Proffitt's current 
competence or risk to the public vel non.  Accordingly, we 
deny Proffitt's petition for review.

                                I.

     Proffitt was the majority shareholder of Tennessee State 
Bancshares, Inc., a holding company which, in turn, is the 

majority shareholder of the Bank.  Proffitt, a co-founder of 
the Bank, served as its director from the date it was char-
tered in 1971 until the FDIC removed him in 1998.  In July 
1989 Charles and Nancy Boling, customers of the Bank who 
were in the motel business in Gatlinburg at the time, ap-
proached Bank president Tommy Bush to discuss a loan to 
purchase the Glenstone Lodge (Lodge), a hotel which was 
then in bankruptcy.  The Bolings requested complete confi-
dentiality about the loan and all information they furnished to 
the Bank.  See Findings of Fact, Chancery Court for Sevier 
County, TN 3 (Feb. 17, 1992).  They specifically expressed 
concern that some members of the Bank's board of directors 
(Board) who were also in the motel business might be inter-
ested in bidding on the Lodge.  See id. Bush promised the 
Bolings that no director who had an interest in purchasing 
the Lodge would see any of the information they provided or 
participate in the consideration of their application for a loan.  
See id. at 3-4.  A few days after their initial meeting, Bush 
informed the Bolings that he had checked with the Board and 
no member was interested in buying the Lodge.  The Bolings 
then applied for a $4.5 million loan and provided the Bank 
with financial information, including their personal financial 
statements and detailed projections of income and expenses 
for operation of the Lodge.  See id. at 4.  The Bank Board 
authorized Bush to investigate whether additional financing 
could be obtained from other lenders since the requested loan 
amount exceeded the Bank's $1.5 million loan-to-one-borrower 
limit.  These efforts failed and, after several months, Bush 
stopped looking for additional loan funds, although the Bol-
ings remained interested in buying the Lodge.  See Adminis-
trative Law Judge's (ALJ) Recommended Decision 14 (Feb. 
12, 1998).

     In December 1989, unknown to the Bolings, Proffitt joined 
the Foley Group, a group of investors interested in acquiring 
the Lodge.  At the time, Proffitt advised Bush only that he 
was considering joining the Foley Group.  In early 1990 
Proffitt participated with the Foley Group in submitting 
several unsuccessful offers to purchase the Lodge from the 
bankruptcy trustee.  At least one other member of the Bank 

Board was at that time aware of Proffitt's participation in the 
Foley Group.  See Proffitt's Statement of Disputed and Omit-
ted Facts 4 (Aug. 4, 1997).

     Meanwhile, in January 1990 the Bolings submitted a re-
vised loan request to the Bank.  Bush considered the Bolings' 
request a new package because they requested only a $4 
million loan package (with the Bank continuing to provide 
$1.5 million) and offered different primary collateral.  On 
March 7, 1990 the Bank Board, including Proffitt, met to 
formally consider the Bolings' loan request.  Bush asked any 
Board member who was interested in purchasing the Lodge 
to leave the room.  Proffitt failed to leave the room or 
disclose his conflicting interest in the Foley Group.  Bush 
then distributed the Bolings' confidential information to each 
Board member.  The Bank Board, including Proffitt, unani-
mously approved the Bolings' loan package.  On March 12, 
1990 the Bank issued a written loan commitment to the 
Bolings in the amount of $1.5 million.

     The foreclosure sale of the Lodge was scheduled to be held 
on March 30, 1990.  On March 27, 1990 Charles Boling went 
to Bush's office and advised him that a Kentucky bank had 
informally approved a participating loan for the additional 
amount needed.  Proffitt, who was in Bush's office at the 
time, listened to the discussion between Boling and Bush, 
including Boling's strategy for bidding at the auction.  See 
FDIC's Decision and Order 4 (Oct. 6, 1998).  Because the 
Lodge was subject to a $100,000 tax lien, Boling told Bush 
that $3.4 million was their top bid.  After Boling left Bush's 
office, Proffitt informed Bush of his Foley Group connection.  
Bush told Proffitt to inform the Bolings of his conflict but he 
did not do so.  On March 30, 1990 the foreclosure sale of the 
Lodge took place.  The first mortgagee, the Foley Group and 
the Bolings were the only bidders.  The Bolings bid their 
maximum of $3.4 million.  The Foley Group then bid $3.405 
million and acquired the Lodge.

     That night the Bolings learned for the first time that 
Proffitt belonged to the Foley Group.  In July 1990 they filed 
a lawsuit against the Bank, Proffitt and Bush, alleging inter 
alia breach of fiduciary duty and fraud.  In February 1992 

the state trial court entered judgment against Proffitt and the 
Bank.  In August 1993 the Tennessee Court of Appeals 
reversed the trial court's judgment, concluding that Proffitt's 
fraud had not caused the Bolings any damage.1  See Boling v. 
Tennessee State Bank, 1993 WL 305824 (Tenn. Ct. App. Aug. 
11, 1993).  In November 1994 the Tennessee Supreme Court 
reversed the intermediate appellate court's decision, see Bol-
ing v. Tennessee State Bank, 890 S.W.2d 32 (Tenn.1994), and 
reinstated the judgment against Proffitt for fraud because he 
willfully violated his fiduciary duties.  The court reduced the 
compensatory damages award to $14,825 (representing the 
Bolings' costs of bid preparation) against the Bank and 
Proffitt jointly and upheld the $250,000 punitive damages 
award against the Bank and the punitive damages award in 
the same amount against Proffitt.

     On December 18, 1996, more than six years after Proffitt's 
actions, the FDIC issued a Notice of Intention to Remove 
from Office and to Prohibit from Further Participation (Re-
moval and Prohibition Notice), charging Proffitt with "viola-
tions of law, unsafe or unsound banking practices, and/or ... 
breaches of fiduciary duty."  Removal and Prohibition Notice 
1 (Dec. 18, 1996).  In response to Proffitt's motion for sum-
mary disposition, the ALJ found that Proffitt had violated 
section 8(e)2 and recommended that Proffitt be removed from 

__________
     1 Because the court determined that Proffitt had not damaged the 
Bolings, it also concluded that the Bank was not liable.

     2 Section 8(e) authorizes the FDIC to remove a "party from office 
or to prohibit any further participation ... in the conduct of the 
affairs of any insured depository institution"

     (1) [w]henever [it] determines that--

          (A) any institution-affiliated party has, directly or indirect-
         ly--
     
                (i) violated
     
                    (I) any law or regulation;
     
                ....
     
membership on the Bank Board and prohibited from further 
participation in the banking business.  See ALJ's Proposed 
Order 19-20 (Feb. 12, 1998).  The ALJ rejected Proffitt's 
assertion that the FDIC's removal and prohibition action was 
barred by the five-year statute of limitations prescribed in 28 
U.S.C. s 2462 (section 2462).3  The ALJ found section 2462 
inapplicable because it conflicts with the six-year limitations 
period imposed by 12 U.S.C. s 1818(i)(3).4  See ALJ's Recom-
__________
     (B) by reason of the violation, practice, or breach described 
       in any clause of subparagraph (A)--
     
          (i) such insured depository institution or business insti-
     tution has suffered or will probably suffer financial loss or 
     other damage;
          (ii) the interests of the insured depository institution's 
     depositors have been or could be prejudiced;  or
          (iii) such party has received financial gain or other 
     benefit by reason of such violation, practice, or breach;  
     and

     (C) such violation, practice, or breach-
     
          (i) involves personal dishonesty on the part of such 
         party;....
12 U.S.C. s 1818(e).

     3  28 U.S.C. s 2462 provides:
     Except as otherwise provided by Act of Congress, an action, 
     suit or proceeding for the enforcement of any civil fine, penalty, 
     or forfeiture, pecuniary or otherwise, shall not be entertained 
     unless commenced within five years from the date when the 
     claim first accrued if, within the same period, the offender or 
     the property is found within the United States in order that 
     proper service may be made thereon.
     
     4 12 U.S.C. s 1818(i)(3) provides:

     The resignation, termination of employment or participation, or 
     separation of an institution-affiliation party (including a separa-
     tion caused by the closing of an insured depository institution) 
     shall not affect the jurisdiction and authority of the appropriate 
     Federal banking agency to issue any notice and proceed under 
     this section against any such party, if such notice is served 
     before the end of the 6-year period beginning on the date such 

mended Decision 2 (Feb. 12, 1998).  On October 6, 1998 the 
FDIC affirmed the ALJ's removal and prohibition decision 
but determined that section 2462 was inapplicable for a 
different reason, namely, that a "removal and prohibition 
action is intrinsically remedial ... and can be brought 'when-
ever' the statutory conditions are satisfied."  FDIC's Decision 
and Order 16 (Oct. 6, 1998).  The removal order went into 
effect on November 5, 1998.  Proffitt petitions this court for 
review.

                               II.

     Our standard of review comes from the Administrative 
Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(E).  "Applying the 
standards set forth in the Administrative Procedure Act ... 
we will set aside the [FDIC's] factual findings only if unsup-
ported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole, 5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(E) (1994);  we will set aside the [FDIC's] 
legal conclusions only if 'arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law,' id. 
s 706(2)(A)." Pharaon v. Board of Governors of Fed. Reserve 
Sys., 135 F.3d 148, 152 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  see also 12 U.S.C. 
s 1818(h) (2) (APA applies to section 8(e) proceeding).  When 
a statute is administered by more than one agency, a particu-
lar agency's interpretation is not entitled to Chevron defer-
ence.  See Bowen v. American Hosp. Ass'n, 476 U.S. 610, 643 
n.30 (1986) (because multiple agencies promulgated rules 
under statute, "there is thus not the same basis for deference 
predicated on expertise as we found" in Chevron);  Salleh v. 
Christopher, 85 F.3d 689, 692 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (no Chevron 
deference applied to agency's interpretation of statute it 
administers "when more than one agency is granted authority 
to interpret the same statute").  "Because s 2462 is a statute 
of general applicability rather than one whose primary admin-
istration has been delegated to the [FDIC], we interpret it de 
novo."  Johnson, 87 F.3d at 486 (citation omitted).

__________
     party ceased to be such a party with respect to such depository 
     institution.
     
     Proffitt argues that the FDIC's section 8(e) removal and 
prohibition action imposes a penalty and is therefore barred 
by section 2462's five-year statute of limitations because the 
FDIC's claim "first accrued" in 1990 but it failed to take 
action until 1996.  The FDIC responds that section 2462 does 
not apply to a section 8(e) removal and prohibition action 
because the action is remedial.  In the alternative, the FDIC 
argues that it moved against Proffitt within five years of 
when the Bank "suffered financial loss" under section 
8(e)(1)(B)(i).  12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(B)(i).

     A.   Section 8(e) action imposes penalty
          
     In 3M Co. v. Browner, 17 F.3d 1453, 1457 (D.C. Cir. 1994), 
the court held that section 2462 applies to any administrative 
proceeding " 'for the enforcement of' a civil penalty."  In 3M 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) assessed civil 
fines against the 3M company eight years after the company 
was found to have first violated the Toxic Substances Control 
Act.  The court held that section 2462 limited the civil fines 
and penalties to those violations occurring within five years of 
the EPA's action.  More recently, in Johnson v. SEC, 87 F.3d 
484, 491 (D.C. Cir. 1996), we defined a section 2462 penalty as 
a sanction used to punish an individual "for unlawful or 
proscribed conduct, going beyond compensation of the 
wronged party."5  There we concluded that the Securities and 

__________
     5 The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) as amicus 
urges the court to reconsider 3M and Johnson in light of the 
Supreme Court's holding in Hudson v. United States, 522 U.S. 93 
(1997).  In Hudson the Court overturned its decision in United 
States v. Halper, 490 U.S. 435 (1989), holding that the double 
jeopardy clause applies only to criminal cases.  3M, however, does 
not employ Halper's reasoning.  Furthermore, in Johnson we ex-
plicitly rejected the argument that section 2462's penalty test is the 
double jeopardy punishment test, noting that the test for punish-
ment "in various constitutional contexts" does "not control the 
question of whether license suspension is a penalty for purposes of 
s 2462."  Johnson, 87 F.3d at 491.

 Nevertheless, the FDIC argues that three other Supreme Court 
cases equate the double jeopardy punishment test and the section 

Exchange Commission's six-month license suspension of 
Johnson, a stock broker, imposed a penalty within section 
2462 because the suspension went "beyond compensation of 
the wronged party" and because the SEC had not focused on 
Johnson's current competence or risk to the public.  Id.  The 
FDIC distinguishes Johnson, contending that its expulsion of 
Proffitt is remedial because it is a permanent suspension 
designed to protect the public, unlike the SEC's temporary 
suspension of Johnson.  Nevertheless, as Johnson noted, "[i]t 
is clearly possible for a sanction to be 'remedial' in the sense 
that its purpose is to protect the public, yet not be 'remedial' 
because it imposes a punishment going beyond the harm 
inflicted by the defendant."  Id. at 491 n.11 (citing In re 
Ruffalo, 390 U.S. 594, 550 (1968)).  Although the FDIC's 
expulsion of Proffitt from the banking industry had the dual 
effect of protecting the public from a dishonest banker and 
punishing Proffitt for his misconduct, its punitive purpose 
plainly goes "beyond compensation of the wronged party."  
Id. at 488.

__________
2462 penalty test.  See Rex Trailer Co. v. United States, 350 U.S. 
148, 149 n.2 (1956);  United States v. Hougham, 364 U.S. 310, 313 
(1960) (following Rex Trailer);  Koller v. United States, 359 U.S. 309 
(1959) (per curiam decision following Rex Trailer).  In Rex Trailer 
the company was criminally fined for fraudulently purchasing motor 
vehicles.  The United States then sued the company civilly for the 
same actions.  The company challenged the civil penalties as viola-
tive of the double jeopardy clause.  The lower court held that the 
monetary relief sought was civil in nature and therefore did not 
violate the double jeopardy clause.  The Supreme Court granted 
certiorari to resolve a circuit conflict over whether the civil sanction 
(monetary relief) also constituted a penalty under section 2462.  
The Court held that the monetary sanction was "civil in nature" and 
therefore not barred by the double jeopardy clause but the Court 
did not expressly address section 2462.  Rex Trailer, 350 U.S. at 
151.  The FDIC argues that the Court thus equated the double 
jeopardy punishment and section 2462's tests.  We disagree.  Al-
though in Rex Trailer the Supreme Court may have implicitly 
recognized a connection between the double jeopardy punishment 
test and the section 2462 penalty test, the Court did not indicate 
that the two tests are identical.

     That the expulsion sanction is punitive is further manifest-
ed by the fact that the FDIC did not act for more than six 
years after Proffitt's misdeeds.  See id. at 490 n.9 ("If the 
[agency] really viewed [the defendant] as a clear and present 
danger to the public, it is inexplicable why it waited more 
than five years to begin the proceedings to suspend her.") 
(emphasis in original).  The FDIC could have taken action as 
early as 1990 under the "will probably suffer" language of 
section 8(e)(1)(B)(i) or perhaps under section 8(e)(1)(B)(ii), 
asserting "the interests of the insured depository institution's 
depositors ... could be prejudiced."  The FDIC admits that 
it monitored the Bolings' lawsuit after it was filed in July 
1990 and was aware of Proffitt's actions at that time through 
newspaper reports.  See FDIC's Opp. Br. to Summary Dispo-
sition 1-2 (Aug. 1, 1997).  The FDIC might have determined 
in 1990 that, because of Proffitt's actions, the Bank "probably 
will suffer financial loss" as a result of an adverse verdict or 
settlement or at least that Proffitt "received financial gain or 
other benefit."  12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(B)(iii).  If in fact 
Proffitt posed the threat to the public that the FDIC por-
trays, it presumably would have removed him sooner rather 
than later.  Instead, it held off for six years with Proffitt 
participating in the Bank's business all the while.

     The FDIC's position is further undermined by the focus of 
its proceeding.  In Johnson, we noted that a "sanction would 
less resemble punishment if the [agency] had focused on 
Johnson's current competence or the degree of risk she posed 
to the public."  Id. at 489.  The FDIC, however, based its 
action solely on Proffitt's long past conduct and made no 
attempt to evaluate his present fitness or competence.  It 
counters that Proffitt had ample opportunity to present any 
information he desired regarding his current competence but 
failed to do so.  The FDIC's argument might carry more 
weight if it had given Proffitt notice that his current compe-
tence and/or risk was at issue.  Instead, its notice focused 
solely on Proffitt's prior conduct.6  See Removal and Prohibi-

__________
     6 Moreover, if, as the FDIC maintains, Proffitt's current compe-
tence was in fact at issue, he was entitled to fair notice and an 

tion Notice 10-11 p p 32-37.  While a serious offense, even 
long past, may indicate Proffitt's current risk to the public, 
that offense cannot alone determine his fitness almost a 
decade later.  See 3M, 17 F.3d at 1457 ("In a country where 
not even treason can be prosecuted, after a lapse of three 
years, it could scarcely be supposed that an individual would 
remain for ever liable to a pecuniary forfeiture.") (quoting 
Adams v. Woods, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 336, 341 (1805) (Marshall, 
C.J.)).

     Finally, the FDIC argues that the six-year limitations 
period imposed by section 1818(i)(3), see supra n.4, indicates 
that the Congress did not intend section 2462's five-year 
period to apply to section 8(e) proceedings.  Section 2462 
limits any "action, suit or proceeding for the enforcement of 
any ... penalty" but also states "[e]xcept as otherwise pro-
vided by Act of Congress."  Both the ALJ and the FDIC 
concluded that section 1818(i)(3) fits the exception.  We dis-
agree.  In CityFed Fin. Corp. v. OTS, 58 F.3d 738, 743 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995), we held that section 1818(i)(3) was enacted "solely 
to address the effects of ... Stoddard v. Board of Governors, 
868 F.2d 1308 (D.C. Cir. 1989)."  In Stoddard, the court had 
held that banking regulatory agencies lost enforcement juris-
diction over individuals who left the industry.  Then, the 
Congress enacted section 1818(i)(3) as part of the Financial 
Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 
(FIRREA), Pub. L. No. 101-73, 103 Stat. 183, to ensure that, 
so long as the agency acted within six years of his departure, 
a banker could not avoid sanctions by simply severing his ties 
with a financial institution.  Thus, section 1818(i)(3) was not 
intended to preempt section 2462 but instead to clarify the 
jurisdiction of banking regulatory agencies to pursue fleeing 
bankers.  Nor is the application of section 2462 to section 8(e) 
proceedings inconsistent with section 1818(i)(3).  Contrary to 
the FDIC's assertion, application of both section 2462 and 
section 1818(i)(3) to a section 8(e) proceeding does not treat a 
banker who leaves an institution more harshly than one who 

__________
opportunity to be heard.  See Green v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 496 
(1959).  The FDIC failed to provide it.

remains with the institution.  Section 1818(i)(3) limits the 
FDIC's jurisdiction over a former banker to six years after 
he leaves the industry while section 2462 requires that any 
action imposing a civil penalty against any banker, regardless 
whether he has left the industry, must be initiated no later 
than five years from the date the claim "first accrue[s]".

     B.   Section 2462 accrual
          
     Having concluded that section 2462 applies to the FDIC's 
section 8(e) proceeding, we must now determine when the 
five-year limitations period began to run, i.e., when the claim 
accrued.  "A claim normally accrues when the factual and 
legal prerequisites for filing suit are in place."  3M, 17 F.3d 
at 1460 (citations omitted).  A section 8(e) removal and 
prohibition action has three prongs:  misconduct, effect and 
culpability.  See Oberstar v. FDIC, 987 F.2d 494, 500 (8th Cir. 
1993) ("In order to impose [section 8(e)(1)'s] sanction, the 
FDIC must establish each of the three statutory criteria--
'misconduct' under s 1818(e)(1)(A), 'effect' under subpara-
graph (B), and 'culpability' under subparagraph (C).");  see 
also Pharaon, 135 F.3d at 157 (adopting Oberstar's "so-called 
effects prong");  Cousin v. OTS, 73 F.3d 1242, 1247 (2d Cir. 
1996) ("These three sub-sections ... have come to be known 
as the (1) 'misconduct,' (2) 'effect,' and (3) 'culpability' prongs 
of the prohibition test.");  Grubb v. FDIC, 34 F.3d 956, 961 
(10th Cir. 1994);  Seidman v. OTS, 37 F.3d 911, 929 (3d Cir. 
1994).  Because misconduct and effect are separate prongs, 
the underlying conduct may not always immediately effect a 
section 8(e) violation and thus the accrual of the claim.  The 
same misconduct can produce different effects at different 
times, resulting in separate section 8(e) claims and separate 
accruals.  As the court recognized in 3M, the question of 
accrual "becomes complex where considerable time inter-
venes" between the underlying conduct and the harmful 
effect.  3M, 17 F.3d at 1460.

     Section 8(e) expressly gives options to the FDIC.  It 
authorizes action to be taken under any of several circum-

stances.  For example, section 8(e)'s effect prong is satisfied 
when:

          (i) such insured depository institution or business in-
     stitution has suffered or probably will suffer financial 
     loss or other damage;
     
          (ii) the interests of the depository institution's deposi-
     tors have been or could be prejudiced;  or
     
          (iii) such party has received financial gain or other 
     benefit by reason of such violation, practice or 
     breach....  
     
12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(B) (emphasis added).  Plainly, there is 
substantial evidence that Proffitt "violated [the] law" when he 
breached his fiduciary duty by failing to disclose a conflict of 
interest to a Bank customer, 12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(A);  that 
his breach of fiduciary duty caused the Bank to suffer "finan-
cial loss," id. s 1818(e)(1)(B);  and that his breach of fiduciary 
duty at least "involve[d] personal dishonesty."  Id. 
s 1818(e)(1)(C).  Proffitt's challenge does not extend to the 
FDIC's findings that the misconduct and culpability prongs 
were satisfied by Proffitt's 1990 conduct.  See Petitioner's Br. 
30.  Proffitt argues instead that the effect prong was also 
satisfied in 1990, thus barring the FDIC's 1996 action, be-
cause the FDIC plainly could have determined in 1990 that 
the Bank "will probably suffer financial loss" because of 
Proffitt's actions.  The FDIC responds that the effect prong 
did not begin section 8(e)'s accrual until the Tennessee Su-
preme Court rendered its final judgment in the Bolings' 
lawsuit in 1994.  The question, then, is when was the effect 
prong met.7

     Last year in Pharaon, we interpreted section 8(e)(1)'s 
effect prong.  There the defendant argued that section 
8(e)(1)(B) required the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) to 

__________
     7 Because a section 8(e) proceeding can be initiated by more than 
one agency, namely, the FDIC, the OCC, the Federal Reserve 
Board and the Office of Thrift Supervision, see Wachtel v. OTS, 982 
F.2d 581, 585 (D.C. Cir. 1993), we do not extend Chevron deference 
to its interpretation of the statute.  See Bowen, 476 U.S. at 643 
n.30.

demonstrate the exact amount of harm in order to satisfy the 
effect prong.  The court rejected that interpretation because 
"[t]he plain language of the statute provides otherwise."  Id. 
at 157.  "Section 1818(e)(1)(B) allows the FRB to impose an 
order of prohibition not only if the insured institution 'suf-
fered ... financial loss or other damage' ... but also if the 
institution 'will probably suffer financial loss or other dam-
age.' "  Id.  Under Pharaon, then, the effect prong can be 
met by either potential or actual "financial loss or other 
damage."  See also Brickner v. FDIC, 747 F.2d 1198, 1202-03 
(8th Cir. 1984) (Section 1818(e)(1)'s use of " 'willful disregard' 
and 'continuing disregard' present two distinct, alternative 
standards for removal.  The use of the disjunctive 'or' be-
tween the words 'willful' and 'continuing' in the statute re-
veals a clear intent to make either one an offense.").

     Moreover, if we applied one statute of limitations to all of 
the alternative circumstances included in section 8(e)(1)(B), 
we would render the "has suffered" language superfluous.  
Whenever an institution "has suffered" financial loss, an 
action based on the "will probably suffer" language would 
have been available before the financial loss in fact occurred.  
If the statute of limitations began running as to all effects as 
soon as the first effect occurred, the "will probably suffer" 
violation would always trigger the statute's accrual.  Separate 
accrual for each alternative effect gives meaning to all of the 
statutory language.  See Connecticut Dep't of Income Main-
tenance v. Heckler, 471 U.S. 524, 530 n.15 (1985) ("It is a 
familiar principle of statutory construction that courts should 
give effect, if possible, to every word that Congress has used 
in a statute.").

     Finally, Proffitt argues that because the FDIC could have 
brought a section 8(e) removal and prohibition action in 1990, 
it was required to do so under the statute.  The statute, 
however, expressly authorizes the FDIC to take action 
"whenever" it determines that the statutory prongs are satis-
fied.  Section 8(e)'s legislative history, spare as it is, supports 
an expansive view of the enforcement options available to the 
FDIC (and the other banking regulatory agencies).  In 1966, 
when the Congress first gave banking regulators removal 

authority, it allowed them little latitude.  See 112 Cong. Rec. 
20,083 (1966) (quoting Report of Senate Committee on Bank-
ing and Currency);  Anonymous v. FDIC, 619 F. Supp. 866, 
871-72 (D.D.C. 1985) (summarizing section 8(e)'s legislative 
history).  With the enactment of FIRREA, however, the 
Congress attempted to lift some of the restrictions it had 
originally imposed on banking regulators.  Before FIRREA 
the banking regulatory agencies were required to demon-
strate that the "bank has suffered or will probably suffer 
substantial financial loss or other damage or that the inter-
ests of its depositors could be seriously prejudiced."  12 
U.S.C. s 1818(e) (1988).  In FIRREA, the Congress changed 
the language to "such [bank] has suffered or will probably 
suffer financial loss or other damage;  [or] the interests of the 
[bank's] depositors have been or could be prejudiced."  12 
U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(B)(i), (ii).  The Committee Report ex-
plained the legislative purpose in making the change:  "[A]n 
agency [could] proceed with [a] removal or prohibition action 
where warranted, without having to quantify losses to the 
institution or the degree of prejudice to depositors...."  
H.R. Rep. 101-54, at 392, reprinted in 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 188.  
The change was intended to:

     allow an agency to proceed with such an enforcement 
     action whenever the institution has suffered any financial 
     loss and has been harmed.  The higher threshold found 
     in current law has resulted in the FDIC losing cases at 
     an early stage because the losses were not high enough 
     ... or because the FDIC could not quantify the loss-
     es....  The regulators must be given the opportunity to 
     proceed before losses become even greater.
     
Id.  The Conference Report iterated that the banking regula-
tory agencies should be able to take action "when an institu-
tion has been harmed or the interests of depositors have been 
prejudiced without requiring the agencies to quantify the 
harm or prejudice."  H.R. Rep. No. 101-222, at 439 (1989), 
reprinted in 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 478.  The legislative history 
also notes that FIRREA was enacted in part to "expand, 
enhance, and clarify enforcement powers of the financial 

institution regulatory agencies."  H.R. Rep. No. 101-54, at 
311, reprinted in 1989 U.S.C.C.A.N. 107.  If the FDIC were 
limited to acting within five years of determining that the 
Bank "will probably suffer financial loss," its burden would 
have been greater (establishing probability) than if it is also 
authorized to wait until the Bank "has suffered financial loss" 
(establishing actuality).  To require the FDIC to speculate 
whether the Bank "will probably suffer" harm or forfeit the 
removal action altogether would impose upon the FDIC the 
kind of quantification that the Congress sought to eliminate 
with FIRREA.  While the FDIC might well have brought an 
action earlier under the "will probably suffer" language, its 
failure to do so does not render untimely, and therefore, 
unauthorized, its action based on the later occurring effect.  
Because the FDIC took action within five years of when the 
Bank in fact "suffered" financial loss in 1994, its section 8(e) 
action against Proffitt is not barred by section 2462's five-
year statute of limitations.8

     C.   Due Process
          
     Finally, Proffitt argues that the FDIC violated his right to 
due process because it evaluated neither his current compe-
tence nor whether he presented a current risk of harm.  But 
Proffitt also concedes that his due process claim fails if we 
conclude that the removal and prohibition action imposes a 
penalty.  See Petitioner's Br. 35-36;  Reply Br. 8.  Because 
we have so concluded, Proffitt's due process argument fails.

     For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the FDIC's 
removal and prohibition action was properly taken and, ac-
cordingly, Proffitt's petition for review is

                                   Denied.

__________
     8 Although the FDIC does not make the argument, it is not 
limited to taking action based on the institution's "financial loss"--
the statute also includes "other damage."  12 U.S.C. 
s 1818(e)(1)(B)(i).

     Silberman, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  I agree with the 
majority's conclusion that Johnson v. SEC, 87 F.3d 484 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996), controls this case, and requires us to apply section 
2462's five-year limitations period to the FDIC's removal 
action against Proffitt.  While the FDIC makes a strong 
argument for the contrary result based on historical evidence 
that state courts declined to apply general statutes of limita-
tions to disbarment proceedings, we considered and rejected 
this argument in Johnson and are in my view bound by that 
determination.  See id. at 488 n.6.  However, I do not agree 
with my colleagues' determination that section 8(e) allows the 
FDIC to bring an enforcement action against Proffitt seven 
years after his misconduct.  The majority correctly recog-
nizes that we may not defer to the FDIC's interpretation of 
section 8(e) because it is a statute administered by more than 
one agency, but proceeds to afford the FDIC an even greater 
deference by giving the agency, as a practical matter, the 
power to determine when the statute of limitations will be 
triggered.

     Relying on a construction of section 8(e) that permits 
banking regulatory agencies to bring a removal action either 
at the point that it might be thought that a bank would 
probably suffer a financial loss or at some later time that an 
actual financial loss can demonstrated (given the vagaries of 
litigation and other imponderables it could be decades after 
the act), the majority concludes that it is within a regulatory 
agency's discretion as to which eventuality begins the running 
of the statute.  In other words, the majority reads the statute 
as creating at least two separate1 causes of action and gives 

__________
     1 I say "at least" because the majority observes that "[t]he same 
misconduct can produce different effects at different times, result-
ing in separate section 8(e) claims and separate accruals."  Maj. Op. 
at 12.  That proposition treats Proffitt's misconduct as something 
resembling a "continuing violation" like a conspiracy or kidnapping, 
with the statute of limitations period starting anew at each moment 
that a different "effect" of the increasingly historical misconduct 
appears.  This is not only a peculiar way of understanding a 
violation that arose out of a discrete series of misdeeds by a banker,  
it is one that has been discouraged by the Supreme Court.  See 
Toussie v. United States, 397 U.S. 112, 115 (1970) (a statutory 

the regulatory agencies an option to choose to bring an action 
based on a probable financial loss or an actual financial loss.  
That is not all.  Since the statute allows a removal action 
based on probable or actual other damage, which would 
certainly include reputational harm, the agency presumably 
could also wait until sufficient newspaper articles appeared 
(which incidentally embarrassed the regulatory agency) and 
then determine that actual reputational harm to the deposito-
ry institution had occurred.  Add to this the majority's rather 
improbable reliance on section 8(e)'s language authorizing an 
agency to bring a removal action "whenever" it determines 
that the statute's requirements are met, Maj. Op. at 14--
which I take it means that the statute of limitations is 
triggered not by objective facts but by a subjective determi-
nation of the agency as prosecutor--and one arrives at the 
inevitable and astounding conclusion that, on the majority's 
view, the statute of limitations for an section 8(e) removal 
action begins to run when the agency decides it should begin 
to run (making it a non-statute statute reminiscent of the 
once infamous non-bank bank, cf. Board of Governors of the 
Fed. Reserve Sys. v. Dimension Fin. Corp., 474 U.S. 361, 363 
(1986)).  With all due respect to my colleagues this interpre-
tation simply will not do.

     It seems to me that it is the "three prong" characterization 
of the elements of a removal cause of action which leads my 
colleagues astray.  Section 8(e) actually contemplates only 
one act on the part of the wrongdoer, the misconduct which 
amounts to a violation of a banking law or regulation.  See 12 
U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(A).  To be sure, that act must also have 
certain characteristics.  Section 8(e)(1)(C) requires that this 
act involve personal dishonesty on the part of the target;  
innocent mistakes are not grounds for removal.  And the 
requirement of section 8(e)(1)(B) must be satisfied, which 
means that some consequences must flow from the act.  But 
it does not follow that the so-called "culpability" and "effect" 
prongs constitute separate temporal events, as the majority 

__________
prohibition should rarely be construed as a continuing violation for 
statute of limitations purposes).

concludes.  I think it makes far more sense to think of them 
as characteristics of a banker's misconduct, which must be 
present at the time of the wrongful act.  (Indeed, it seems 
that the "culpability prong" could only be established by 
reference to the time of a wrongdoer's misconduct.)  Just as a 
new cause of action would not spring up if evidence of 
dishonesty--meeting section 8(e)(1)(C)'s requirement--ap-
peared ten years after a banker's misconduct, a new and 
distinct FDIC removal action should not arise at every point 
that evidence of new consequences flowing from that miscon-
duct is uncovered.  Cf. 3M Co. v. Browner, 17 F.3d 1453, 
1460-63 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (rejecting the application of the 
"discovery rule" in the context of an agency enforcement 
proceeding).

     My colleagues believe that such a reading "render[s] the 
'has suffered' language [in 1818(e)(1)(B)] superfluous."  Maj. 
Op. at 14.  But this is plainly mistaken.  Actual damage to an 
institution may or may not be immediately apparent at the 
time of the wrongful act;  thus the FDIC is also permitted to 
bring an action where an institution "will probably suffer 
financial loss or other damage" or the depositors "could be 
prejudiced" from a banker's misconduct.  12 U.S.C. 
s 1818(e)(1)(B) (emphasis added).  The majority is right 
when it notes that section 8(e)'s language gives enforcement 
agencies a great deal of discretion;  the obvious purpose of 
the statute is to allow the regulatory agencies potentially to 
prosecute a wide range of misconduct.  Its threshold is so low 
that I cannot imagine any violation of law, involving personal 
dishonesty on the part of a bank officer, that would not 
qualify.2  However, this discretion is relevant to the range of 
actions that may be prosecuted, not to the time at which an 
agency may bring an enforcement action.  To the contrary, 
the early running of the statute of limitations seems to me the 
inevitable price of section 8(e)'s low threshold;  the agencies 
have to take the "bitter with the sweet."

     As we have recently noted in the very context of an 
administrative enforcement proceeding, the statute of limita-

__________
     2 Unless, perhaps, the act fortuitously led to a bank profit.

tions begins to run when the factual and legal prerequisites 
for an enforcement action are in place.  See 3M, 17 F.3d at 
1460.  There is no serious question that these prerequisites 
were in place at the time of Proffitt's misconduct in 1990;  the 
FDIC's objection that my reading of the statute would force 
it to bring actions too early is ridiculous, given the minimal 
hurdle set by the "other damage" language in section 
8(e)(1)(B).  Nor was there any practical excuse for the 
FDIC's behavior in this case.  If the FDIC were sincere in 
claiming that it delayed its action out of concerns of fairness 
given the pending litigation in the Tennessee courts, it could 
have sought an agreement with Proffitt tolling the running of 
the statute of limitations.

     Indeed, the facts presented here aptly demonstrate the 
costs of not enforcing statutes of limitations vigorously.  The 
pressure on courts not to do so is obvious, as it can permit a 
wrongdoer to escape his or her just desserts.  But ignoring 
the limitations on an agency's action creates an undesirable 
incentive for government prosecutors to sit on their hands 
until some event--typically publicity--induces action.

                                                   