                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 11, 1999     Decided July 7, 2000 

                           No. 97-7221

                      City of Philadelphia, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                 Consolidated Rail Corporation, 
                             Appellee

            National Railroad Passenger Corporation, 
                            Appellant

                        Consolidated with 
                         97-7222, 97-7223

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96rr00001) 
                         (No. 96rr00003) 

                            ---------

     Dennis M. Moore argued the cause for appellant National 
Railroad Passenger Corporation.  With him on the briefs 
were J. Brian Molloy and John L. Moore, Jr.

     Joann Hyle argued the cause for appellant Consolidated 
Rail Corporation.  With her on the briefs were Laurence Z. 
Shiekman and Stacey A. Mufson.  Stephanie L. Kralik en-
tered an appearance.

     Kenneth A. Murphy argued the cause for appellee City of 
Philadelphia.  With him on the brief was Gaetan J. Alfano.

     Susan D. Colwell argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellee Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.  John F. 
Povilaitis entered an appearance.

     Before:  Silberman, Sentelle and Garland, Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Consolidated Rail Corporation 
and National Railroad Passenger Corporation appeal from a 
summary judgment entered against them in favor of the City 
of Philadelphia and the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commis-
sion requiring the railroads to pay for the refurbishment of a 
highway bridge.  Because the question of ownership of the 
bridge was a matter governed by the state law of Pennsylva-
nia, we certified that question to the Supreme Court of 
Pennsylvania.  That court having now ruled that the City of 
Philadelphia owns the bridge, we reverse the judgment of the 
District Court and remand the case for the entry of summary 
judgment in favor of the railroads.

                             Analysis

     This case originated in the District Court for the District of 
Columbia sitting as a Special Court under the Regional Rail 
Reorganization Act of 1973, 45 U.S.C. s 719 (1994).  The case 
is a contest between the City of Philadelphia ("the City") and 
the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission ("PUC") on one 
side, and Consolidated Rail Corporation ("Conrail") and Na-
tional Railroad Passenger Corporation ("Amtrak") on the 
other, over who owns a highway bridge over a below-grade 

railroad right-of-way, who has to pay for its repair and 
upkeep, and in what amount.  The railroads appeal the 
District Court's grant of summary judgment against Conrail 
and Amtrak and in favor of the City and the PUC, in which 
the railroads were required to pay for the refurbishment of a 
highway bridge as its owners and as successors to the now-
defunct Pennsylvania Railroad and its successor, the also 
defunct Penn Central Transportation Company ("Penn Cen-
tral") under a contract with the City in which the railroad 
promised to maintain the bridge at no cost to the City.  The 
dispositive issue in the case is the ownership of the bridge 
under Pennsylvania law.  If the Pennsylvania Railroad, the 
original builder, never owned the bridge, but merely was a 
party with a contractual maintenance obligation, then the 
bridge did not pass to the railroads when the properties of 
Pennsylvania Railroad's successor Penn Central passed to 
Conrail and Amtrak under the provisions of the Regional Rail 
Reorganization Act of 1973.  The parties offer Pennsylvania 
authority both for the proposition that highway bridges are 
parts of the highway they carry, and that they are appurte-
nances to the property they cross.  No one provides, nor have 
we located, any case from Pennsylvania directly considering 
what effect the ordinance between the City and the railroad 
and the allocation of maintenance obligations in perpetuity 
may have on the question of ownership in the first instance.

     A.   Jurisdiction
          
     This action was originally filed in the Special Court under 
45 U.S.C. s 719(e) (1994).  The Special Court was abolished 
by Congress effective January 17, 1997, and its original 
jurisdiction was transferred to the United States District 
Court for the District of Columbia.  See 45 U.S.C. s 719(b)(2) 
(Supp. III 1997).  We have jurisdiction of this appeal under 
45 U.S.C. s 719(e) (Supp. III 1997) and 28 U.S.C. ss 1291 
and 1294 (1994).

     B.   Material Facts of the Case
          
     The basic facts material to this issue are not disputed.  The 
bridge in question crosses six railway tracks in the railroad 
right of way at 41st Street in Philadelphia.  The City owns the 

bridges over 40th Street and 42nd Street, but maintains that 
the railroads own the 41st Street bridge.  The 41st Street 
bridge crosses six railway tracks, four owned by Amtrak and 
two owned by Conrail.  The original steel and timber bridge 
elevating 41st Street where it intersects with the railroad 
right of way was built at the site in 1875.  That bridge was 
replaced by the now-deteriorating steel and concrete struc-
ture which was built in 1929, pursuant to a Philadelphia city 
ordinance that required the Pennsylvania Railroad to build 
and maintain the bridge at its own cost under the supervision 
of the Philadelphia Department of Public Works.  The Penn-
sylvania Railroad1 signed a document accepting these require-
ments on May 11, 1927.  The Pennsylvania Public Service 
Commission (which became the PUC) issued a Certificate of 
Public Convenience for construction of the highway bridge on 
February 21, 1928, and Penn Central completed construction 
in August of 1929.  None of these documents mentions own-
ership of the bridge.

     It appears that the Pennsylvania Railroad and its successor 
Penn Central lived up to this contractual obligation until 
financial crisis struck the rail industry in the northeast, 
threatening its extinction.  By 1971, Penn Central had filed 
for bankruptcy.  It was not alone.  By the early 1970s, the 
railroads in the northeast were failing at such a rapid rate 
that Congress stepped in to resolve the regional rail crisis.  
Congress passed the Regional Rail Reorganization Act of 
1973, Pub. L. No. 93-236, 87 Stat. 985 (1974) (codified as 
amended at 45 U.S.C. s 701 et seq. (1994)) (the "Rail Act"), 
which allowed the railroads to reorganize into a single entity, 
and Conrail was designed to salvage the viable rail properties, 
leaving much of the debt behind in bankruptcy and beginning 
with a "clean slate."  The process by which new, financially-
viable railroads were built from the wreckage that was the 
northeastern rail system forms the essential legal background 
to this case.  See generally Regional Rail Reorganization 
Act Cases, 419 U.S. 102, 108-17 (1974).

__________
     1 The Pennsylvania Railroad, through merger, became the Penn 
Central Transportation Company.

     The Rail Act created the United States Railway Associa-
tion, see 45 U.S.C. s 711(a), a non-profit corporation, which in 
turn prepared a Final System Plan ("FSP") which designated 
how rail properties held by the bankrupt railroads would be 
distributed, see 45 U.S.C. s 716.  The Rail Act also created 
Conrail, see 45 U.S.C. s 741(a), and mandated that rail prop-
erties designated in the FSP be conveyed to Conrail, see 45 
U.S.C. s 743(b).  The conveyance process was supervised by 
the Special Court and implemented through a Conveyance 
Order of the Special Court.  See 45 U.S.C. s 719(b).  Proper-
ties related to passenger rail service were then reconveyed to 
Amtrak.  The transfer that matters in this case occurred 
when, pursuant to the Rail Act, all of Penn Central's "rail 
properties," i.e. properties "used or useful in rail transporta-
tion service," 45 U.S.C. s 702(14), were conveyed to Conrail, 
and the property related to passenger rail service was recon-
veyed to Amtrak.  The City and the PUC claim that Penn 
Central's trustees in bankruptcy conveyed all of the real 
property in Philadelphia County to Conrail, "including the 
railroad right of way, rails, and the 41st Street Bridge former-
ly owned by [the Pennsylvania Railroad]."

     The railroads dispute that the bridge was ever owned by 
Penn Central, and thus dispute that it could ever have been 
properly conveyed to them.  They characterize the Rail Act 
conveyances differently.  According to the railroads, the 
deeds between the trustees of the Penn Central bankruptcy 
estate and Conrail, and between Conrail and Amtrak, con-
veyed the real property free and clear of liens and encum-
brances.  The six railroad tracks under the 41st Street bridge 
were conveyed to Conrail, and four of them were reconveyed 
to Amtrak.  Real property was conveyed by deed, and other 
property was conveyed by Bills of Sale and Assignment, 
which specifically excluded contracts for the "rehabilitation 
and modernization" of property without complete financial 
remuneration of the new railroads.  Contracts for the "main-
tenance and security" of property not passed to Conrail also 
were expressly not conveyed.

     The railroads denied any ownership interest in the bridge, 
and opposed attempts by the City to have them maintain the 

bridge.  The bridge continued to deteriorate to the point that 
it was closed to vehicular traffic in 1993, and only pedestrians 
were allowed across.  The City notified the PUC of the 
deteriorated condition of the bridge, and the PUC approved 
the closure. (To the extent not preempted by federal law, the 
PUC has regulatory authority over bridges crossing railroad 
rights of way under Pennsylvania law, and may permit 
changes or construction, and determine who must pay for 
maintenance.)  The PUC began an investigation to determine 
who was responsible for the repair and future maintenance of 
the bridge.  The PUC directed Amtrak to create a plan for 
repairing the bridge, and ordered the City to pay the initial 
costs of repair.

     The current case was initiated by the City in the Special 
Court asking for a declaration that the responsibility to 
maintain the 41st Street bridge had been conveyed to Amtrak 
and Conrail by the Special Court's order transferring Penn 
Central's property.  Conrail then brought a related action 
against the PUC, seeking to bind it to any order issued by the 
Special Court.  The two cases were consolidated.  On simul-
taneous motions for summary judgment, the Special Court 
held that the real property under the 41st Street bridge and 
the bridge itself had been owned by Penn Central and had 
been conveyed to Conrail and Amtrak, and that the contractu-
al obligation to maintain the bridge under the 1927 agreement 
had also been conveyed.  The Special Court further held that 
while Conrail and Amtrak were not responsible for any 
deterioration that took place prior to April 1, 1976 under the 
Rail Act's "fresh start policy," the deterioration had substan-
tially occurred after that date.  It held Conrail and Amtrak 
responsible for all of the costs associated with repair and 
maintenance of the bridge, and apportioned two-thirds to 
Amtrak and one-third to Conrail, according to the number of 
rail lines each owned.  The Court also stated that Amtrak's 
obligation was not a tax or fee, but a contractual obligation.  
It did not address Amtrak's defenses that the action under 
the contract was barred by the statute of limitations or 
discharged in the Penn Central bankruptcy proceeding.

     C.   The Certification
          
     Because this case presented a question that will likely rise 
again in the context of litigation over the so-called "orphan 
bridges" to which neither the railroads nor the municipalities 
claim title, and because state law governing ownership of the 
bridge is dispositive of the question of contractual allocation 
of maintenance agreements, we concluded that an authorita-
tive response to the question would assist in establishing 
uniformity in future proceedings.  We further concluded that 
the precise effect of the ordinance contracts on questions of 
bridge ownership is purely a question of state law.  We 
therefore petitioned the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania for 
certification of the question of state law under 204 Pa. Code 
s 29.451 (1999).  The Pennsylvania Supreme Court helpfully 
granted our petition, and has now decided the certified ques-
tion.

     Based on the undisputed facts, that court held that it "has 
long been recognized as the law in Pennsylvania" that "where 
a railroad company has constructed at its own expense a 
bridge over its tracks at a street crossing, and the bridge is to 
constitute part of a public highway and be maintained by the 
municipality, title to the bridge rests in the municipality."  
City of Philadelphia v. Consolidated Rail Corp., No. 29 M.D. 
Miscellaneous Docket 1999, slip op. at 4 (Pa. Feb. 24, 2000) 
(citing Pennsylvania R.R. v. Greensburg, J. & P. Street Ry., 
176 Pa. 559, 575, 35 A. 122, 129 (1896)).  As further authority, 
the Supreme Court cited North Pennsylvania Railroad Co. v. 
Inland Traction Co., 205 Pa. 579, 587-89, 55 A. 774, 775-76 
(1903), which held that a "railroad lacked standing to object to 
proposed use by streetcars of a highway bridge that it 
constructed over its right-of-way, inasmuch as the bridge 
became part of the public highway, and the railroad thus had 
no property interest that would be affected."  Consolidated 
Rail, slip op. at 4.  The court further recognized as a long-
established principle "that a bridge carrying a public street is 
deemed to be a part of the street, and, as such, it is owned by 
the entity that owns the street."  Id. (citing Heinlein v. 
Allegheny County, 374 Pa. 496, 499, 98 A.2d 36, 38 (1953)).  
As it is "undisputed that the City owns the public street that 

is supported by the 41st Street bridge," it has owned the 
bridge since the completion of its reconstruction in 1929.2

                            Conclusion

     The Pennsylvania Supreme Court having decided the gov-
erning question of state law that the City and not the 
railroads owns the bridge, and the railroads having been 
absolved of contractual liability by the bankruptcies and the 
Reorganization Act, we reverse the decision of the District 
Court granting summary judgment in favor of the City and 
the PUC and remand the case for the entry of summary 
judgment in favor of the railroads.

__________
     2 On June 19, 2000, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania issued an 
order denying the City's application for reconsideration.

                                                  