                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued December 3, 2001    Decided May 17, 2002 

                           No. 00-1394

                    General Electric Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     Angus Macbeth argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Patricia K. Casano, Christopher L. Bell 
and Timothy K. Webster.

     H. Michael Semler, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause and filed the briefs for respondent.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  General Electric Co. petitions for 
review of the "PCB Risk Assessment Review Guidance Docu-
ment" issued by the Environmental Protection Agency.  The 
parties dispute (1) whether this case is ripe for review;  (2) 
whether the Document is a "rule" within the meaning of 
s 19(a) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), and 
hence whether the court has jurisdiction to review its promul-
gation;  and (3) whether the Agency should have followed the 
procedures required for rulemaking in the TSCA and in the 
Administrative Procedure Act when it promulgated the Docu-
ment.  We conclude that the case is ripe for review, and that 
the Guidance Document is a legislative rule such that the 
court does have jurisdiction to entertain GE's petition and the 
Document should not have been issued without prior notice 
and an opportunity for public comment.

                          I. Background

     The TSCA prohibits the manufacture, processing, distribu-
tion, and use (other than in a "totally enclosed manner") of 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) unless the EPA determines 
that the activity will not result in an "unreasonable risk of 
injury to health or the environment."  15 U.S.C. s 2605(e)(2) 
& (3).  The Guidance Document governs the application of 
two regulations promulgated by the EPA under the TSCA to 
provide respectively for the cleanup and disposal of PCB 
remediation waste and for the disposal of PCB bulk product 
waste.  See 40 C.F.R. ss 761.61 ("cleanup and disposal op-
tions for PCB remediation waste"), 761.62 (how "PCB bulk 
product waste shall be disposed").

     Under subsection (c) of each regulation a party may apply 
for permission to use a method other than one of the generic 
methods set out in the regulations for sampling, cleaning up, 
or disposing of PCB remediation waste, or for sampling or 
disposing of PCB bulk product waste.  The EPA will approve 
applications under these subsections if the alternative method 
proposed does "not pose an unreasonable risk of injury to 
health or the environment."  Id.  The regulations do not, 

however, tell applicants how to conduct the necessary risk 
assessment.*

     That is where the Guidance Document comes in.  It "pro-
vide[s] an overview of risk assessment techniques, and guid-
ance for reviewing risk assessment documents submitted 
under the final PCB disposal rule."  Guidance Document at 
10.  Of particular relevance to this case, in the Guidance 
Document the EPA also explains that an applicant seeking to 
use an alternative method under s 761.61(c) may take either 
of two approaches to risk assessment.  Id. at 21, 42.  First, 
the applicant may calculate cancer and non-cancer risks sepa-
rately.  Id.  To calculate cancer risks the applicant would 
have to use a cancer potency factor recognized by the EPA.  
Such cancer potency factors range, depending upon the expo-
sure pathway and upon the composition of the PCB mixture, 
from .04 to 2.0 (mg/kg/day)-1.  Id., Table 9, at 64.  To 
calculate the non-cancer risks a different type of toxicity 
value--a reference dose, for example--would have to be used, 
and certain specified non-cancer risks would have to be taken 
into account.  Id. at 21, 42.

     The second approach endorsed in the Guidance Document 
is to use a "total toxicity factor" of 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 to 
account for cancer and non-cancer risks together.  Id.  In its 
brief the EPA explains that this approach "provides the 
applicant an opportunity to reduce the time and expense 
associated with the risk assessment" because the Agency is 
willing "to accept this 'default' toxicity value of 4.0 (mg/kg/
day)-1[ ] without requiring further justification."

                           II. Analysis

     GE's primary argument is that the Guidance Document is a 
legislative rule and therefore should have been promulgated 
only after public notice and an opportunity for comment.  In 

__________
     * The Guidance Document initially says it applies to both 
s 761.61 and s 761.62.  See Guidance Document at 10.  Later in 
the Guidance Document the EPA appears to use s 761.61 as 
shorthand for both provisions.  See id. at 21.  We follow the 
Agency's lead in referring henceforth only to s 761.61.

the alternative it contends that the Guidance Document is not 
supported by substantial evidence.  Before considering these 
arguments about the merits, however, we must determine 
whether the case is ripe for review and whether we have 
jurisdiction to hear it.

A.   Ripeness

     To determine whether a controversy is ripe for judicial 
review the court must evaluate "the fitness of the issues for 
judicial decision and the hardship to the parties of withhold-
ing court consideration."  Abbott Labs. v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 
136, 149 (1967).  "In determining the fitness of an issue for 
judicial review we look to see whether the issue is purely 
legal, whether consideration of the issue would benefit from a 
more concrete setting, and whether the agency's action is 
sufficiently final."  Clean Air Implementation Project v. 
EPA, 150 F.3d 1200, 1204 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

     Here the EPA argues that "GE's claims satisfy neither 
aspect of the 'fitness'/'hardship' standard under Abbott Labo-
ratories."  Regarding fitness, the EPA argues that (1) GE is 
asking the court to consider factual questions, such as how 
the EPA would evaluate an application that did not use either 
of the approaches to toxicity set out in the Guidance Docu-
ment;  (2) the Guidance Document is not final agency action 
because the Agency "is currently conducting an assessment of 
the non-cancer risks of PCBs" and will be modifying the 
Document "as needed";  (3) "the Court's consideration would 
be aided by further application of the agency's position to 
particular facts";  and (4) judicial review is premature because 
"adjudication may well prove unnecessary."

     We think the issues presented are fully fit for review.  
First, whether the Guidance Document is a legislative rule is 
largely a legal, not a factual, question, turning as it does in 
this case primarily upon the text of the Document.  GE does 
rely in part upon the Agency's application of the Guidance 
Document, but we need not reach that issue;  we hold the 
Guidance Document is a legislative rule because on its face it 
purports to bind both applicants and the Agency with the 
force of law.

     Second, it is clear that the Guidance Document is final 
agency action because it marks the consummation of the 
EPA's decisionmaking process and it determines the rights 
and obligations of both applicants and the Agency.  See 
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 178 (1997).  The EPA argues 
that the Guidance Document is not final because it is subject 
to change and the "EPA has not completed its decisionmak-
ing process regarding the non-cancer impacts of PCBs."  We 
rejected a similar argument in Appalachian Power Co. v. 
EPA, 208 F.3d 1015 (2000), stating:  "The fact that a law may 
be altered in the future has nothing to do with whether it is 
subject to judicial review at the moment."  Id. at 1022.  If the 
possibility (indeed, the probability) of future revision in fact 
could make agency action non-final as a matter of law, then it 
would be hard to imagine when any agency rule--and particu-
larly one that must be updated periodically to reflect ad-
vances in science--would ever be final as a matter of law.

     In the same vein, the EPA contends that the Fifth Circuit's 
decision in Central & South West Services, Inc. v. EPA, 220 
F.3d 683, 695 (2000), remanding the Final Rule governing 
PCB remediation and decontamination--which Rule the 
Agency promulgated using the 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 toxicity fac-
tor--was "[i]n effect" a decision that the case was "not ripe 
because EPA's position on this complex scientific issue was 
not final."  But the court there did not purport in the least to 
hold GE's petition non-ripe or the Agency's Final Rule non-
final.  Id. Rather, the court remanded the issue without 
considering the merits of GE's petition because, in view of the 
EPA's continuing assessment of the toxicity of PCBs, the 
Agency had "no objection to a remand," and that was all the 
relief GE was seeking.  Id.*

__________
     * This is all the Fifth Circuit had to say:

     EPA is in the process of conducting a comprehensive assess-
     ment of the non-cancer toxic effects of PCBs.  According to 
     EPA, it promulgated the Final Rule before the assessment was 
     completed, in order to comply with the desires of the regulated 
     community to finalize the rulemaking as soon as possible.  
     However, EPA states that it has already committed to reexam-
     
     Third, we do not think "the Court's consideration would be 
aided by further application of the agency's position to partic-
ular facts."  We conclude below that the Guidance Document 
should not have been issued without public notice and an 
opportunity for comment because the Document purports on 
its face to bind both applicants and the Agency.  In this 
situation, nothing would be gained from delaying review.

     The EPA's final argument regarding the fitness of the 
issues for review is that, if the court does not resolve this case 
now, then it may never be necessary to decide the underlying 
controversy.  This contention rests upon the EPA's assertion 
that it will apply the Guidance Document flexibly.  That 
assertion, however, simply restates a portion of the Agency's 
argument that the Document is not binding, an argument we 
reject below.

     As for hardship, the EPA argues that GE will not be 
harmed if the court defers review of the Guidance Document 
because GE can later challenge under the APA any decision 
of the EPA denying its application for a risk-based alterna-
tive.  As we have previously explained, however, "[w]here the 
first prong of the [Abbott Laboratories] ripeness test is met 
and Congress has emphatically declared a preference for 
immediate review ... no purpose is served by proceeding to 
the second [or hardship] prong."  George E. Warren Corp. v. 
EPA, 159 F.3d 616, 622 (1998).  In this case the TSCA 
requires that any petition for review of a rule be filed within 
60 days of the promulgation of the rule.  15 U.S.C. 
s 2618(a)(1)(A).  Consequently, having demonstrated that the 
issue is fit for review, GE need not also show that delaying 
review would work a hardship.  For these reasons, we hold 
the case ripe for review.

__________
     ine the toxicity of PCBs and has no objection to a remand so 
     that it can consider the results of the assessment.  Therefore, 
     we remand ss 761.61(a) and 761.79(b) to give EPA an opportu-
     nity to complete its assessment and reconsider the Final Rule 
     in light of its study.
     
B.   Jurisdiction under the TSCA

     Before we can reach the merits, we must consider whether 
the Document is a "rule" subject to our review under 
s 19(a)(1)(A) of the TSCA, 15 U.S.C. s 2618(a)(1)(A).  That 
section provides:

     Not later than 60 days after the date of the promulgation 
     of a rule under section ... 2605(e) ... of this title, ... 
     any person may file a petition for judicial review of such 
     rule with the United States Court of Appeal for the 
     District of Columbia Circuit.
     
GE contends that the term "rule" should be read broadly to 
track the definition in the APA.  See 5 U.S.C. s 551(4).  The 
EPA takes the narrower view that "direct appellate review is 
limited to legislative rules, i.e., rules which were (or should 
have been) promulgated through notice and comment rule-
making."  See, e.g., Appalachian Power, 208 F.3d at 1020 & 
n.11.  We need not decide which interpretation of the term 
"rule" in s 19(a)(1)(A) is correct because we conclude that the 
Guidance Document is indeed a legislative rule.

     GE argues that the Guidance Document is a legislative rule 
rather than a statement of policy or an interpretive rule 
because it gives substance to the vague language of 40 C.F.R. 
s 761.61(c) ("unreasonable risk of injury to health or the 
environment"), does so in an obligatory fashion, and is treated 
by the EPA as "controlling in the field."  See Community 
Nutrition Inst. v. Young, 818 F.2d 943, 946 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  
McLouth Steel Prods. Corp. v. Thomas, 838 F.2d 1317, 1320-
22 (D.C. Cir. 1988);  Appalachian Power, 208 F.3d at 1021.  
The EPA argues that under the three-part test applied in 
Molycorp, Inc. v. EPA, 197 F.3d 543, 545 (D.C. Cir. 1999), the 
Guidance Document is not a legislative rule.  Although it is 
not entirely clear what in the EPA's view the Document is, 
the EPA comes closest to characterizing it as a statement of 
policy;  thus:

     [T]he portion of the guidance at issue here is simply an 
     expression of EPA's policy judgment, based on the avail-
     able scientific data and analysis, that when the "total 
     
     toxicity" analysis is used, the 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 toxicity 
     value is appropriate to avoid an unreasonable risk to 
     health or the environment.
     
With the Agency's argument so understood, the question 
before us can be framed as whether the Guidance Document 
is a legislative rule or a statement of policy.

     As GE argues, in cases where we have attempted to draw 
the line between legislative rules and statements of policy, we 
have considered whether the agency action (1) "impose[s] any 
rights and obligations" or (2) "genuinely leaves the agency 
and its decisionmakers free to exercise discretion."  Commu-
nity Nutrition Inst., 818 F.2d at 946;  Chamber of Commerce 
v. Dep't of Labor, 174 F.3d 206, 212 (1999).  In McLouth, we 
recognized that "[i]n practice, there appears some overlap in 
the Community Nutrition criteria" because "[i]f a statement 
denies the decisionmaker discretion in the area of its cover-
age, so that [the agency] will automatically decline to enter-
tain challenges to the statement's position, then the statement 
is binding, and creates rights or obligations."  838 F.2d at 
1320.  We emphasized that an agency announcement has 
"present-day binding effect" if the agency is "simply unready 
to hear new argument" in proceedings governed by the 
announcement.  Id. at 1321.

     The EPA urges the court to consider three factors:  "(1) the 
Agency's own characterization of its action;  (2) whether the 
action was published in the Federal Register or the Code of 
Federal Regulations;  and (3) whether the action has binding 
effects on private parties or on the agency."  Molycorp, Inc., 
197 F.3d at 545;  see also Florida Power & Light Co. v. EPA, 
145 F.3d 1414, 1418 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  American Portland 
Cement Alliance v. EPA, 101 F.3d 772, 776 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  
As the EPA concedes, however, the third factor is the most 
important:  "[T]he ultimate focus of the inquiry is whether the 
agency action partakes of the fundamental characteristic of a 
regulation, i.e., that it has the force of law."  Molycorp, Inc., 
197 F.3d at 545.

     The two tests overlap at step three of the Molycorp 
formulation--in which the court determines whether the 

agency action binds private parties or the agency itself with 
the "force of law."  This common standard has been well-
stated as follows:

     If a document expresses a change in substantive law or 
     policy (that is not an interpretation) which the agency 
     intends to make binding, or administers with binding 
     effect, the agency may not rely upon the statutory ex-
     emption for policy statements, but must observe the 
     APA's legislative rulemaking procedures.
     
Robert A. Anthony, Interpretive Rules, Policy Statements, 
Guidances, Manuals, and the Like--Should Federal Agen-
cies Use Them to Bind the Public?, 41 Duke L.J. 1311, 1355 
(1992).

     Our cases likewise make clear that an agency pronounce-
ment will be considered binding as a practical matter if it 
either appears on its face to be binding, Appalachian Power, 
208 F.3d at 1023 ("[T]he entire Guidance, from beginning to 
end ... reads like a ukase.  It commands, it requires, it 
orders, it dictates."), or is applied by the agency in a way that 
indicates it is binding, McLouth, 838 F.2d at 1321.  As 
Professor Robert A. Anthony cogently comments, the manda-
tory language of a document alone can be sufficient to render 
it binding:

     A document will have practical binding effect before it is 
     actually applied if the affected private parties are reason-
     ably led to believe that failure to conform will bring 
     adverse consequences, such as ... denial of an applica-
     tion.  If the document is couched in mandatory language, 
     or in terms indicating that it will be regularly applied, a 
     binding intent is strongly evidenced.  In some circum-
     stances, if the language of the document is such that 
     private parties can rely on it as a norm or safe harbor by 
     which to shape their actions, it can be binding as a 
     practical matter.
     
Interpretive Rules, 41 Duke L.J. at 1328-29.

     GE argues that the Guidance Document is binding both 
because it facially requires an applicant for a risk-based 

variance to calculate toxicity by one of two methods--either 
use a total toxicity factor of 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 or use a cancer 
potency factor and account for the specified non-cancer health 
risks--and because, considering the cost, delay, and uncer-
tainty entailed in the latter course, "[f]or all practical pur-
poses, the Guidance is a rule that directs PCB toxicity to be 
measured by a 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 CPF."

     The EPA counters that the Guidance Document lacks the 
force of law because it does not purport to be binding and 
because it has not been applied as though it were binding.  
First, we are told, the Document "allows great flexibility" 
because it not only "recognizes two broad approaches to risk 
assessment," but also acknowledges (at 44) that

     some risk assessments may have components that re-
     quire the use of non-standard reference materials, unique 
     exposure scenarios or assumptions, or require the use of 
     unconventional methods for estimating risks.  These risk 
     assessments will need to be addressed on a case-by-case 
     basis.
     
Second, the EPA says that it has not in practice "applied the 
guidance document inflexibly, as if it were a rule or regula-
tion."  By this, however, the EPA means only that it has 
received and approved applications based upon the use of the 
total toxicity factor and upon a separate analysis of cancer 
and non-cancer risks--and even this limited assertion is 
disputed by GE.  Finally, the Agency contends that the 
Guidance Document is "an expression of EPA's judgment on 
values to be used in conducting risk assessments," much like 
the data in the Agency's Integrated Risk Information System 
(IRIS), which this court held are not subject to the require-
ments of notice and comment rulemaking.  See Chemical 
Mfrs. Ass'n v. EPA, 28 F.3d 1259, 1263 (1994).

     We think it clear that the Guidance Document does purport 
to bind applicants for approval of a risk-based cleanup plan 
under 40 C.F.R. s 761.61(c).  Consider the principal di-
rectives:  "When developing a risk-based cleanup application 
... both the cancer and non-cancer endpoints must be ad-
dressed...."  Guidance Document at 21.  If an applicant 

chooses not to use the 4.0 total toxicity factor, then it "must, 
at a minimum account for the risk from non-cancer endpoints 
for neurotoxicity, reproductive and developmental toxicity, 
immune system suppression, liver damage, skin irritation, and 
endocrine disruption for each of the commercial mixtures 
found at the cleanup site."  Id.  Although the Guidance 
Document does, as noted, anticipate and acknowledge that 
"some risk assessments may have components that require 
the use of non-standard ... unique ... or unconventional 
methods for estimating risk," id. at 44, that does not under-
mine the binding force of the Guidance Document in standard 
cases.  See McLouth, 838 F.2d at 1321 ("such a provision for 
exceptions ... does not push it much in the direction of a 
policy statement").  Furthermore, even though the Guidance 
Document gives applicants the option of calculating risk in 
either of two ways (assuming both are practical) it still 
requires them to conform to one or the other, that is, not to 
submit an application based upon a third way.  And if an 
applicant does choose to calculate cancer and non-cancer risks 
separately, then it must consider the non-cancer risks speci-
fied in the Guidance Document.  To the applicant reading the 
Guidance Document the message is clear:  in reviewing appli-
cations the Agency will not be open to considering approaches 
other than those prescribed in the Document.

     The Guidance Document also appears to bind the Agency 
to accept applications using a total toxicity factor of 4.0 
(mg/kg/day)-1 to calculate the risk from both cancer and non-
cancer endpoints.  Guidance Document at 21.  The EPA 
recognized this in its principal brief:  "By indicating that [a] 
total toxicity value [of 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1] will be accepted 
without detailed justification, the guidance document offers 
an applicant an opportunity to reduce the time and expense 
associated with risk assessment."  In its supplemental brief, 
however, the EPA backs away from this statement, asserting 
that the "EPA is not 'bound' to approve an application under 
Section 761.61(c) if the applicant uses a total toxicity factor of 
4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1, even assuming that the application falls 
within the framework of the guidance document."  How can 
this be?  According to the Agency, its position with respect to 

the total toxicity factor "is a matter of policy" that "can be 
changed at any time to respond to, inter alia, advances in 
scientific knowledge."  But the Guidance Document itself 
says nothing of the sort.  Clearly the EPA's initial response 
more accurately describes the Agency's approach in the Doc-
ument:  Stating without qualification that an applicant may 
use a total toxicity factor of 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 strongly implies 
that use of that value will not be questioned;  an applicant 
reasonably could rely upon that implication.

     The EPA argues that the Guidance Document "neither 
adds to EPA's prior position nor imposes any further obli-
gations on EPA or the regulated community" because the 
Agency had used the toxicity factor of 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1 when 
it "establish[ed] the generic cleanup standards in the 1998 
[PCB] regulations."  In its supplemental brief, however, the 
Agency explicitly states that it does not think its use of 4.0 
(kg/mg/day)-1 in the 1998 regulations requires it to approve 
use of that factor in an application under s 761.61(c).  Be-
cause we conclude that the Guidance Document does bind the 
Agency to accept use of 4.0 (kg/mg/day)-1, it follows that the 
Document does indeed impose a "further obligation[ ] on the 
EPA."  In this way the Guidance Document is not like the 
risk data at issue in Chemical Mfrs., which we held "constrain 
no one until ... applied in a particular rule."  28 F.3d at 
1263.

     Furthermore, the EPA does not contend that in practice it 
has not treated the Guidance Document as binding in the 
ways described above.  The EPA does not claim, for example, 
that it has accepted any applications that (1) use neither of 
the two methods of risk assessment approved in the Guidance 
Document;  or (2) calculate risk separately for cancer and 
non-cancer endpoints, but fail to calculate endpoints for all 
the non-cancer risks required by the Guidance Document to 
be addressed.  Nor does the EPA contend that it has ever 
rejected an applicant's use of 4.0 (mg/kg/day)-1.  Whether an 
applicant has successfully used the second method of risk 
assessment set out in the Guidance Document--as the EPA 
asserts and GE disputes--is immaterial because, even if both 

methods are practically available, the Document nonetheless 
binds applicants and the Agency in the ways described above.

     In sum, the commands of the Guidance Document indicate 
that it has the force of law.  On its face the Guidance 
Document imposes binding obligations upon applicants to 
submit applications that conform to the Document and upon 
the Agency not to question an applicant's use of the 4.0 
(mg/kg/day)-1 total toxicity factor.  This is sufficient to render 
it a legislative rule.  Furthermore, the Agency's application of 
the Document does nothing to demonstrate that the Docu-
ment has any lesser effect in practice.  Consequently, we 
conclude that the Guidance Document is a legislative rule.  
The Guidance Document is therefore undisputedly a "rule" 
for purposes of s 19(a)(1)(A) of the TSCA, and the manner of 
its promulgation is subject to review.

C.   The Merits

     The EPA concedes that it did not comply with the proce-
dural requirements of the TSCA and of the APA.  More 
specifically, as GE points out, it failed to publish a notice of 
proposed rulemaking, give interested parties an opportunity 
to comment, and hold an informal hearing.  See 15 U.S.C. 
s 2605(e)(4);  15 U.S.C. s 2605(c)(2);  5 U.S.C. s 553.  There-
fore, having held that the case is ripe for review and that the 
Guidance Document is a "rule" for purposes of the TSCA, it is 
clear that GE must prevail on the merits.  The EPA agrees:  
"Either the petition must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction 
or the PCB Guidance should be vacated."  For this reason we 
need not consider GE's alternative argument on the merits, 
namely, that the Guidance Document is not supported by 
substantial evidence.

                         III. Conclusion

     GE's petition for review is granted because the EPA 
promulgated a legislative rule without following the proce-
dures required by the TSCA and the APA.  The Guidance 
Document is accordingly

                                                                 Vacated.

                                                                   