                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 12, 2002     Decided July 16, 2002 

                           No. 01-1085

               United States Telecom Association, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                     State of Iowa, et al., 
                           Intervenors

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     William F. Maher Jr. argued the cause for petitioner.  
With him on the briefs were Lawrence E. Sarjeant, Linda 
Kent, John W. Hunter, Julie E. Rones, and Stephen Good-
man.

     James M. Carr, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
briefs were John A. Rogovin, Deputy General Counsel, and 
John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel.

     Michael D. Hays argued the cause for intervenors State of 
Iowa and Iowa Telecommunications and Technology Commis-
sion.  With him on the briefs were J.G. Harrington and 
Kenneth D. Salomon.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  The United States Telecom Asso-
ciation (USTA) challenges a Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC) order finding that the Iowa Communications 
Network (ICN) is a common carrier.  The order makes ICN 
eligible to receive federal subsidies for providing discounted 
telecommunications services under the Telecommunications 
Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. s 254(h)(1).  We first consider whether 
USTA has standing to bring this suit, and then whether the 
FCC reasonably classified ICN as a common carrier.  We 
answer both questions in the affirmative and uphold the 
FCC's order.

                                I

     ICN was established by the Iowa legislature to provide 
subsidized high-speed telecommunications services through-
out Iowa, especially in areas inadequately covered by local 
exchange carriers.  The governing statute bars ICN from 
offering services to individuals and to most private busi-
nesses.  Iowa Code s 8D.11(2) (2001).  Instead, ICN's cus-
tomers are "public and private agencies."  Under the statute, 
"public agency" means:  "a state agency, an institution under 
the control of the board of regents, the judicial branch ..., a 
school corporation, a city library, a regional library ..., a 
county library ...[,] a judicial district department of correc-
tional services ..., an agency of the federal government, or a 
United States post office which receives a federal grant for 

pilot and demonstration projects."  Id. s 8D.2(5).  A "private 
agency" is:  "an accredited nonpublic school, a nonprofit insti-
tution of higher education eligible for tuition grants, or a 
[licensed] hospital ... or a physician clinic [for specified 
services]."  Id. s 8D.2(4).1

     Section 254(h)(1) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 
requires a "telecommunications carrier" to provide services at 
discounted rates to schools, libraries, and rural health care 
providers.  47 U.S.C. s 254(h)(1).  Such a carrier is entitled 
to receive from the FCC, in an amount equal to the aggregate 
discount it gives to those entities, either a reimbursement or 
an offset against the carrier's obligation to participate in or 
contribute to the universal service fund.  Id.  The Act defines 
a "telecommunications carrier" as "any provider of telecom-
munications services," id. s 153(44), and defines "telecommu-
nications service" as "the offering of telecommunications for a 
fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be 
effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the 
facilities used," id. s 153(46).

     In 1998, ICN petitioned the FCC for a declaration that it 
qualifies as a "telecommunications carrier" under the Act, and 
hence is eligible to receive direct reimbursement for provid-
ing services at discounted rates.  In 1999, citing its decision 
in an earlier case, the Commission held that the term "tele-
communications carrier" includes only carriers that offer tele-
communications on a "common carrier" basis.  Federal-State 

__________
     1 Iowa law divides "public and private agencies" into two further 
subcategories:  "certifying users," which are higher education insti-
tutions, area education agencies, and certain post offices;  and 
"preauthorized users," which are all other public and private agen-
cies.  Certifying users must obtain specific legislative authorization 
to connect to the network unless they certified their intention to 
connect by July 1, 1994, and must take all of their telecommunica-
tions services from ICN unless they obtain a statutory waiver.  
Preauthorized users may choose whether to connect to ICN and 
which services to take from it.  See id. s 8D.9;  Iowa Admin. Code 
s 751-7.1(8D) (2001).  ICN will serve any qualifying user that 
requests service.  See Iowa v. FCC, 218 F.3d 756, 757-58 (D.C. Cir. 
2000).

Joint Bd. on Universal Serv., Declaratory Ruling, 14 
F.C.C.R. 3040, 3040 (1999) [hereinafter 1999 Declaratory 
Ruling] (citing Federal-State Joint Bd. on Universal Serv., 
Report & Order, 12 F.C.C.R. 8776, 9177-78 (1997)).  To 
define "common carrier," the FCC turned to the two-pronged 
test it had previously applied under the Communications Act 
of 1934, 47 U.S.C. ss 151 et seq., a test derived from the 
common law as interpreted in this circuit's case law.  Under 
that test, common carrier status turns on:

     (1) whether the carrier "holds himself out to serve indif-
     ferently all potential users";  and (2) whether the carrier 
     allows "customers to transmit intelligence of their own 
     design and choosing."2
     
The FCC ruled that ICN fails to satisfy the first prong 
because the network does not hold itself out to serve all 
potential users, but rather is limited by Iowa law to a select 
clientele.  1999 Declaratory Ruling, 14 F.C.C.R. at 3050-51.3  
The Commission did not reach the second prong of the test.

__________
     2 1999 Declaratory Ruling, 14 F.C.C.R. at 3050 (quoting South-
western Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 19 F.3d 1475, 1480 (D.C. Cir. 1994), 
and citing National Ass'n of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. FCC, 525 
F.2d 630, 640-41 (D.C. Cir. 1976) ("NARUC I"), and National Ass'n 
of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. FCC, 533 F.2d 601, 608-09 (D.C. 
Cir. 1976) ("NARUC II"));  see Federal-State Joint Bd. on Univer-
sal Serv., Order on Remand, 16 F.C.C.R. 571, 573, 576 (2000) 
(noting common-law origins of test).

     3 The FCC also held that ICN further fails the first prong 
because it does not hold itself out to serve even that select group 
"indifferently," but instead treats each of the subcategories of ICN 
users according to different terms fixed by the legislature.  1999 
Declaratory Ruling, 14 F.C.C.R. at 3051;  see supra note 1 (describ-
ing subcategories).  In light of the FCC's subsequent characteriza-
tion of this holding on appeal, we concluded in Iowa v. FCC, 218 
F.3d 756 (D.C. Cir. 2000), that it was not an independent basis for 
denying ICN common carrier status.  Rather, it was equivalent to 
the FCC's holding that offering "service only to the class of users 
authorized by law to receive it is inconsistent with being a common 
carrier."  Id. at 760.  On remand, the FCC reversed itself and 
found "persuasive ICN's position that while its enabling statute may 

     In Iowa v. FCC, 218 F.3d 756 (D.C. Cir. 2000), this court 
granted Iowa's petition for review and remanded the case to 
the Commission for further consideration.  We held that the 
FCC had failed to consider Iowa's argument that ICN quali-
fies as a common carrier, even though its user base is legally 
restricted, because it offers service to all users that it is 
authorized by law to serve.  See id. at 757.  We pointed out 
that two cases that had considered the meaning of "common 
carrier" under the Communications Act of 1934--FCC v. 
Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689 (1979), and National 
Ass'n of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. FCC, 525 F.2d 630 
(D.C. Cir. 1976) ("NARUC I")--"can be read as approving 
the general rule that a carrier offering its services only to a 
legally defined class of users may still be a common carrier if 
it holds itself out indiscriminately to serve all within that 
class."  Iowa, 218 F.3d at 759.  Although we made clear that 
we were "not suggesting that Midwest Video or NARUC ... 
require[s] a decision in Iowa's favor," we held that "the 
Commission's failure to address Iowa's argument requires 
that we remand this matter for the Commission's further 
consideration."  Id.

     On remand, the FCC reversed its 1999 ruling.  The Com-
mission held that ICN is a common carrier, and hence a 
telecommunications carrier for purposes of s 254(h)(1).  In so 
holding, the Commission concluded that "a carrier offering its 
services only to a legally defined class of users may still be a 
common carrier if it holds itself out indiscriminately to serve 
all within that class."  Federal-State Joint Bd. on Universal 
Serv., Order on Remand, 16 F.C.C.R. 571, 573 (2000) [herein-
after 2000 Order].  Finding that ICN does not discriminate 
among entities within its legally defined user classes, the 
FCC held that ICN passes the first prong of the common 
carrier test.  See id. at 574-75.  It also found ICN to satisfy 

__________
discriminate among various classes of users, it does not allow ICN 
to discriminate among entities within each class of users."  Federal-
State Joint Bd. on Universal Serv., Order on Remand, 16 F.C.C.R. 
571, 574 (2000).  The FCC thus held that ICN does treat its 
authorized users "indifferently," id. at 575, and USTA has not 
appealed that ruling.

the second prong, because it "allows customers to transmit 
intelligence of their own design and choosing."  Id. at 575.  
The Commission therefore declared ICN "eligible to receive 
direct reimbursement for discounted telecommunications ser-
vices provided to schools and libraries."  Id. at 577.

     USTA petitions for review of the Commission's order, 
contending that ICN fails both prongs of the common carrier 
test.  We discuss those contentions in Part III below.  In 
Part II, we first consider whether USTA has standing to 
bring this case.

                                II

     USTA is a trade association representing local exchange 
carriers.  Its members provide voice, data, and video services 
over wireline and wireless networks throughout the United 
States.  Although the initial briefs of the FCC and intervenor 
State of Iowa did not dispute USTA's standing, we have an 
independent obligation to assure ourselves that the petitioner 
has constitutional standing to bring this challenge to the 
FCC's decision.  See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env't, 
523 U.S. 83, 94-95 (1998);  Liquid Carbonic Indus. Corp. v. 
FERC, 29 F.3d 697, 701 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Accordingly, we 
directed the parties to submit supplemental briefs on the 
issue, and, at oral argument, gave USTA a further opportuni-
ty to submit affidavits in support of its position.  Thereafter, 
USTA submitted three affidavits, two from individual USTA 
members and one from the association itself.  We have 
reviewed those affidavits and are satisfied that USTA has 
made the requisite showing.

     As a trade association, USTA has standing to sue on behalf 
of its members if "its members would otherwise have stand-
ing to sue in their own right, the interests it seeks to protect 
are germane to the organization's purpose, and neither the 
claim asserted nor the relief requested requires the partic-
ipation of individual members in the lawsuit."  Fund Democ-
racy, LLC v. SEC, 278 F.3d 21, 25 (D.C. Cir. 2002) (citing 
Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Envtl. Servs. (TOC), 
Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 181 (2000)).  There is no question that 

USTA satisfies the latter two conditions;  the only question is 
whether USTA members meet the constitutional require-
ments for suit in their own right.  Those "irreducible consti-
tutional minimum" requirements are:

     (1) that the plaintiff have suffered an "injury in fact"--
     an invasion of a judicially cognizable interest which is (a) 
     concrete and particularized and (b) actual or imminent, 
     not conjectural or hypothetical;  (2) that there be a causal 
     connection between the injury and the conduct com-
     plained of--the injury must be fairly traceable to the 
     challenged action of the defendant, and not the result of 
     the independent action of some third party not before the 
     court;  and (3) that it be likely, as opposed to merely 
     speculative, that the injury will be redressed by a favor-
     able decision.
     
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 167 (1997).

     USTA contends that the FCC's order injures its members 
by making ICN eligible for a subsidy that permits it to offer 
lower prices for the same telecommunications services.4  We 
have repeatedly recognized that parties "suffer constitutional 
injury in fact when agencies ... allow increased competition" 
against them.  Louisiana Energy & Power Auth. v. FERC, 
141 F.3d 364, 367 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  see, e.g., Wabash Valley 
Power Ass'n v. FERC, 268 F.3d 1005, 1113 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  
MD Pharm., Inc. v. Drug Enforcement Admin., 133 F.3d 8, 
11 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  And we have likewise recognized that 
regulatory decisions that permit subsidization of some partici-
pants in a market can have the requisite injurious impact on 
those participants' competitors.  See Exxon Co., U.S.A. v. 
FERC, 182 F.3d 30, 43 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  Liquid Carbonic, 29 
F.3d at 701.

__________
     4 USTA also maintains that its members suffer injury because, if 
ICN is improperly reimbursed for providing discounted telecommu-
nications, insufficient universal service funds will be left to reim-
burse USTA members.  Because we find that USTA's "competitive 
injury" theory satisfies the requirements of standing, we do not 
address this alternative theory.

     Nor is the injury to USTA's members "conjectural or 
hypothetical."  The affidavit of one of USTA's members, an 
independent local exchange carrier, avers that the member 
has tried to sell its services to a school that currently takes 
similar services from ICN, but has been unsuccessful because 
ICN's subsidy enables it to charge substantially lower rates.  
Whipple Aff. pp 5-6.  The affidavit of another USTA member 
states that it lost a customer to ICN because the subsidy 
enabled ICN to charge lower rates for similar services.  
Kilburg Aff. pp 5, 7.  And an affidavit from USTA, summariz-
ing information it gathered from a survey of its members, 
avers that other members have had like experiences--either 
losing business to ICN or being unable to compete for new 
customers because of ICN's subsidy.  Flerl Aff. pp 4-5.

     These affidavits show that USTA's members are ready, 
willing, and able to compete with ICN in providing telecom-
munications to schools and libraries, and that ICN's subsidy 
prevents them from doing so on an equal basis.  That show-
ing is sufficient to establish that the association's members 
have suffered cognizable injury in fact.  See Dynatlantic 
Corp. v. Department of Defense, 115 F.3d 1012, 1016 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997).  And it is also sufficient to satisfy the remaining 
two requirements of constitutional standing:  The competitive 
injury suffered by USTA's members is fairly traceable to the 
FCC's decision to render ICN eligible for the subsidy, and 
that injury would likely be redressed by a favorable decision 
of this court vacating the FCC's order.  See High Plains 
Wireless, L.P. v. FCC, 276 F.3d 599, 605 (D.C. Cir. 2002);  
Exxon, 182 F.3d at 43;  Liquid Carbonic, 29 F.3d at 701.  We 
therefore conclude that USTA has constitutional standing to 
seek judicial review of the order on behalf of its members.

                               III

     USTA contends that ICN cannot satisfy either prong of the 
common carrier test, and that the FCC therefore erred in 
finding ICN eligible for reimbursement from universal ser-
vice funds.  The association also argues that the FCC's order 
is not entitled to a deferential standard of review because it 

rests on an interpretation of this circuit's Iowa, NARUC, and 
other decisions, rather than on an interpretation of a statute.  
We disagree, and conclude that we must review the agency's 
order with deference.

     At bottom, the FCC's order rests not on judicial precedent 
but on its interpretation of the term "telecommunications 
carrier" in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.  The Com-
mission interprets the term as the equivalent of "common 
carrier" under the Communications Act of 1934, a term which 
was itself previously defined by a two-pronged test derived 
from the common law as construed by this circuit.  USTA 
does not dispute the FCC's decision to interpret "telecommu-
nications carrier" as "common carrier," or its decision to 
define the latter through the two-pronged test.  Indeed, we 
have previously upheld the FCC's approach as a reasonable 
construction of an ambiguous statutory term.  See Iowa, 218 
F.3d at 757 (citing Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. 
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984));  Virgin Islands Tel. Corp. 
v. FCC, 198 F.3d 921, 922, 925-26 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     In deciding that ICN satisfies the requirements of the 
common carrier test, the FCC further elaborated upon the 
meaning of "common carrier," and then applied its version of 
the two-pronged test to the facts of ICN's situation.  Where a 
statute is "ambiguous with respect to [a] specific issue," the 
only question for this court is whether the agency's interpre-
tation "is based on a permissible construction of the statute."  
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843.  We also defer to an agency's 
reasonable interpretation of its own rules and precedents.  
See Global Crossing Telecomms., Inc. v. FCC, 259 F.3d 740, 
746 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  Cassell v. FCC, 154 F.3d 478, 484 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).  And we give deference as well to an agency's 
application of its statutory and administrative interpretations 
to specific circumstances--asking only whether such applica-
tions are "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or 
otherwise not in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A);  
see Global Crossing, 259 F.3d at 747;  Cassell, 154 F.3d at 483 
n.4;  Huls America Inc. v. Browner, 83 F.3d 445, 452 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996).  Finally, where an agency has adopted a judicial 
test as its own, we likewise review its application of that test 

only to determine whether it is unreasonable or arbitrary and 
capricious.  See Independent Petroleum Ass'n of Am. v. 
Babbitt, 92 F.3d 1248, 1257-58 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (noting con-
vergence of Chevron and arbitrary and capricious review 
where agency adopts court decision as its rule).

     In the following sections, we apply this deferential standard 
of review to the two challenges that USTA levels against the 
FCC's order.

                                A

     USTA's first contention is that, because Iowa law greatly 
restricts the universe of the network's authorized users, ICN 
fails to satisfy the first prong of the common carrier test:  
that the carrier hold itself out to serve indifferently "all 
potential users."  1999 Declaratory Ruling, 14 F.C.C.R. at 
3050.  USTA argues that, under our opinion in NARUC I, a 
carrier cannot satisfy this prong unless it holds itself out to 
"the public."  See NARUC I, 525 F.2d at 640.  And ICN's 
"class of legally authorized users," USTA maintains, "is not 
broad enough to be considered a portion of 'the public.' "  
Pet'r Br. at 11.

     In response to this argument below, the FCC determined 
that "legal restrictions on eligibility to use a carrier's services 
do not necessarily preclude common carrier status," and that 
this proposition is consistent with NARUC I.  2000 Order, 16 
F.C.C.R. at 573.  We agree.  As we said in Iowa, our decision 
in NARUC I "can be read as approving the general rule that 
a carrier offering its services only to a legally defined class of 
users may still be a common carrier if it holds itself out 
indiscriminately to serve all within that class."  Iowa, 218 
F.3d at 759.

     In NARUC I, this court held that mobile radio operators 
known as Specialized Mobile Radio Systems (SMRS) were not 
foreclosed from common carrier status--even though "SMRS 
offer a service that may be of practical use to only a fraction 
of the population," and even though an FCC order "limit[ed] 
possible subscribers to SMRS services to eligibles" under 
three specific sections of the FCC's regulations.  NARUC I, 

525 F.2d at 642 (emphasis added).  "The key factor," we said, 
"is that the operator offer indiscriminate service to whatever 
public its service may legally and practically be of use."  Id. 
(emphasis added).5  As the FCC noted, this passage from 
NARUC I "directly supports" its conclusion in the instant 
case.  2000 Order, 16 F.C.C.R. at 573.

     USTA counters, however, that the list of authorized ICN 
users is so much more restricted than was the list of SMRS 
eligibles that ICN's list "cannot be considered the public" and 
ICN cannot qualify as a common carrier.  Pet'r Br. at 11.  
We do not agree.  Authorized ICN users include state agen-
cies, institutions under the control of the board of regents, the 
judicial branch, schools, libraries, departments of correctional 
services, federal agencies, certain post offices, certain non-
profit institutions of higher education, licensed hospitals, and 
physician clinics (for some purposes).  See Iowa Code 
s 8D.2(4)-(5).  Together, these amount to at least 500 dis-
crete entities.  See 2000 Order, 16 F.C.C.R. at 574.  More-
over, the network's end-users are all those who can access 
ICN at authorized facilities--a group that includes students, 
library patrons, and state and federal employees, and that 
potentially extends to all Iowans.  See Iowa Admin. Code 
s 751-7.5(8D).

     Like the list of authorized ICN users, the list of eligible 
SMRS subscribers in NARUC I was legally circumscribed.  
The FCC limited SMRS subscribers to "eligibles under Sec-
tions 89, 91 and 93 of the Regulations."  NARUC I, 525 F.3d 
at 642.  Those included local governments, police and fire 
departments, motor carriers, taxicab companies, and other 
specified commercial and noncommercial entities in need (pri-
marily) of dispatch services.  See id. at 634, 639, 642-43.6  

__________
     5 In NARUC I, we eventually upheld the FCC's determination 
that it could treat SMRS as non-common carriers because there was 
no evidence that they would indifferently serve all eligible custom-
ers.  See id. at 643-44.

     6 Parts 89, 91, and 93 of the FCC's regulations listed specific 
types of eligible subscribers for three categories of private radio 
service:  "Public Safety," "Industrial," and "Land Transportation."  

Although we do not have enough information to count the 
number of eligible SMRS subscribers, the SMRS list is not 
any more readily characterizable as "the public" than is the 
list of those eligible to use ICN.  See NARUC I, 525 F.2d at 
634 (characterizing class of eligible SMRS subscribers as "a 
limited group of users").  In any event, it is certainly not 
arbitrary for the FCC to regard the two situations as compa-
rable.

     USTA also argues that ICN cannot qualify as a common 
carrier because Iowa bars the network's use for "profit-
making venture[s]."  Iowa Admin. Code s 751-14.1(8D)(1)(a).  
NARUC I, however, does not impose a for-profit requirement 
on common carriers.  Instead, USTA points to "this Court's 
guidance in NARUC II," Pet'r Br. at 15, an opinion stating 
that price discrimination by cable system operators in favor of 
noncommercial users did not necessarily preclude those oper-
ators from common carrier status--"at least if not carried to 
the point of excluding all commercial users."  National Ass'n 
of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. FCC, 533 F.2d 601, 609 (D.C. 
Cir. 1976) ("NARUC II").  USTA's argument rests solely on 
the quoted phrase, and puts more weight on that phrase than 
either its words or the NARUC II opinion as a whole can 
bear.

     First, the quoted phrase concerned the operators' voluntary 
decision to engage in price discrimination;  NARUC II was 
not a case in which either discrimination or exclusion was 
mandated by law.  Second, the phrase served at most as 
dictum in the opinion, since NARUC II was also not a case in 
which price discrimination effectively excluded all commercial 
users.  Finally, the portion of NARUC II cited by the 
petitioner is not the opinion of "this Court," but rather the 
opinion of Judge Wilkey alone.7  Although we have subse-
__________

See, e.g., 47 C.F.R. s 89.251 (1975) (local government);  id. s 89.301 
(police);  id. ss 89.501-89.519 (special emergency users);  id. 
s 89.551 (state guards);  id. s 91.301 (petroleum radio service);  id. 
s 91.351 (forest products radio service);  id. s 93.251 (motor carri-
ers);  id. s 93.351 (railroads);  id. s 93.506 (contract road service 
vehicles);  id. s 98.401 (taxicabs).

     7 See NARUC II, 533 F.3d at 621 (Lumbard, J., concurring) 
(deeming it "unnecessary to reach" common carriage question);  id. 

quently approved some of the views expressed by Judge 
Wilkey in NARUC II, see Southwestern Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 
19 F.3d 1475, 1480 (D.C. Cir. 1994), we have never held that a 
carrier is barred from common carrier status unless it is 
authorized to serve commercial users.  Indeed, given 
NARUC I's declaration that the key factor in determining 
common carriage is whether the carrier offers "indiscriminate 
service to whatever public its service may legally and prac-
tically be of use," 525 F.2d at 642 (emphasis added), we have 
no warrant for concluding that the exclusion of commercial 
users from ICN's network compels the Commission to dis-
qualify it as a common carrier.

     USTA further purports to discern significant inconsisten-
cies between the FCC's order and the Supreme Court's 
decision in FCC v. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689 (1979).  
Succeeding on that argument, however, is an uphill struggle 
in light of our statement in Iowa that Midwest Video, like 
NARUC I, "can be read as approving the general rule that a 
carrier offering its services only to a legally defined class of 
users may still be a common carrier."  218 F.3d at 759.  
Nonetheless, USTA contends that Midwest Video supports its 
claim that ICN fails the first prong of the common carrier 
test because ICN's class of authorized users both is too small 
and excludes profit-making ventures.

     Midwest Video, however, said nothing about either of these 
issues.  Indeed, to the extent the case is relevant at all, it is 
by implication only and in that respect supports the FCC.  In 
Midwest Video, the Supreme Court considered FCC regula-
tions requiring cable television systems to allocate channels 
for educational, government, public, and leased access users.  
The regulations mandated that the public and leased access 
channels be open to all users, but that the educational channel 
be dedicated to "local educational authorities" and the govern-
ment channel be dedicated to "local government."  47 C.F.R. 
s 76.254(a)(2), (3) (1977).  The Supreme Court held that the 
access rules effectively "relegated cable systems, pro tanto, to 

__________
at 634 (Skelly Wright, J., dissenting) (accepting only "arguendo" 
that cable operators were common carriers).

common-carrier status"--an action the Court held to be be-
yond the authority of the Commission.  440 U.S. at 700-01;  
see id. at 708-09.

     On its face, Midwest Video is substantially more helpful to 
the FCC than to USTA.  As we noted in Iowa, the Midwest 
Video Court found that the FCC's regulations had effectively 
transformed the cable systems into common carriers, notwith-
standing that "use of the educational and government access 
channels was limited respectively to 'local educational authori-
ties' and the 'local government' " and that a "private organiza-
tion could not air an educational program on the educational 
access channel because it would not come within the class of 
users authorized by law."  218 F.3d at 758.  Thus, like the 
Iowa Code, the FCC regulations at issue in Midwest Video 
narrowly defined the class of authorized users for each chan-
nel and barred profit-making enterprises from using the 
government and educational channels.  Undaunted by these 
similarities, USTA contends that the Supreme Court did not 
analyze the regulations on a channel-by-channel basis, but 
instead considered them as a unit that included not only the 
nonprofit channels but also the public and leased access 
channels that were available to the general public.  Nothing 
in the Midwest Video opinion, however, suggests that the 
Court relied on the existence of the public channels to reach 
its conclusion about common carriage.  Instead, the Court 
focused on the fact that the regulations required the cable 
systems to offer use of the allocated channels to all who 
qualified for them on a nondiscriminatory basis, and deprived 
the systems of the power to select individual users or to 
control the programming of those who qualified.  See Mid-
west Video, 440 U.S. at 699-702.  Accordingly, nothing in 
Midwest Video supports USTA's claim that the list of ICN 
users is too narrowly delineated for the network to qualify as 
a common carrier.

     Finally, USTA argues that to affirm the FCC's decision 
here would be to accept that a carrier may be designated as 
"common" even if it has only a single authorized user.  That 
is hardly the case, and it is certainly not this case.  Regard-
less of whether the FCC could label a single-user network as 

a common carrier without being arbitrary and capricious, the 
Commission's determination that ICN--with its far broader 
customer base--qualifies as a common carrier constitutes a 
reasonable application of the test the Commission has 
adopted to define that term.

                                B

     USTA's second contention is that ICN cannot satisfy the 
second prong of the common carrier test because it does not 
allow customers to "transmit intelligence of their own design 
and choosing."  1999 Declaratory Ruling, 14 F.C.C.R. at 3050.  
This prong of the test is intended to confine common carrier 
status to operators that do not regulate the content of their 
customers' communications.  Although USTA concedes that 
"ICN does not specify the individual words or messages sent 
over the network," Pet'r Br. at 17, it argues that Iowa 
nonetheless restricts users' communications because its regu-
lations require them to adopt policies acknowledging that:  (1) 
"[t]he use of the network must be consistent with the written 
mission of the authorized user," and (2) "[t]he network ... 
cannot be used for a profit-making venture."  Iowa Admin. 
Code s 751-14.1(8D)(1)(b), (a).

     The FCC rejected this argument in its order, concluding 
that these restrictions are "intended to acknowledge the 
statutorily-prescribed customer base, rather than to limit the 
'intelligence' [customers] may transmit over the network."  
2000 Order, 16 F.C.C.R. at 575.  "The effect of this limita-
tion," the FCC continued, is merely "to restrict the use of the 
ICN to the primary purpose for which the network exists."  
Id. at 575-76.  The Commission accepted ICN's representa-
tions that it does not police the content that a user transmits, 
and instead places the responsibility on the user to determine 
whether its use of the network is consistent with its written 
mission statement.  See id. at 576.  The FCC further noted 
that "ICN states, and no party disputes, that it has never 
denied or cut off service on the basis of an acceptable use 
issue."  Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).

     These considerations persuade us that the FCC reasonably 
concluded that ICN meets the second prong of the common 
carrier test.  As we held in Part III.A, Iowa's limitation of 
ICN's services to specified categories of eligible users is 
consistent with the network's status as a common carrier.  A 
requirement that users adhere to the missions that make 
them statutorily eligible is therefore also consistent, as it 
represents nothing more than a method of enforcing that 
limitation.  Indeed, in NARUC I we held that SMRS' com-
mon carrier status was not precluded by the fact that the 
governing regulations "require that SMRS applicants certify 
that they will not provide service to ineligibles."  525 F.2d at 
642.  Similarly, the requirement that users adopt policies 
stating that ICN "cannot be used for a profit-making ven-
ture" represents nothing more than an acknowledgment that 
use of the network is limited to nonprofits, a limitation that 
we also upheld in Part III.A.  Moreover, beyond the implicit 
condition that a user's mission be one that qualifies for 
network eligibility, ICN places no limits on the scope of a 
user's written mission statement and no restrictions on a 
user's ability to change its mission statement.

     USTA once again turns to Midwest Video for support in its 
attack on the FCC's order, but again that case offers only 
further support for the Commission's decision.  USTA points 
out that, when the Supreme Court ruled that the cable access 
regulations imposed common carrier obligations on cable 
operators, it stated that "[o]perators are prohibited from 
determining or influencing the content of access program-
ming"--a prohibition USTA claims is breached by the Iowa 
regulations recounted above.  Midwest Video, 440 U.S. at 
702.  But the Court's statement was made in a context that 
demonstrates that it did not regard the restriction of users to 
their authorized missions as the kind of content control that 
precludes common carrier status.  As we have already noted, 
under the regulations at issue in Midwest Video, "use of the 
educational and government access channels was limited re-
spectively to 'local educational authorities' and the 'local 
government,' " and a "private organization could not air an 
educational program on the educational access channel be-

cause it would not come within the class of users authorized 
by law."  Iowa, 218 F.3d at 758.  Moreover, Midwest Video's 
more complete description of the prohibition on content con-
trol in that case makes it plain that the Court did not regard 
the exclusion of commercial content as inconsistent with 
common carriage:  "System operators," the Court said, "are 
specifically enjoined from exercising any control over the 
content of access programming except that they must adopt 
rules proscribing the transmission on most access channels 
of ... commercial matter."  440 U.S. at 693 (emphasis add-
ed).

     In sum, we find that the FCC reasonably concluded that 
ICN does permit its customers to "transmit intelligence of 
their own design and choosing."  As the FCC held, the 
regulations highlighted by USTA do not control the content 
of communications, but rather merely "acknowledge the stat-
utorily-prescribed customer base."  2000 Order, 16 F.C.C.R. 
at 575.

                                IV

     In ruling that ICN is a "telecommunications carrier" eligi-
ble for subsidies under s 254(h)(1), the FCC reasonably 
interpreted the language of its governing statute, and reason-
ably construed and applied the test it had previously adopted 
to give meaning to that language.  Accordingly, USTA's 
petition for review is

                                                             Denied.

                                         