                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 6, 2000    Decided October 4, 2000 

                           No. 99-3101

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                      Nigel Judson Maccado, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00162-01)

     Sandra G. Roland, Assistant Federal Public Defender, 
argued the cause for appellant.  With her on the brief was A. 
J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Luis Andrew Lopez, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Thomas J. Tourish, 
Jr., and Alan Boyd, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Nigel Judson Maccado appeals his 
conviction on the ground that the district court misapplied 
United States Sentencing Guidelines ("U.S.S.G.") s 3C1.1 
(1995) by enhancing his sentence by two levels for obstruction 
of justice in the absence of a substantial effect on the 
investigation or prosecution of his case.  He contends that the 
enhancement is unwarranted for his failure timely to comply 
with the court's order to give a handwriting exemplar for 
essentially two reasons.  First, the nineteen-day delay in the 
taking of his handwriting exemplar that resulted from his 
noncompliance did not delay or otherwise hinder the sched-
uled judicial proceedings, and second, his guilty plea cured 
any obstruction.  We hold that s 3C1.1 applies in the absence 
of a substantial effect on an investigation or prosecution, and 
accord due deference to the district court's determination that 
Maccado's deliberate disobedience of the court order warrant-
ed an enhancement under s 3C1.1.  Accordingly, we affirm.

                                I.

     Maccado was indicted in 1998 for possession of false identi-
fication documents with intent to defraud the United States 
and for making false statements in a passport application.  
See 18 U.S.C. ss 1028(a)(4), 1542.  He ultimately pleaded 
guilty on August 17, 1998, to the false statements charge.  
According to the government's proffer at the time Maccado 
pleaded guilty, the charges stemmed from his submission on 
September 11, 1997, of a completed United States Passport 
Application (Form DSP-11) in the name of David Arnar 
Proctor, born December 17, 1957, in Washington, D.C.  Mac-
cado listed his social security number as 577-86-2072 and 
presented as proof of citizenship a District of Columbia 
certificate with a recorded date of birth, as well as an 
employee identification card from his own construction com-
pany.  He signed the form in the presence of the clerk at the 

Friendship Heights Post Office, who accepted the application 
on behalf of the Department of State.  Several months later, 
Special Agent Leonard Codispot of the United States Depart-
ment of State Bureau of Diplomatic Security obtained an 
arrest photograph of Maccado from the Montgomery County, 
Maryland, police records that matched the photo attached to 
the passport application.  Agent Codispot also determined 
from the United States Immigration and Naturalization Ser-
vice that Maccado was born in India in 1949, and was not a 
United States citizen and not entitled to a United States 
passport.

     At a status hearing on Thursday, June 18, 1998, in contem-
plation of trial, the district court granted the government's 
motion to compel Maccado to submit a handwriting exemplar 
that day to Agent Codispot, who was present in the court-
room.  When asked by the court if he understood the court's 
order, Maccado replied, "Yes, your Honor."  Nevertheless, 
Maccado did not give the exemplar to the agent that day and 
had no further personal contact with the agent until July 7, 
1998, when Agent Codispot obtained the exemplar from Mac-
cado in Maryland.  At that time Maccado was in the Charles 
County Detention Center in LaPlata, Maryland.1

     At Maccado's sentencing hearing, Agent Codispot testified 
that after the June 18th status hearing, he accompanied 
Maccado and his wife to the first floor of the courthouse.  
Agent Codispot told Maccado to wait while he obtained a copy 
of the court order, and that the exemplar would be taken in a 
vacant room in the courthouse.  When Agent Codispot re-
turned minutes later, Maccado was gone;  his wife explained 
that Maccado had left to move the car.  After waiting for over 
an hour for Maccado to return, Agent Codispot returned to 
his office and found a message from Maccado that his car had 
overheated and he had left it at his wife's office, that he had 

__________
     1  Two days after the status hearing at which he was ordered to 
provide the exemplar to Agent Codispot, Maccado attempted sui-
cide.  He was hospitalized and thereafter transferred to the Charles 
County Detention Center based on a Maryland warrant for a parole 
violation.

gone to visit a cousin in the hospital, and that he would do the 
"court-ordered things" at another time.  Agent Codispot 
twice attempted unsuccessfully to reach Maccado at the pager 
number that Maccado had left as part of his recorded mes-
sage.

     Maccado's wife recounted somewhat different events.  She 
testified that after the status hearing Agent Codispot in-
formed them the exemplar would be taken at an office in 
Virginia, and that Maccado left the courthouse to retrieve the 
car so they could follow the agent to Virginia.  Upon re-
turning to her office later that day, Mrs. Maccado found a 
message from her husband explaining that he had encoun-
tered car problems and another message from her cousin's 
wife stating that Maccado had been to the hospital to get 
water for the car.  Upon returning home around 4:30 p.m., 
Mrs. Maccado found her husband at home.  She telephoned a 
mechanic and dropped the car off that night, leaving a 
message for the mechanic about the problem.  She also 
telephoned Agent Codispot, leaving a message about resched-
uling the taking of the exemplars.

     At sentencing, the district court found:

     that there has been obstruction of justice;  that the 
     obstruction of justice occurred when, notwithstanding a 
     court order to go with the FBI agent [sic] to give a 
     handwriting exemplar, and it's clear from the transcript 
     that I told the defendant that he had to go with that 
     agent that day to provide a handwriting exemplar, not-
     withstanding that, he didn't, and he hasn't offered any 
     plausible explanation or reason why he didn't.
     
          I mean, I think that if I were to credit his testimony 
     that he had to take his car to get it fixed, it's not a 
     mitigating circumstance to offset the failure to comply 
     with the court directive to have that handwriting exemp-
     lar provided that day, and his failure to do so rises to the 
     level of an obstruction of justice.
     
     After applying the two-level enhancement under U.S.S.G. 
s 3C1.1 and crediting Maccado for acceptance of responsibili-

ty, id. s 3E1.1, which resulted in a sentencing range of 12 to 
18 months, the court sentenced Maccado to 18 months' incar-
ceration and three years' supervised release.

                               II.

     On appeal, Maccado contends that mere disobedience of a 
court order is insufficient to constitute obstruction of justice 
under U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1 where the ordered evidence is pro-
duced within a relatively brief time prior to any scheduled 
court hearing and, thus, does not substantially influence the 
investigation or prosecution.  Combined with his guilty plea 
to one count, that he maintains effectively cured any prior 
obstructive conduct, Maccado contends that the district 
court's application of U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1 involved an erroneous 
interpretation of law that is subject to de novo review.

     As to our standard of review, we agree with Maccado.  
Maccado does not challenge the district court's findings that 
his conduct was unjustified, or that he materially breached 
the district court's order.  Nor does he claim that he had a 
necessity defense or that his actions were not willful.  Conse-
quently, the only issue presented on appeal is whether 
s 3C1.1 requires that a defendant's conduct have a substan-
tial effect on the investigation or prosecution of his case, and 
if so, whether a guilty plea negates the obstruction of justice.  
These are questions of law that the court reviews de novo.  
See United States v. (Michael) Taylor, 997 F.2d 1551, 1560 
(D.C. Cir. 1993).  Upon determining whether there is a 
substantial effect requirement in s 3C1.1, the court must 
accord due deference to the district court's factual determina-
tion that the defendant's conduct is within the range of 
punishable actions.  See In re Sealed Case, 199 F.3d 488, 491 
(D.C. Cir. 1999);  18 U.S.C. s 3742(e);  see also United States 
v. Drew, 200 F.3d 871, 880 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

     The relevant version of s 3C1.1 of the Sentencing Guide-
lines instructs that:

     [i]f the defendant willfully obstructed or impeded, or 
     attempted to obstruct or impede, the administration of 
     justice during the course of the investigation, prosecu-
     
     tion, or sentencing of the instance offense, increase the 
     offense level by 2 levels.
     
U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1 (1995).2  In the Application Notes to the 
Guidelines, which the court must treat as authoritative, see 
Stinson v. United States, 508 U.S. 36, 38 (1993), the Sentenc-
ing Commission has included two non-exhaustive lists of 
examples to illustrate some of the kinds of conduct that do 
and do not fall within s 3C1.1.  See Application Notes 3 & 4.  
None of the examples is precisely on point.  By way of 
caveat, Application Note 2 states that "[o]bstructive conduct 
can vary widely in nature, degree of planning, and serious-
ness . . . [and] is not subject to precise definition."  Applica-
tion Note 3 gives as examples of when the enhancement is 
properly imposed "committing, suborning, or attempting to 
suborn perjury; . . . escaping or attempting to escape from 
custody before trial or sentencing;  or willfully failing to 
appear, as ordered, for a judicial proceeding; . . . [or] provid-
ing materially false information to a judge or magistrate."  
U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1, Application Note 3(b), (e), (f).3  On the 

__________
     2  The district court sentenced Maccado under the 1995 edition 
of the Sentencing Guidelines, and we refer to that edition.  Macca-
do's offense occurred in September 1997, and the relevant guideline 
was modified in November 1997.

     3  Application Note 3 lists the following examples:

          (a) threatening, intimidating, or otherwise unlawfully influ-
     encing a co-defendant, witness, or juror, directly or indirectly, 
     or attempting to do so;
     
          (b) committing, suborning, or attempting to suborn perjury;
     
          (c) producing or attempting to produce a false, altered, or 
     counterfeit document or record during an official investigation 
     or judicial proceeding;
     
          (d) destroying or concealing or directing or procuring anoth-
     er person to destroy or conceal evidence that is material to an 
     official investigation or judicial proceeding (e.g., shredding a 
     document or destroying ledgers upon learning that an official 
     investigation has commenced or is about to commence), or 
     attempting to do so;  however, if such conduct occurred contem-
     poraneously with arrest (e.g., attempting to swallow or throw 
     away a controlled substance), it shall not, standing alone, be 
     
other hand, examples of acts that do not qualify for punish-
ment under s 3C1.1 include "providing incomplete or mis-
leading information, not amounting to a material falsehood, in 
respect to a presentence investigation;  ... [and] avoiding or 
fleeing from arrest."  Id., Application Note 4(c), (d).4

     By providing non-exhaustive illustrations, the Sentencing 
Commission has left considerable discretion in applying 
s 3C1.1 to the sentencing court.  In view of the variety of 
situations that might constitute obstruction of justice, the 
Commission necessarily relied on the district court's reasoned 
exercise of discretion in applying s 3C1.1 to particular fact 
patterns.  The question, therefore, is how the threshold for 
applying s 3C1.1 is to be defined.  Efforts by the circuit 
courts of appeal to identify that threshold have not been 
__________
     sufficient to warrant an adjustment for obstruction unless it 
     resulted in a material hindrance to the official investigation or 
     prosecution of the instant offense or the sentencing of the 
     offender;
          (e) escaping or attempting to escape from custody before 
     trial or sentencing;  or willfully failing to appear, as ordered, 
     for a judicial proceeding;
     
          (f) providing materially false information to a judge or mag-
     istrate;
     
          (g) providing a materially false statement to a law enforce-
     ment officer that significantly obstructed or impeded the offi-
     cial investigation or prosecution of the instant offense;
     
          (h) providing materially false information to a probation 
     officer in respect to a presentence or other investigation for the 
     court;
     
          (i) conduct prohibited by 18 U.S.C. ss 1501-1516.
     
     4  Application Note 4 lists the following examples:

          (a) providing a false name or identification document at 
     arrest, except where such conduct actually resulted in a signifi-
     cant hindrance to the investigation or prosecution of the instant 
     offense;
               (b) making false statements, not under oath, to law enforce-
     ment officers, unless Application Note 3(g) above applies;
               (c) providing incomplete or misleading information, not 
     amounting to a material falsehood, in respect to a presentence 
     investigation;
          (d) avoiding or fleeing from arrest (see, however, s 3C1.2 
     (Reckless Endangerment During Flight)).

particularly successful in view of the breadth of the text of 
s 3C1.1.

     For example, the Fifth Circuit has derived two general 
principles from the commentary's lists based on two factors 
that it has presumably distilled from the commentary.  The 
two factors are:  "(1) whether the conduct 'presents an inher-
ently high risk that justice will be obstructed;'  and (2) 
whether the conduct 'requires a significant amount of plan-
ning,' as opposed to being 'the result of a spur of the moment 
decision' or 'stem[ming] from merely panic, confusion, or 
mistake.' "  United States v. Phillips, 210 F.3d 345, 348 (5th 
Cir. 2000) (quoting United States v. Greer, 158 F.3d 228, 235 
(5th Cir. 1998)).  A classification relying on this distinction, 
articulated in United States v. Draves, 103 F.3d 1328, 1337 
(7th Cir. 1997), as the difference between "panicked, instinc-
tive flight" and "calculated evasion," appears to place the 
threshold higher than the Commission's language and listings 
suggest, because the list of sanctionable conduct in Applica-
tion Note 3 includes actions that do not seem to require much 
planning.5

     The circuits, however, have had little problem imposing 
s 3C1.1 enhancements when a defendant refused to cooperate 
with an order to provide a handwriting exemplar.  See United 
States v. Brazel, 102 F.3d 1120 (11th Cir. 1997);  United States 
v. (David) Taylor, 88 F.3d 938 (11th Cir. 1996);  United States 
v. Ruth, 65 F.3d 599 (7th Cir. 1995);  United States v. Reyes, 
908 F.2d 281 (8th Cir. 1990).  As the Second Circuit observed 
in United States v. Valdez, 16 F.3d 1324 (2d Cir. 1994), "there 
are few better examples of a classic obstruction of justice 
than a defendant who refuses to give handwriting samples 
when compelled by subpoena [to do so]."  Id. at 1335.  It is 
true that these cases involved defendants who either refused 
to provide exemplars and never supplied them, or repeatedly 
refused and then belatedly provided the handwriting samples.  
Still, there is no suggestion that more than a single act 
without additional obstreperous, deliberate, or disruptive con-

__________
     5  Our concurring colleague refines the Fifth Circuit's analysis 
slightly.  See concurring opinion at 4.

duct is required under s 3C1.1, much less that a meaningful 
distinction exists between never submitting an exemplar and 
submitting one late.  As the Seventh Circuit has observed, 
the guideline is concerned with the effect of potentially ob-
structive conduct rather than formal definitions.  Cf. United 
States v. Harrison, 42 F.3d 427, 431 (7th Cir. 1994).

     Other circuit cases emphasize the obstructive nature of 
avoiding full compliance with an order to provide an exemp-
lar.  Both the Second and Seventh Circuits have affirmed 
s 3C1.1 enhancements when a defendant disguised a hand-
writing exemplar that was to be compared with writings to be 
introduced at trial.  See United States v. Yusufu, 63 F.3d 505, 
514-15 (7th Cir. 1995);  Valdez, 16 F.3d at 1335-36.  As in the 
instant case, the exemplars sought in Yusufu and Valdez 
were for comparison with writing that was to be introduced at 
trial.  See Yusufu, 63 F.3d at 514;  Valdez, 16 F.3d at 1335.  
Furthermore, in United States v. Ruth, 65 F.3d 599 (7th Cir. 
1995), the Seventh Circuit affirmed a s 3C1.1 enhancement 
based on a pretrial finding of contempt for two refusals to 
provide a handwriting exemplar, even though the government 
"eventually found another way to prove its case and did not 
try a third time to take the handwriting exemplars."  Id. at 
606.

     In addition, a series of cases have applied s 3C1.1 to out-of-
court conduct that is analogous to the type of conduct at 
issue.  The Second Circuit in United States v. Defeo, 36 F.2d 
272, 276 (2d Cir. 1994), affirmed enhancement under s 3C1.1 
for a "four-month failure to report to pretrial services."  The 
Ninth Circuit in United States v. Draper, 996 F.2d 982 (9th 
Cir. 1993), affirmed enhancement under s 3C1.1 for failure to 
report to a community corrections center during pre-trial 
release, rejecting both the view that a "significant disruption" 
was required and the view that "a two week absence is not 
sufficient to warrant the obstruction adjustment."  Id. at 984-
87.

     The line of authority applying s 3C1.1 to handwriting 
exemplars and out-of-court conduct is persuasive for three 
reasons:  the Commission has (1) used broad language in 

s 3C1.1;  (2) included egregious as well as non-egregious 
conduct in its list of acts that warrant a sentencing enhance-
ment;  and (3) determined that for most of the listed conduct 
sanctionable under s 3C1.1, actual hindrance is an irrelevant 
consideration.  By contrast, our concurring colleague's inter-
pretation does not adequately explain either the language of 
s 3C1.1 or the two lists in the commentary.  The Commission 
not only included attempts in s 3C1.1 but stated that "willful-
ly failing to appear, as ordered, for a judicial proceeding" is 
punishable under s 3C1.1 without actual hindrance, even 
though such failures do not seem necessarily to have a high 
risk of materially impeding the criminal justice process and 
might encompass spontaneous conduct.  In (Michael) Taylor, 
997 F.2d at 1559-60, the court, in rejecting a specific mens 
rea requirement, upheld a s 3C1.1 enhancement for obstruc-
tion where the defendant failed to return to the courtroom 
before the jury returned its verdict, even though defense 
counsel waived his presence and the proceedings continued.  
The viability of our concurring colleague's distinction cannot 
rest on the fact (Michael) Taylor involved a "judicial proceed-
ing" rather than an "ancillary process," see infra concurring 
opinion at 4, for the obstruction that occurred in both cases 
was adverse to the court's process.

     Accordingly, we hold that a s 3C1.1 enhancement can be 
based on a defendant's failure to comply with a court order to 
provide a handwriting exemplar in connection with the under-
lying pending charges regardless of whether the failure has a 
substantial effect on the investigation or prosecution.  A 
defendant's failure to provide the ordered exemplar clearly 
has the potential to weaken the government's case, prolong 
the pendency of the charges, and encumber the court's docket 
with an unnecessary trial.  The two circumstances on which 
Maccado relies are unavailing.  Whether or not the scheduled 
judicial proceedings are postponed is not dispositive, see 
Defeo, 36 F.3d at 276-77;  those proceedings might occur as 
scheduled, but without a defendant's exemplar or adequate 
time to evaluate or reach a plea agreement, the course of the 
proceeding could be very different.  The fact that a defendant 
ultimately enters a guilty plea to some of the charges cannot 

be dispositive;  until the district court has accepted the plea, 
see Fed. R. Crim. P. Rule 12, anything could happen.  See, 
e.g., supra n.1.  Moreover, the conclusion that a plea could 
erase an actual obstruction of justice would be inconsistent 
with s 3C1.1's inclusion of attempts.  Each of these circum-
stances, in other words, fails to eliminate the concern about 
the potential effect of the defendant's conduct that the guide-
line is addressing.6  While we do not adopt a per se rule for 
handwriting exemplars, for the Commission's reference in 
Application Note 2 to the "degree of planning" and "serious-
ness" of the obstructive conduct are relevant factors for the 
district court to consider in deciding whether a s 3C1.1 
enhancement is warranted, we reject a heightened threshold 
requiring conduct that has a substantial effect on the investi-
gation or prosecution.  It remains for the district court to 
determine whether a defendant has offered a sufficient reason 
for failing to comply with the court order as would make 
application of the guideline inappropriate.  As stated in Unit-
ed States v. Baker, 641 F.2d 1311 (9th Cir. 1981), "criminal 
contempt requires a contemnor to know of an order and 
willfully disobey it. . . . A good faith effort to comply with 
the order is a defense, although delaying tactics or indiffer-
ence to the order are not."  Id. at 1317 (citations omitted).

     Having concluded that the threshold for application of 
s 3C1.1 does not bar enhancement for failing to comply with 
a court order in the absence of a substantial effect, the 
remaining question is whether the district court's findings 
were in some manner lacking.  We find no clear error.  See 
generally United States v. Saro, 24 F.3d 283, 286 (D.C. Cir. 

__________
     6  The cases on which Maccado relies are distinguishable for the 
reason that the Application Notes require that the giving of false 
identification information to authorities actually hinder the investi-
gation or prosecution of the case.  See United States v. Manning, 
955 F.2d 770 (1st Cir. 1992);  United States v. Robinson, 978 F.2d 
1554 (10th Cir 1992).  Likewise, Maccado's reliance on United States 
v. Tabares, 951 F.2d 405 (1st Cir. 1991), is misplaced;  the materiali-
ty of Maccado's handwriting exemplar, which was relevant to the 
prosecution of his case, is undisputed.  See United States v. Smaw, 
993 F.2d 902, 904 (D.C. Cir. 1993).

1984).  Under s 3C1.1 the district court could reasonably 
determine that Maccado's failure to comply with a clearly 
understood order was inadequate.  Not only did Maccado's 
explanation seem implausible, it failed to explain why he did 
not provide his exemplar, or at least make arrangements to 
provide it, before he went to the hospital and was thereafter 
taken into custody, where his exemplar, albeit probably in a 
disguised form, was finally obtained.7  Maccado could hardly 
contend that the district court's interpretation of his conduct 
as being consistent with obstruction is clearly erroneous, for 
Maccado's version of events is undermined by Agent Codis-
pot's testimony that Maccado's telephone message stated he 
would take care of the "court-ordered things" at another time, 
thus indicating a deliberate, planned decision not to comply 
with the court order, a serious matter in and of itself.  
Consistent with the Sentencing Commission's acknowledg-
ment of the need for case-by-case determinations, see Appli-
cation Note 2, these are circumstances where the court owes 
due deference to the district court's application of a guideline.  
See In re Sealed Case, 199 F.3d at 491.

     Accordingly, we affirm the appealed judgment.

__________
     7  At sentencing, the government presented evidence that Mac-
cado's exemplar was "not naturally executed," and that when giving 
his exemplar, Maccado "was straining" and "bearing down with a lot 
of pressure."

     Williams, Circuit Judge, concurring:  At the initial status 
hearing on Maccado's indictment, the district court ordered 
him to provide a federal agent a handwriting sample.  Macca-
do disappeared.  The district court's discussion of Maccado's 
explanation, recounted in the majority opinion ("Maj. Op.") at 
4, strikes me as somewhat ambiguous, but I accept the 
majority's reading:  namely that the court, rather than finding 
the explanation insufficient, simply disbelieved it.  On that 
view, Maccado's disappearance looks like a deliberate and 
considered decision to pursue a course tending to delay the 
enforcement of the criminal law, and perhaps to thwart it.  
On that assumption we must consider whether there was 
error in the district court's decision under the Sentencing 
Guidelines to add a two-point enhancement for obstruction of 
justice under s 3C1.1.

     In the course of affirming, the majority appears to estab-
lish a lower threshold for enhancement than s 3C1.1 permits.  
The Guidelines provide for the enhancement "[i]f the defen-
dant willfully obstructed or impeded, or attempted to obstruct 
or impede, the administration of justice during the investiga-
tion, prosecution, or sentencing of the instant offense."  
U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1.  To elucidate this language the Sentencing 
Commission has included in its commentary two non-
exhaustive lists, one of acts qualifying for the enhancement 
and the other of non-qualifying acts.  We owe the commen-
tary deference.  Stinson v. United States, 508 U.S. 36, 38 
(1993);  see also U.S.S.G. s 1B1.7 (1995).  Defendant's con-
duct is not among the specific examples, so we must try to 
discern the pattern and see where Maccado's conduct fits 
best.

     To help the reader navigate through the two lists, I offer in 
advance the general principles that the Fifth Circuit has 
drawn from them.  It found that the enhancement should 
depend on the inherent tendency of the conduct actually to 
obstruct justice and on the deliberateness of defendant's 
behavior:  "(1) whether the conduct 'presents an inherently 
high risk that justice will be obstructed;'  and (2) whether the 
conduct 'requires a significant amount of planning,' as op-
posed to being 'the result of a spur of the moment decision' or 
'stem[ming] from merely panic, confusion, or mistake.' "  

United States v. Phillips, 210 F.3d 345, 348 (5th Cir. 2000) 
(internal citation omitted).  The acts listed by the commen-
tary as qualifying for enhancement are, in the Fifth Circuit's 
view, ones that are "egregiously wrongful," involving both 
considerable advance planning and a high risk of derailing an 
investigation or prosecution.  United States v. Greer, 158 
F.3d 228, 235 (5th Cir. 1998).  In support it points to lan-
guage in the commentary noting the range of "degree of 
planning[ ] and seriousness" that obstruction of justice issues 
may present.  Id. at 234.  In fact, I question whether every 
item in the Commission's lists handily fits the Fifth Circuit's 
explanation, but it is a useful starting point.

     Application Note 3 gives a non-exhaustive list of acts calling 
for enhancement:

          (a) threatening, intimidating, or otherwise unlawfully 
     influencing a co-defendant, witness, or juror, directly or 
     indirectly, or attempting to do so;
     
          (b) committing, suborning, or attempting to suborn 
     perjury;
     
          (c) producing or attempting to produce a false, altered, 
     or counterfeit document or record during an official 
     investigation or judicial proceeding;
     
          (d) destroying or concealing or directing or procuring 
     another person to destroy or conceal evidence that is 
     material to an official investigation or judicial proceeding 
     (e.g., shredding a document or destroying ledgers upon 
     learning that an official investigation has commenced or 
     is about to commence), or attempting to do so;  however, 
     if such conduct occurred contemporaneously with arrest 
     (e.g., attempting to swallow or throw away a controlled 
     substance), it shall not, standing alone, be sufficient to 
     warrant an adjustment for obstruction unless it resulted 
     in a material hindrance to the official investigation or 
     prosecution of the instant offense or the sentencing of 
     the offender;
     
          (e) escaping or attempting to escape from custody 
     before trial or sentencing;  or willfully failing to appear, 
     as ordered, for a judicial proceeding;
     
          (f) providing materially false information to a judge or 
     magistrate;
     
          (g) providing a materially false statement to a law 
     enforcement officer that significantly obstructed or im-
     peded the official investigation or prosecution of the 
     instant offense;
     
          (h) providing materially false information to a proba-
     tion officer in respect to a presentence or other investiga-
     tion for the court;
     
          (i) conduct prohibited by 18 U.S.C. ss 1501-1516.
     
          This adjustment also applies to any other obstructive 
     conduct in respect to the official investigation, prosecu-
     tion, or sentencing of the instant offense where there is a 
     separate count of conviction for such conduct.
     
U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1, Application Note 3.  Many of these acts 
easily score on both the factors identified by the Fifth Circuit.  
Example (g), however, seems to embrace a defendant's spon-
taneous deception of a law enforcement officer--but only if 
the deception in fact generates a "significant" obstruction or 
impediment.

     Application Note 4 gives examples of conduct not qualifying 
for an enhancement:

     The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of the 
     types of conduct that, absent a separate count of convic-
     tion for such conduct, do not warrant application of this 
     enhancement, but ordinarily can appropriately be sanc-
     tioned by the determination of the particular sentence 
     within the otherwise applicable guideline range:
     
          (a) providing a false name or identification document 
     at arrest, except where such conduct actually resulted in 
     a significant hindrance to the investigation or prosecution 
     of the instant offense;
     
          (b) making false statements, not under oath, to law 
     enforcement officers, unless Application Note 3(g) above 
     applies;
     
          (c) providing incomplete or misleading information, 
     not amounting to a material falsehood, in respect to a 
     presentence investigation;
     
          (d) avoiding or fleeing from arrest (see, however, 
     s 3C1.2 (Reckless Endangerment During Flight)).
     
U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1, Application Note 4.  Given Note 3(g) and 
the second part of Note 3(d), and the re-appearance of 
concern for actual obstructive effect in 4(a) and 4(b), I might 
amend the Fifth Circuit's classification to say that generally 
the enhancement is due (1) when the conduct is the result of 
planning and is highly likely to cause a serious derailment of 
the process, or (2) when conduct, even if spontaneous, actually 
does cause such a derailment.  Such a view puts the risk of 
derailment largely on the perpetrator.  Other courts appear 
to rely on the distinction between planned and high risk 
conduct, on one hand, and instinctive and low risk conduct, on 
the other.  See United States v. Draves, 103 F.3d 1328, 1337 
(7th Cir. 1997) (holding obstruction enhancement improper 
when defendant fled from the back of a patrol car during his 
arrest;  "panicked, instinctive flight" must be distinguished 
from "calculated evasion").

     "[W]illfully failing to appear, as ordered, for a judicial 
proceeding," see Application Note 3(e), appears not to fit 
readily the Fifth Circuit's taxonomy.  Such failures do not 
seem necessarily to have a high risk of materially impeding 
the criminal justice process--except in the sense of to some 
degree wasting judicial resources;  and, depending on the 
breadth of "willfully," these acts might or might not encom-
pass spontaneous conduct.  The language is, however, con-
fined to a "judicial proceeding," rather than reaching any 
neglect of any judicial order, and would not seem necessarily 
to encompass a judicial order to turn up for some ancillary 
process such as giving a handwriting sample out of court.  
Although courts have held that the failure to appear for a 
non-judicial proceeding qualifies for a s 3C1.1 sentencing 
enhancement, these courts also found the defendant acted in 
a deliberate and calculated fashion.  See United States v. 
Defeo, 36 F.3d 272, 276 (2d Cir. 1994) (upholding s 3C1.1 

enhancement for four month failure to report to pretrial 
services because it was comparable to escape from custody);  
United States v. Mondello, 927 F.2d 1463, 1466-67 (9th Cir. 
1991) (contrasting defendant's two-week "cat-and-mouse 
game of avoiding the authorities" after arrest with very 
different "situation where ... a criminal is surprised in the 
act of committing a crime and makes an evasive dodge to 
avoid apprehension").

     The majority's characterization of the Fifth Circuit's analy-
sis seems to me incorrect.  The analysis does not set actual 
hindrance as a threshold requirement for the enhancement, 
compare Maj. Op. at 11, and it does not read out the attempt 
language in s 3C1.1, compare Maj. Op. at 10.  It requires 
actual hindrance only when the defendant's act is better 
viewed as spontaneous than deliberate (in the sense of delib-
erated).  Also contrary to the majority, I do not see how the 
Sentencing Commission's inclusion of attempts to obstruct 
provides any basis for some sort of across-the-board lowering 
of the bar.  Compare id.  For example, one who attempts to 
escape from custody before trial deserves the enhancement, 
even if he is foiled by an alert guard.  See Application Note 
3(e).  But that is no basis for diluting the requirement of 
actual impact expressed by the Commission in cases such as 
3(g).

     The majority goes some way to erase all the distinctions 
that the Commission sought to draw.  It characterizes the 
Commission as having "included egregious as well as non-
egregious conduct in its list of acts that warrant a sentencing 
enhancement," Maj. Op. at 10, and says that the Seventh 
Circuit in Draves placed "the threshold higher than the 
Commission's language and listings suggest," Maj. Op. at 8.  
Obviously the margin between "egregious" and "non-
egregious" is vague, but the Commission was plainly trying to 
set up a hierarchy.  In Application Note 2 it stresses that 
"Application Note 4 sets forth examples of less serious forms 
of conduct to which this enhancement is not intended to 
apply, but that ordinarily can appropriately be sanctioned by 
the determination of the particular sentence within the other-
wise applicable guideline range."  U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1, Applica-

tion Note 2 (emphasis added).  By refusing to apply s 3C1.1 
to "panicked, instinctive flight", the court in Draves was 
merely honoring the Commission's scheme and leaving pun-
ishment of "less serious" obstructions to adjustment within 
the otherwise prevailing sentencing range.

     Accepting the district court's view of Maccado's conduct as 
deliberate, there remains the question of the risk (or reality) 
that his actions would seriously impede his prosecution.  In 
several cases courts have found a deliberate, affirmative 
refusal to provide a handwriting sample grounds for enhance-
ment--in many of them the refusal was repeated.  See Unit-
ed States v. Brazel, 102 F.3d 1120, 1163 (11th Cir. 1997) 
(upholding enhancement where the defendant affirmatively 
refused to provide, and never supplied, sample);  United 
States v. Taylor, 88 F.3d 938, 944 (11th Cir. 1996) (upholding 
enhancement for defendant's "repeated refusals to supply 
handwriting exemplars, and his effort to disguise his hand-
writing when he did supply them");  United States v. Ruth, 65 
F.3d 599, 608 (7th Cir. 1995) (upholding enhancement where 
the "court twice ordered handwriting exemplars, and [defen-
dant] twice failed to comply");  United States v. Reyes, 908 
F.2d 281, 290 (8th Cir. 1990) (upholding enhancement where 
defendant refused to comply with handwriting sample order 
and never supplied one).  Maccado's behavior seems to have 
posed less risk and caused less actual impact on law enforce-
ment.  Indeed, if we exclude days in the hospital or in 
custody, only two days passed between the June 18, 1998 
order and the actual taking of an example.  Maccado seems 
reminiscent of the luckless Conrad Hensley in Tom Wolfe's A 
Man in Full, though to be sure a good deal more feckless.  
But his hospitalization and custody may be viewed as wind-
falls, so that--given the deference we owe the district court's 
application of law to facts, see United States v. Kim, 23 F.3d 
513, 517 (D.C. Cir. 1994)--we cannot reverse the district 
court for its implicit judgment that Maccado's actions pre-
sented a serious risk of derailing justice.

     Accordingly, I join the court in affirming the judgment.

       