                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 14, 2000   Decided December 29, 2000 

                           No. 00-3016

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                        Curnell L. Davis, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00222-01)

     A. J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender, argued the cause 
and filed the briefs for appellant.  Gregory L. Poe entered an 
appearance.

     Suzanne Grealy Curt, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Thomas J. Tourish, Jr. 
and Ricardo Nunez, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Williams, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel:

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  After police conducting a Terry stop-
and-frisk discovered a shotgun hidden in his clothing, appel-
lant pled guilty to possession of a firearm by a felon.  He 
appeals the district court's denial of his motion to suppress, 
arguing, among other things, that the court erred by relying 
on information police obtained from a citizen 911 call describ-
ing a man fleeing the scene of a shooting even though the 
government failed to produce a tape of the call.  Finding that 
appellant waived this argument, and that his similarity to the 
911 caller's description and to witness accounts of the shooter 
gave police a "reasonable, articulable suspicion" sufficient to 
justify the stop, see Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 123 
(2000), we affirm.

                                I

     At 11:33 PM on May 31, 1999, a 911 caller reported gunfire 
and screaming in the 2300 block of North Capitol Street.  
Minutes later, a police dispatcher sent units to 2308 North 
Capitol to investigate a "shooting."  As police arrived at the 
scene, the dispatcher relayed additional citizen reports de-
scribing two men, one with blood on his clothes and another 
in khaki shorts and a white t-shirt.  At 11:40, the police unit 
that had arrived at the North Capitol address broadcast its 
first account of witness reports.  Known as a "lookout," the 
broadcast described the suspect as a man on a bike, dressed 
all in black, heading north on North Capitol.  The unit also 
relayed witness reports that the "subjects" were in a four-
door sedan and that "there seem[ed] to be a grey, small 
weapon."  Updating the lookout two minutes later, the unit 
described the suspect as a "black male, light skinned, black 
[unclear], all black, or possibly on a bike, [unclear] carrying a 
small weapon."

     At midnight, about thirty minutes after the shooting, the 
dispatcher reported that "we have a citizen that's on landline, 
says the subject is wearing all black, that appears to be 
running away from 2308 North Capitol.  He's on foot, possi-

bly now in the unit block of Channing."  Police Lieutenant 
Taliaferro and his partner investigated and within thirty 
seconds noticed appellant Curnell Davis, a black man wearing 
dark blue coveralls, walking with a companion just a block 
away from where the midnight 911 caller had reported seeing 
the fleeing man.  Stopping and frisking Davis, Taliaferro 
found a sawed-off shotgun hidden in Davis's clothing.  Davis 
told the police that "it was [his] boy that got shot" and that he 
needed a gun for protection because the neighborhood was so 
dangerous.  A grand jury indicted Davis for unlawful posses-
sion of a firearm by a felon.  See 18 U.S.C. s 922(g)(1).

     Arguing that the police lacked a reasonable suspicion for 
the stop-and-frisk, see Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 30 (1968), 
Davis moved to suppress both the shotgun and his statements 
to the police.  In response, the government pointed to Davis's 
similarity to the lookouts and to the midnight 911 caller's 
description of the man fleeing the crime scene.  Although at a 
status conference the government apparently promised (the 
record does not contain the transcript) to search for the tape 
of the midnight 911 call, it failed to produce it at the 
evidentiary hearing on the suppression motion.  Davis's coun-
sel, however, never mentioned the tape's absence at the 
hearing, focusing both his cross-examination of Taliaferro (the 
only witness) and his closing argument on ways in which 
Davis failed to match the descriptions of the shooting suspect.  
Finding Taliaferro's suspicion of Davis reasonable, the district 
court denied the suppression motion.  Davis pled guilty, 
reserving his right to appeal.  We review the district court's 
findings of fact for clear error and its conclusions of law de 
novo.  See Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690, 699 (1996).

                                II

     Investigative stops do not run afoul of the Fourth Amend-
ment if they are based on "reasonable, articulable suspicion" 
of criminal conduct.  Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 123.  Requiring 
considerably less than probable cause, Terry stops are consti-
tutional if the police can show a "minimal level of objective 
justification."  INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 217 (1984).

     Davis argues that in defending the constitutionality of the 
stop, the government cannot rely on the information supplied 
by the midnight 911 caller and relayed by the dispatcher to 
the arresting officer because the government failed to pro-
duce the tape of the call.  In Whiteley v. Warden, Wyo. State 
Penitentiary, 401 U.S. 560, 568 (1971), the Supreme Court 
held unlawful an arrest based on a radio bulletin where the 
government failed to prove that the bulletin was itself based 
on probable cause.  Later, in United States v. Hensley, 469 
U.S. 221 (1985), the Court described Whiteley as standing for 
the proposition that "when evidence is uncovered during a 
search incident to an arrest in reliance merely on a flyer or 
bulletin, its admissibility turns on whether the officers who 
issued the flyer possessed probable cause to make the ar-
rest," id. at 231;  see also Whiteley, 401 U.S. at 568 ("An 
otherwise illegal arrest cannot be insulated from challenge by 
the decision of the instigating officer to rely on fellow officers 
to make the arrest.").  Hensley also extended Whiteley to 
reasonable suspicion cases.  469 U.S. at 232.  Following 
Hensley, in United States v. Cutchin we overturned a district 
court's exclusion of a 911 tape, saying:  "What the tape itself 
revealed went directly to the issue whether the dispatcher 
had a reasonable, articulable suspicion, without which [the 
officer's] stop of [the suspect's] car might not have been 
legal."  956 F.2d 1216, 1217-18 (D.C. Cir. 1992).

     Relying on these cases, Davis urges us to find that without 
the 911 tape, the dispatcher's report of the call cannot provide 
the basis for reasonable suspicion.  According to the govern-
ment, Davis waived this argument because he failed to make 
it in the district court.  See Fed. R. Crim. P. 12(f) ("Failure by 
a party to raise defenses or objections ... at the time set by 
the court ... shall constitute waiver thereof.").  The govern-
ment's point is well taken.  Not once in the district court did 
defense counsel cite Whiteley, Hensley, or Cutchin, much less 
the propositions for which they stand, nor did he complain 
about the government's failure to produce the 911 tape at the 
suppression hearing.  Counsel focused his entire argument on 
trying to persuade the district court that Davis did not match 
the suspect's description.  Contrary to Davis's argument, we 

do not consider the filing of a general suppression motion 
sufficient to preserve the 911 tape objection for appeal just 
because the government bears the burden of proving reason-
able suspicion.  Neither defense counsel's motion nor his 
argument could have given the government notice of the 
importance counsel apparently ascribed to the tape.

     Given the waiver, we will consider the information provided 
by the 911 caller in determining whether the police had a 
reasonable suspicion sufficient to justify the stop.  For start-
ers, we agree with Davis that the call, by itself, provides 
insufficient justification.  In Florida v. J.L., 120 S.Ct. 1375 
(2000), the Supreme Court considered the validity of a Terry 
stop based on an anonymous tip that a young man standing 
on a street corner possessed an illegal weapon.  Because 
nothing corroborated the anonymous caller's accusation of 
criminal activity, the Court held the tip insufficiently reliable 
to justify the stop.  Id. at 1380.  In this case, the midnight 
911 caller made no accusation of criminal activity, reliable or 
otherwise, reporting only that a subject dressed all in black 
appeared to be running from 2308 North Capitol.  In view of 
J.L., the information supplied by the call falls far short of 
what Terry requires.

     The 911 call, however, was not Taliaferro's only source of 
information, and we have made it clear that "in judging the 
reasonableness of the actions of the officer the circumstances 
before him are not to be dissected and viewed singly;  rather 
they must be considered as a whole."  United States v. Hall, 
525 F.2d 857, 859 (D.C. Cir. 1976).  Taliaferro knew that a 
shooting had just occurred at 2308 North Capitol and that 
witnesses had described the shooter as a black male dressed 
all in black heading north from the crime scene.  He also 
knew that a man matching the description of the suspect in 
two respects--his clothing and his approximate location (just 
north of 2308 North Capitol)--had been seen fleeing the 
crime scene.  So when Taliaferro saw Davis, he saw a man 
heading away from the nearby crime scene who not only 
matched the 911 caller's description (according to the district 
court, Davis's dark blue coveralls likely appeared black in the 
dark) but also matched the police lookouts in yet another 

respect:  his race.  This case is thus quite like United States 
v. Smart, 98 F.3d 1379, 1384 (D.C. Cir. 1997), where we found 
sufficient justification for a Terry stop based on the criminal 
suspect's sex, race, clothing, and location.  Taliaferro had 
precisely the same information about the shooting suspect in 
this case, albeit aggregated from two different sources.  To 
be sure, Davis was with a companion, a fact mentioned in 
none of the descriptions;  he was not riding a bicycle as the 
lookouts said he might "possibly" be;  nor was a "grey, small 
weapon" visible.  Setting aside these minor inconsistencies 
involving mutable characteristics, however, Davis matched 
the lookouts and the 911 caller's description sufficiently to 
supply the reasonable suspicion required by Terry.

     Davis next argues that Taliaferro's focus on him was unrea-
sonable because the dispatcher provided information about 
other suspects:  a man with blood on his clothes, another in 
khaki shorts, and several individuals in a four-door sedan.  
We disagree.  Terry requires only that the police have a 
reasonable suspicion of the person actually stopped.  In 
assessing this suspicion, the fact that police have greater 
reason to suspect a different person is of course relevant.  
But in this case, the best information the police had--eyewit-
ness accounts of the shooter and a man seen fleeing the 
scene--pointed to Davis.

     While we recognize the need to guard against authorizing 
broad police sweeps of an undeniably high crime area, see 
Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 52 (1979) ("The fact that 
appellant was in a neighborhood frequented by [criminals], 
standing alone, is not a basis for concluding that appellant 
himself was engaged in criminal conduct."), we need not 
address that concern here--the police found Davis within a 
block of a shooting that occurred just thirty minutes earlier 
and Davis matched the primary suspect in several critical 
respects.  Because Davis makes no independent challenge to 
the frisk, the district court's denial of the motion to suppress 
is affirmed.

                                                        So ordered.

           