                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                            ---------

                      Filed August 21, 2001

                             No. 94-1

       In re:  Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan Association 
       (Independent Counsel's Motion for Termination Order)

                             _______

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels

           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                             _______

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                  ORDER DEFINING FURTHER DUTIES 
                    OF THE INDEPENDENT COUNSEL

     Per Curiam:  On August 3, 2001, Independent Counsel 
Robert W. Ray filed with this Court a "Motion for Order of 
Termination of Investigation of the Office of Independent 
Counsel Robert W. Ray";  and,

     Upon due consideration, it appearing to the Court that the 
Independent Counsel has represented to the Court that all 
investigations were concluded as of January 19, 2001;  and, 
that in compliance with 28 U.S.C. s 594(h)(1)(B), the Inde-
pendent Counsel has filed with the Special Division the final 
reports in all of its investigative mandates, which set forth 

fully and completely the work of the office;  and, for the 
reasons more fully set forth in the opinion filed contempora-
neously herewith, it is

     (1) ORDERED that the Independent Counsel, effective 
September 30, 2001, and subject to further order of this 
Court, continue his office only to the extent necessary or 
appropriate to fulfill his duties relating to his Final Report, 
specifically:

     (a) the final submission of such Report inclusive of the 
     statutory appendix consisting of the comments autho-
     rized by this Court in accordance with the provisions of 
     28 U.S.C. s 594(h)(2);  (b) the written evaluations of 
     applications for attorneys' fees in accordance with 28 
     U.S.C. s 593(f)(2);  (c) the archiving and transfer of 
     reports pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 594(k)(1);  (d) the publi-
     cation of final reports under 28 U.S.C. s 594(h)(3), as 
     may be ordered by the Court;  and, (e) the completion of 
     any remaining audits in 28 U.S.C. s 596(c)(1).
     
     (2) To the extent necessary or appropriate to the purposes 
of this order, the Independent Counsel shall perform any 
noninvestigative and nonprosecutorial tasks remaining of his 
statutory duties as required to conclude the functions of his 
office as set forth in the decretal paragraph (1).

                                                            Per Curiam

                                                       For the Court: 
                                                       Mark J. Langer, Clerk

                                                  by

                                                       Marilyn R. Sargent 
                                                       Chief Deputy Clerk

                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                             _______

                      Filed August 21, 2001

                             No. 94-1

       In re:  Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan Association 
       (Independent Counsel's Motion for Termination Order)

                             _______

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels

           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                             _______

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Special Division filed per curiam.

     Per curiam:  As we noted in the Per Curiam order accom-
panying this opinion, the Independent Counsel has come 
before this Court moving for an order pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
s 596(b)(1) "terminating the investigation of the office of 
Independent Counsel Robert W. Ray" (the "Office").  Literal-
ly, that section of the Ethics in Government Act empowers 
the Court to effect the "termination of office" rather than the 
termination of investigation.  However, we have in the past 
construed the statute as granting the lesser included authori-
zation to terminate the investigative functions of the office 
while reiterating the noninvestigative statutory duties of the 
office, such as those set forth in our accompanying order.  
See generally, In re North (Walsh Show Cause Order), 10 
F.3d 831 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div. 1993) (per curiam).  In the 
present case, as in In re North, it appears to the Court that 

an order so delimiting the continuing authority of the Office is 
appropriate.

     The Independent Counsel has represented to the Court 
that he completed all of his investigations as of January 19, 
2001.  We have no reason to doubt this assertion, and it is not 
apparent that any other party would have standing to chal-
lenge that assertion.  Insofar as other parties have interests 
in the question, these would seem appropriately addressed in 
the comments to the report authorized by this Court in 
accordance with the provisions of 28 U.S.C. s 594(h)(2).  In-
dependent Counsel Ray, like the Independent Counsel in In 
re North, does not seek to absolve himself of the duties 
contemplated under the statute of responding to attorney fee 
applications, archiving, publishing, and conducting such other 
supportive noninvestigative functions as may remain his duty.  
Neither do we contemplate absolving him of those duties.  
Therefore, by the order of even date, we have granted the 
termination of investigation sought by the Independent Coun-
sel, but do not terminate his office, as he remains empowered 
and obligated under the statute to perform the other nonin-
vestigative duties which neither the Court nor the Depart-
ment of Justice is equipped to perform were we to terminate 
his office.

                                                        SO ORDERED.

                                    