                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 13, 2002       Decided July 2, 2002 

                           No. 01-1282

      AT Systems West, Inc., f/k/a Armored Transport, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

                International Union, Security and 
                 Fire Professionals of America, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Marta M. Fernandez argued the cause for petitioner.  
With her on the briefs was Patrick W. Jordan.

     Jeffrey M. Hirsch, Counsel, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Sharon I. Block, 
Attorney.  Julie B. Broido, Senior Attorney, entered an 
appearance.

     Scott A. Brooks was on the brief for intervenor.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  The principal issue in this review 
of an order of the National Labor Relations Board is whether 
the employer refused to bargain in the face of a valid bargain-
ing demand, in violation of s 8(a)(1) and (5) of the National 
Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1) & (5).  On that 
issue, our decision in Prime Serv., Inc. v. NLRB, 266 F.3d 
1233, 1238 (D.C. Cir. 2001), controls the outcome.

     The employer, AT Systems West, Inc., operates an ar-
mored car company.  The company transports, processes and 
stores cash, coins, checks and other valuables for banks and 
retail stores.  At each of the company's facilities in Bakers-
field, Santa Maria, Fresno, Merced and Temecula, California, 
an employee association served as the exclusive bargaining 
representative of the employees.  The employee associations 
negotiated and communicated with AT Systems on the em-
ployees' behalf, and entered into triennial contracts.  None of 
the associations had elected officers or office space, none kept 
records, and none had a constitution or bylaws.

     In March and April of 1998, the employee associations for 
the five facilities designated the Currency and Security Han-
dlers Association ("CASHA") as their agent for collective 
bargaining.  The associations did not notify AT Systems of 
their actions.  David Troy Nelsen, then president of CASHA, 
sent letters on CASHA letterhead to AT Systems' president 
Richard Irvin.  One of Nelsen's letters, dated April 6, 1998, 
stated:

     On March 23, 1998, the Armored Transport Santa Maria 
     Employees Association voted to affiliate with the Curren-
     cy And Securities Handlers Association.
     
     Please be advised that CASHA is now the bargaining 
     representative for the Armored Transport Santa Maria 
     Employees Association.
     
     CASHA will honor the existing contract between the 
     Armored Transport Santa Maria Employees Association 
     and Armored Transport, Inc.
     
     CASHA requests Armored Transport, Inc. to recognize 
     CASHA as the representative of the Armored Transport 
     Santa Maria Employees Association.
     
     Armored Transport, Inc. will conduct future bargaining 
     with the same representatives of the Armored Transport 
     Santa Maria Employees Association who conducted such 
     bargaining in the past.
     
     Please respond to this request by April 20, 1998.
     
Nelsen sent similar letters to Irvin on the same day regard-
ing the Fresno and Temecula Employee Associations.
     After AT Systems failed to respond, Nelsen wrote to Irvin 
again on May 18, 1998, stating:

     On April 6, 1998, CASHA demanded recognition for the 
     following A.T.I. Branches due to Merger Elections held:
     
     1-Fresno
     2-Santa Maria
     3-Temecula
      4-Van Nuys
     
     A.T.I. has not responded.
     
     Please be advised that CASHA is also demanding recog-
     nition for the following A.T.I. Branches for Merger Elec-
     tions also held:
     
     1-Bakersfield
     2-Merced
     3-Victorville
     
     CASHA will respectfully file charges for refusal to bar-
     gain with the N.L.R.B. if we do not receive a response 
     by May 29, 1998.
     
     On June 11, 1998, Nelsen and some other CASHA repre-
sentatives met with Irvin on an unrelated matter.  At the 
meeting, Nelsen asked Irvin for a response to CASHA's April 
6 and May 18 letters.  Irvin replied that there was no reason 
for AT Systems to recognize CASHA for those units because 
there were no contracts due to expire.

     Between June 24 and October 15, 1998, CASHA filed unfair 
labor practice charges against AT Systems alleging that the 
company had unlawfully refused to recognize and bargain 
with CASHA at the five facilities (Bakersfield, Santa Maria, 
Fresno, Merced and Temecula).  Then on February 10, 1999, 
Nelsen--who had become the President of Local 100 after 
CASHA became affiliated with the United Plant Guard Work-
ers of America--sent another letter to AT Systems, request-
ing a response to the earlier requests for recognition.  The 
letter stated:

     On May 18, 1998, CASHA demanded recognition for the 
     following A.T.I. Branches due to Merger Elections held:
     
     1-Bakersfield
     2-Fresno
     3-Merced
     4-Santa Maria
     
     A.T.I. did not respond.
     
     As you know, CASHA has voted to affiliate with the 
     United Plant Guard Workers of America and is now 
     CASHA LOCAL #100.
     
     CASHA LOCAL #100 is now officially demanding recog-
     nition in the following A.T.I. locations:
     
     1-Bakersfield
     2-Fresno
     3-Merced
     4-Santa Maria
     
     AT Systems' director of labor relations, Joel Curnutt, told 
Nelson in a telephone conversation that the company's posi-
tion had not changed and that it would not recognize CASHA 
or Local 100.  Local 100 then filed unfair labor practice 
charges with the Board, alleging that AT Systems unlawfully 
refused to recognize and bargain with Local 100 at the five 
facilities.

     In a consolidated proceeding, an Administrative Law Judge 
ruled that AT Systems violated section 8(a)(1) and (5) of the 
Act, see 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1) & (5), by refusing to recognize 
and bargain with CASHA and Local 100 as agents of the five 
employee associations.  The Board affirmed the ALJ's rul-
ings, findings and conclusions and adopted his order requiring 
AT Systems to cease and desist from refusing to recognize 
and bargain with Local 100.

     AT Systems disputes the Board's decision on alternative 
grounds.  It first contends that because none of the employ-
ees' representatives advised AT Systems of their selection of 
an agent for bargaining purposes, the company could not 
have unlawfully refused to bargain.  See, e.g., Tree-Free Fiber 
Co., 1999 WL 305507, at *7 (N.L.R.B. May 10, 1999);  Hamp-
ton Lumber Mills-Washington, Inc., 2001 WL 618204, at *10 
(N.L.R.B. May 31, 2001). The company's second argument is 
that it violated no duty to bargain because only a request to 
recognize (not a request to bargain) was made and the Act 
does not impose any independent duty to recognize a bargain-
ing agent absent a valid bargaining demand.  We agree with 
the second argument and therefore do not reach the first.

     The ALJ faulted AT Systems for failing to "recognize and 
offer to bargain with CASHA" in violation of s 8(a)(1) and (5) 
of the Act.  Armored Transport, Inc., 2001 WL 589388, * 12 
(N.L.R.B. May 29, 2001).  But there is no authority to 
support the proposition that an employer violates the Act 
simply by not recognizing a bargaining agent upon request.  
Counsel for the Board conceded as much at oral argument.  
The Act imposes on employers a duty to "bargain collectively 
with the representatives of [its] employees."  29 U.S.C. 
s 158(a)(5).  Part of the duty to bargain includes the duty to 

recognize, but until a valid bargaining demand is made, there 
is no independent duty to recognize a bargaining agent.  
Thus, the key question is whether AT Systems received a 
valid bargaining demand.

     Although a "union need utter no particular words to convey 
its demand for bargaining," Prime Serv., Inc. v. NLRB, 266 
F.3d 1233, 1238 (D.C. Cir. 2001), a valid bargaining demand 
nevertheless "must contain more than merely a suggestion 
that the parties should meet to discuss representation."  
Williams Enter., Inc. v. NLRB, 956 F.2d 1226, 1233 (D.C. 
Cir. 1992).  If a union's communications to an employer do 
not explicitly demand bargaining, a refusal-to-bargain charge 
cannot be sustained unless there is "some indicia of a de-
mand, such as a suggested meeting place and time, proposed 
topics, and a method for reply."  Id.  The burden is on the 
union to make its bargaining wishes known.  The "union must 
do more than simply suggest a meeting without specifying the 
subjects of the meeting or when or where the union would 
like to get together."  Prime Serv., 266 F.3d at 1238.

     In this case, none of CASHA or Local 100's letters explicit-
ly demanded that AT Systems bargain with CASHA.  The 
April 6, 1998, letters told AT Systems to continue to bargain 
with the employees' representatives--that is, the local em-
ployee associations.  The letters said nothing about where 
bargaining was to take place, when bargaining was to occur, 
or what subjects would be covered.  See Prime Serv., 266 
F.3d at 1238.  Although the letters demanded recognition of 
CASHA as the employees' bargaining agent, a demand for 
recognition is not a demand to bargain, as the Board made 
clear in Sheboygan Sausage Co., 156 N.L.R.B. 1490, 1500-01 
(1966).  In that case, the Board held that a telegram stating 
that the company's employees authorized the union to be 
their representative and that the union requested "recogni-
tion as agent" was not a demand for bargaining because it did 
not expressly request bargaining, nor did it propose a meet-
ing date or place, or any method to initiate a bargaining 
session.  Id.  Relying on NLRB v. Williams, 50 F.3d 1280, 
1286 (4th Cir. 1995), counsel for the Board argued that even if 
the letters did not expressly seek bargaining, CASHA's filing 

of charges against the company removed all doubt that this is 
what it had in mind.  But much of the conduct CASHA 
complained about (such as AT Systems' failure to respond to 
its letters of April 6, 1998, and May 18, 1998) preceded the 
unfair labor practice charges, the first of which was filed on 
June 24, 1998.  Even if the June 24th filing of charges plus 
the earlier requests for recognition amounted to a valid 
request to bargain, only conduct occurring after that date 
could serve as a basis for finding an unfair labor practice. Yet 
the ALJ's decision adopted by the Board was not limited to 
the company's conduct after June 24, 1998.  In fact, the ALJ 
never mentioned the filing of charges as a ground for deter-
mining that a valid bargaining demand had been made.  The 
ALJ relied solely on "CASHA's letters of April 6 and May 18, 
1998, and subsequent communications by Local 100."  2001 
WL 589388, * 12.  The short of the matter is that the ALJ's 
decision contained nothing to support the conclusion that 
CASHA or Local 100 requested bargaining.  See SEC v. 
Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196 (1947).  Without a bargain-
ing demand, there can be no violation of a duty to bargain.

     There is a separate issue remaining.  It pertains to AT 
Systems' dealings with employees at its Temecula facility.  
On April 23, 1998--after the Temecula Employee Association 
designated CASHA as its bargaining agent--thirteen Teme-
cula unit employees signed and submitted a letter to the 
company stating that they would like to open their current 
wage agreement to facilitate negotiations of a wage increase.  
In response, AT Systems held a mandatory meeting with the 
Temecula employees on May 20, 1998.  Thirteen employees 
attended.  A renewed collective bargaining agreement was 
negotiated at this meeting.  Later, on March 18, 1999, AT 
Systems held another mandatory meeting with the Temecula 
employees, at which it offered the employees a revised collec-
tive bargaining agreement, including a two dollar an hour 
increase in starting wages.  The employees accepted the 
agreement and signed a written contract.

     The Board's General Counsel alleged that AT Systems 
improperly bypassed the Temecula Employee Association, 
CASHA and Local 100 and therefore violated s 8(a)(1) and 

(5) of the Act.  AT Systems defended on the ground that the 
Temecula employees were one and the same as the Temecula 
Employee Association and that the Association's decision to 
negotiate new contracts with AT Systems therefore constitut-
ed a rescission of its earlier designation of CASHA and Local 
100 as its agent.  The ALJ, and hence the Board, ruled that 
the company violated its s 8(a)(5) duty to bargain with the 
designated representatives of the Temecula Association be-
cause it "did not deal with the Temecula employees as the 
representing Association or labor organization."  2001 WL 
589388, * 15.  "Rather [the company] at all times material 
herein treated the employees as employees," rushing the 
employees to approve its offers, commanding their attendance 
at mandatory meetings, and offering financial gain condi-
tioned on the employees' discontinuance of dealings with 
CASHA.  Id.

     AT Systems argues that it did not violate s 8(a)(5) by 
entering into the contract with the employees at the Temecu-
la facility because it "had no means by which it could meet 
with the Employee Association other than meeting with the 
employees."  Brief for Petitioner at 48.  We agree.  Employ-
ee associations may--as they did here--serve as valid bar-
gaining representatives under the Act.  See 29 U.S.C. 
s 152(5) (defining the term "labor organization" to include 
any "employee representation committee or plan");  see also 
29 U.S.C. s 159(a);  Guerdon Indus. & Mobile Home Workers 
Ass'n, 199 N.L.R.B. 937-38 (1972).  Thus, when AT Systems 
met with the Temecula employees, it was doing no more than 
meeting with the employees' valid labor representative.

     The Act draws no distinctions between unions based on 
their degrees of formality.  That the Employee Association 
had no elected officers or no formal structure did not render 
it an invalid or improper labor organization. Because the 
employees chose to represent themselves, AT Systems acted 
reasonably--and in accord with its past practices--when it 
held meetings with all the Temecula employees.  The record 
showed that when AT Systems wanted to deal with the 
employee association, it spoke with "everybody."  Further-
more, AT Systems did precisely what CASHA's April 6, 1998, 

letter requested;  it conducted "future bargaining with the 
same representatives of the Armored Transport Temecula 
Employees Association who conducted such bargaining in the 
past."  Letter from Troy Nelsen to Richard Irvin (Apr. 6, 
1998).

     AT Systems' petition for review on both the failure to 
bargain and Temecula issues is granted, and the Board's 
cross-application for enforcement is denied.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                                              