                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 28, 2001   Decided October 30, 2001 

                           No. 00-1457

                 John J. Flynn and J. H. Thomas, 
                            Appellants

                                v.

            Commissioner of Internal Revenue Service, 
                             Appellee

             Appeal from the United States Tax Court 
                       (No. IRS-18090-99R)

     Michael S. Gordon argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellants.

     Steven W. Parks, Attorney, United States Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief 
was Kenneth L. Greene, Attorney.  Ann W. Muoio, Attorney, 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Rogers, and Tatel, Circuit Judges

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Section 7476 of the Internal 
Revenue Code ("I.R.C.") allows certain qualified employees to 
bring an action in the Tax Court for a declaratory judgment 
to challenge a determination that their employers' retirement 
plan qualifies for favorable tax treatment.  I.R.C. s 7476 
(1994).  Pursuant to the statute's express delegation of au-
thority, the Secretary of the Treasury promulgated regula-
tions determining which employees would be permitted to 
utilize the declaratory judgment remedy.  See Treas. Reg. 
s 1.7476-1(b) (as amended in 1988).  Appellants sought to use 
s 7476 to challenge the Internal Revenue Service's ("IRS") 
determination that the amended retirement plan of their 
former employer continued to qualify for favorable tax treat-
ment.  The regulations, however, grant standing to use the 
declaratory judgment remedy only to current employees, not 
former employees like appellants.  See id.  The United 
States Tax Court therefore dismissed appellants' action for a 
declaratory judgment and upheld the regulations denying 
standing to former employees.  See Flynn v. Comm'r, 80 
T.C.M. (CCH) 91 (2000).

     On appeal, appellants make three arguments.  First, they 
argue that s 7476 impermissibly delegates authority to the 
Secretary to determine which employees may use the declara-
tory judgment remedy, without giving the Secretary guide-
lines for making that determination, in violation of the consti-
tutional nondelegation doctrine.  Because appellants did not 
raise this argument at the Tax Court, we decline to address it 
now.  Second, appellants renew their challenge to the validity 
of Treas. Reg. s 1.7476-1(b).  We find that the Tax Court 
correctly upheld the regulation as a reasonable construction 
of the statutory language.  Finally, appellants argue that 
their employer somehow conferred standing on them by 
mailing them a "notice to interested parties" informing them 
that it was seeking a determination that the amended plan 
would continue to receive favorable tax treatment.  It is 
clear, however, that the rules governing the content of notices 

to interested parties do not operate to confer standing on 
appellants.  We accordingly affirm the judgment of the Tax 
Court.

                          I. Background

A.   The s 7476 Declaratory Judgment Provision and the 
     Applicable Regulations

     In 1974, Congress enacted the Employee Retirement In-
come Security Act ("ERISA"), sections of which were codified 
as part of the I.R.C.  Pub. L. No. 93-406, 88 Stat. 829 
(codified as amended at 29 U.S.C. ss 1001-1461 and scattered 
sections of the I.R.C., 26 U.S.C. (1994 & Supp. 1999)).  Many 
of its provisions set forth requirements to which retirement 
and other benefit plans must conform.  Among these require-
ments are the so-called "backloading rules," mathematical 
formulae designed to prevent employers from providing rates 
of benefit accrual for older or more experienced workers that 
are excessive in relation to the rates of accrual for younger 
workers.  See I.R.C. ss 401(a)(7) (providing that to qualify 
under ERISA, a trust must satisfy the requirements of 
s 411);  411(b)(1) (setting forth various mathematical formu-
lae that plans may use) (1994).  When retirement plans 
comply with ERISA's requirements, they enjoy favorable tax 
treatment.  ERISA is a remedial statute, whose express 
purpose is to protect, inter alia, "the interests of participants 
in private pension plans and their beneficiaries."  29 U.S.C. 
s 1001(c) (1994);  Rettig v. Pension Benefit Guar. Corp., 744 
F.2d 133, 155 n.54 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (discussing Congress' 
remedial purpose in enacting ERISA).

     Internal Revenue Code s 7476 gives the Tax Court juris-
diction to issue a declaration about a retirement plan's qualifi-
cation for favorable tax treatment when there is a controver-
sy involving the Secretary of the Treasury's determination 
that a plan qualifies or continues to qualify for such treat-
ment.  I.R.C. s 7476(a).  Any employee who qualifies as an 
"interested party" under regulations prescribed by the Secre-
tary may petition the Tax Court for such a declaration.  Id.  
The effect of the provision is to allow certain employees and 

other interested parties to act as watchdogs:  when a plan or 
an amendment to a plan hurts those employees' interests by 
failing to conform to ERISA's requirements, those employees 
can seek a declaration preventing the plan from receiving a 
determination that will ensure favorable tax status.  Employ-
ers and plan administrators are also interested parties who 
can use the declaratory judgment remedy provided in s 7476.  
Id.

     The regulations authorized by s 7476(b)(1) define several 
categories of present employees as "interested parties" who 
can challenge plan determinations in most situations, includ-
ing cases involving certain amendments to plans.  Treas. Reg. 
ss 1.7476-1(b)(1)(i), (ii), (2)(ii), (3)(ii), (4), (5).  The only in-
stance in which former employees are included as interest- 
ed parties is in the case of plan terminations.  Id. 
s 1.7476-1(b)(5).  When an employer wishes to terminate a 
retirement plan that covers former employees with vested 
benefits under the plan, those former employees and all 
beneficiaries of deceased former employees currently receiv-
ing benefits under that plan have standing to seek a declara-
tory judgment.  Id.

     Additional regulations require the party applying for quali-
fied status to notify the interested parties referred to in 
s 7476(b)(1) of the application for a determination of qualified 
status.  Treas. Reg. ss 1.7476-1(a)(1), 1.7476-2.  The rules 
governing the content and timing of notice to interested 
parties are set forth at 26 C.F.R. s 601.201 (2001).  Part 601 
of 26 C.F.R., entitled "Statement of Procedural Rules," con-
sists of rules issued by the Commissioner, rather than by the 
Secretary, pursuant to his power to promulgate rules "for the 
government of his department, the conduct of its employees, 
the distribution and performance of its business, and the 
custody, use, and preservation of its records, papers, and 
property."  5 U.S.C. s 301 (1994).  Section 601.201(o)(3)(xiv) 
requires, in cases in which plans apply for determinations of 
their qualification for special tax status, that notice of the 
application be given to all interested parties "in the manner 
set forth in the regulations under section 7476."  26 C.F.R. 
s 601.201(o)(3)(xiv).  Section 601.201(o)(3)(xvi) requires the 

notice to contain, inter alia, a statement that "any person to 
whom the notice is addressed is entitled to submit ... a 
comment on the question of whether the plan meets the 
requirements for qualification."  Id. s 601.201(o)(3)(xvi)(g).

B.   Appellants' Challenge to the IRS's Favorable Determina-
     tion

     Appellants are former employees of the International Un-
ion of Operating Engineers ("the Union"), which established 
the International Headquarters Pension and Beneficiaries 
Plan of the International Union of Operating Engineers ("the 
plan") in 1947.  Flynn, 80 T.C.M. (CCH) at 92. Around 
January 6, 1999, the Union filed an application with the IRS, 
seeking a determination that the pension plan would continue 
to qualify for favorable tax treatment after the adoption of 
certain amendments.  See Application for Determination for 
Employee Benefit Plan, reprinted in Deferred Appendix 
("App.") 35.  The Union also sent appellants a notice on 
Union letterhead, entitled "Notice to Interested Parties.  No-
tice to all participants of application for determination of the 
International Headquarters Pension and Beneficiaries Plan of 
the International Union of Operating Engineers."  Notice to 
Interested Parties, reprinted in App. 13.  The notice ex-
plained that the Union was applying to the IRS for a determi-
nation that its amended pension plan was eligible for tax-
qualified status.  Id.  It also stated that the recipient had the 
right to submit comments to the IRS as to whether the plan 
met the qualification requirements under the I.R.C.  Id.

     Appellants responded to the notice by submitting critical 
comments to the IRS.  They argued that while the amended 
plan complied with ERISA's backloading requirements, the 
old version of the plan -- which governed appellants' bene-
fits -- did not.  The plan was supposed to satisfy one of the 
statutorily available mathematical formulae, known as the "3-
percent method."  See I.R.C. s 411(b)(1)(A).  That method 
requires that the accrued benefit to which each worker is 
entitled on leaving the employer is not less than 3% of the 
normal retirement benefit to which that worker would be 
entitled if he or she began participation in the plan at the 

earliest possible entry age and served continuously until the 
earlier of age 65 or normal retirement age, multiplied by the 
number of years of that worker's participation in the plan.  
Id. According to appellants, the amended plan satisfied the 
3% rule, because it allowed vested employees with less than 
20 years of service to accrue benefits at the rate of 4% of final 
pay for each year of service.  Preliminary Written Comments 
of John J. Flynn ... and James H. Thomas p 6, reprinted in 
App. 15-19.  Appellants alleged that the version governing 
their benefits, however, had only allowed them to accrue 
benefits at a rate of 2.25% of final pay, in violation of the 
backloading requirement.  Even worse, according to appel-
lants, the amended plan apparently did not go back and 
correct the alleged violation with respect to former employ-
ees.  Id.  As a result, appellants argued that they were 
"vitally affected by the potential ... violations committed by 
the Plan."  Id.

     The IRS issued a favorable determination to the Union 
regarding the amended plan, apparently without addressing 
appellants' comments.  Letter from IRS to Int'l Union of 
Operating Eng'rs (Oct. 8, 1999), reprinted in App. 37-38.  
Appellants responded by filing a petition in the Tax Court 
seeking a declaration, under I.R.C. s 7476, that the plan was 
not entitled to continuing qualification because it violated the 
I.R.C.  Petition (T.C. Dec. 2, 1999), reprinted in App. 3-8.  
The IRS moved to dismiss the petition, arguing, inter alia, 
that appellants lacked standing because they were former 
employees and therefore not interested parties.  Motion to 
Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction, Docket No. 18090-99R (T.C. 
Feb. 4, 2000), reprinted in App. 23-32.  Appellants, in oppos-
ing the motion to dismiss, argued that they qualified as 
interested parties by virtue of the fact that the Union had 
sent them a notice addressed to interested parties or, alterna-
tively, because the regulations excluding former employees 
were arbitrary and capricious.  Notice of Petitioners' Opposi-
tion to Respondent's Motion to Dismiss, Docket No. 18090-
99R (T.C. Feb. 29, 2000), reprinted in App. 39-57.

     The Tax Court dismissed the petition and held that appel-
lants lacked standing and were not interested parties.  Order 

of Dismissal for Lack of Jurisdiction, Docket No. 18090-99R 
(T.C. July 31, 2000), reprinted in App. 67;  Flynn, 80 T.C.M. 
(CCH) at 93-94.  The court held that under Treas. Reg. 
s 1.7476-1(b), only present employees qualified as interested 
parties.  Flynn, 80 T.C.M. (CCH) at 93.  Contrary to appel-
lants' argument, the Union could not confer jurisdiction on 
the Tax Court by sending appellants a notice.  Id.  The Tax 
Court also upheld the regulations under s 7476 as valid 
legislative regulations.  Id. at 93-94.  Appellants appealed 
the decision of the Tax Court.

                         II.  Discussion

     Our jurisdiction to review the decision of the Tax Court 
derives from I.R.C. s 7482(a)(1) (1994).  We review the legal 
determinations of the Tax Court de novo.  ASA Investerings 
P'ship v. Comm'r, 201 F.3d 505, 511 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 
531 U.S. 871 (2000).

A.   The Nondelegation Argument

     On appeal, appellants raise the argument, not raised at the 
Tax Court, that s 7476 violates the Constitution's nondelega-
tion doctrine.  Having failed even to mention any constitu-
tional claim below, appellants now argue that s 7476 imper-
missibly delegates to the Secretary of the Treasury the 
authority to determine which employees are interested par-
ties, without providing sufficient guidance to the Secretary as 
to how to make that determination.  Appellee argues in 
response that because appellants failed to raise the issue at 
the Tax Court, this court should not now consider it.  Appel-
lee also argues that appellants' nondelegation argument lacks 
merit.  We agree with appellee on the former point and 
therefore decline to address the latter.

     Generally, an argument not made in the lower tribunal is 
deemed forfeited and will not be entertained absent "excep-
tional circumstances."  Marymount Hosp., Inc. v. Shalala, 19 
F.3d 658, 663 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (citing Roosevelt v. E.I. Du 
Pont de Nemours & Co., 958 F.2d 416, 419 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 
1992)).  This rule promotes efficiency and finality in the 
administration of justice.  See Johnston v. Reily, 160 F.2d 

249, 250 (D.C. Cir. 1947).  The rule is not absolute, and courts 
of appeals have discretion to address issues raised for the 
first time on appeal.  Roosevelt v. E.I. Du Pont de Nemours 
& Co., 958 F.2d 416, 419 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (citing Hormel v. 
Helvering, 312 U.S. 552, 555-59 (1941)).  We generally exer-
cise that discretion, however, only in exceptional circum-
stances, as, for example, in cases involving uncertainty in the 
law;  novel, important, and recurring questions of federal law;  
intervening change in the law;  and extraordinary situations 
with the potential for miscarriages of justice.  Id. (citations 
omitted).

     There are no exceptional circumstances in this case.  Ap-
pellants argue that this court should consider its nondelega-
tion argument because it is vital to the proper functioning of 
s 7476 as a mechanism for channeling the grievances of plan 
participants regarding tax qualification decisions that affect 
their benefits.  Reply Br. for Appellants at 9.  This argument 
is not the least bit compelling.  Under the existing regulatory 
regime, employees may challenge all plan determinations and 
former employees and other beneficiaries may challenge de-
terminations in cases involving plan terminations.  This 
scheme makes sense, in part because it is undisputed that 
former employees rarely have reason to challenge determina-
tions regarding plan amendments, since amendments usually 
affect only current and future employees.  See id. at 16.  
Furthermore, former employees are not without a remedy in 
circumstances when they seek to challenge plan amendments, 
for they may assert their claims through a civil action under 
ERISA s 502(a), 29 U.S.C. s 1132(a) (1994 & Supp. V 1999).  
We are unconvinced, therefore, that the issue now raised by 
appellants is either sufficiently important or fraught with 
sufficient risk of a miscarriage of justice to warrant deviation 
from our general refusal to address issues raised for the first 
time on appeal.

B.   The "Interested Parties" Regulations

     In I.R.C. s 7476, Congress expressly delegated authority to 
the Secretary of the Treasury "to elucidate a specific provi-
sion of the statute by regulation."  Chevron USA Inc. v. 
Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 844 (1984).  

The legislative regulation promulgated pursuant to that ex-
plicit grant of authority is accorded controlling weight.  As 
the Supreme Court recently noted in United States v. Mead 
Corp., 121 S. Ct. 2164, 2171 (2001):

     When Congress has "explicitly left a gap for an agency to 
     fill, there is an express delegation of authority to the 
     agency to elucidate a specific provision of the statute by 
     regulation," Chevron, 467 U.S., at 843-844, 104 S. Ct. 
     2278, and any ensuing regulation is binding in the courts 
     unless procedurally defective, arbitrary or capricious in 
     substance, or manifestly contrary to the statute.
     
See also Arent v. Shalala, 70 F.3d 610, 616 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(where there is no question that an agency had authority to 
issue regulations under a statute, the only issue is whether 
the agency's discharge of its authority is reasonable).  There 
is no doubt here that the Secretary promulgated a legislative 
regulation pursuant to an express delegation of authority 
from Congress.  There are no procedural, substantive, or 
statutory infirmities denigrating the regulation.  Therefore, 
under Mead, the regulation is binding.

     By its plain language, the statute limits standing to "an 
employee who has qualified under regulations prescribed by 
the Secretary as an interested party."  I.R.C. s 7476(b)(1).  
As evidenced by this wording, the statute contemplates that 
some employees will qualify under the regulations, while 
others will not.  Otherwise, there would be no need for the 
Secretary to prescribe regulations setting forth the categories 
of qualified employees.

     In their briefs, the parties quibble over the significance of 
the legislative history underlying the statute.  Appellants cite 
a report of a committee of the House of Representatives 
suggesting that plan "participants" will be able to bring an 
action, see H.R. Rep. No. 93-779, at 106 (1974) (Report of the 
Committee on Ways and Means), while appellee counters that 
the final Conference Report speaks only of "employees,"  see 
H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 93-1280, at 331 (1974).  This debate is 
much ado about nothing.  The statute's plain language clearly 
shows that Congress did not intend for every participant to 

have standing under s 7476.  The only remaining question is 
whether it was reasonable for the Secretary to exclude vested 
former employees from qualification in situations involving 
plan amendments.

     Appellants do not deny that the statute authorizes the 
Secretary to bar some employees from access to the declara-
tory judgment remedy, but they argue that it was unreason-
able to exclude all former employees automatically.  They 
suggest that the regulations should be revised to grant stand-
ing to any plan participant who can demonstrate that his 
interests may be adversely affected by the grant or denial to 
the plan of a favorable qualification determination.  Br. for 
Appellants at 27.  Appellants may have a point in suggesting 
that the regulations would have been better written to grant 
standing to any participant with an interest at stake, rather 
than granting standing based on a categorical distinction 
between current and former employees.  This does not mean, 
however, that the existing regulations are arbitrary and un-
reasonable.

     Appellants argue that the regulatory scheme is irrational, 
because some former employees with no real stake in the 
termination of a plan are nonetheless allowed to challenge it, 
while all former employees are barred from challenging plan 
amendments even when approval could adversely affect their 
benefits.  This example of alleged regulatory irrationality is 
hardly convincing, for it focuses solely on the treatment of 
different categories of former employees, not on the treat-
ment of former versus current employees.  The example 
therefore has little relevance to the instant case.  Further-
more, the fact that some former employees may be able to 
challenge determinations relating to plan terminations in 
which they no longer have a stake does not mean that it is 
irrational to exclude former employees where plan amend-
ments are concerned.  Put another way, the fact that the rule 
for plan terminations may be overinclusive does not necessar-
ily show that the rule for plan amendments is unreasonably 
underinclusive.

     In any event, the fact that the division between current and 
former employees does not map perfectly onto the categories 
of plan amendments and plan terminations does not render 
the regulatory scheme irrational.  First, appellants do not 
dispute that former employees ordinarily are not affected by 
amendments made to a plan after they terminate their em-
ployment.  See Reply Br. for Appellants at 16.  They also 
acknowledge that regulatory simplicity and ease of adminis-
tration may have been among the Secretary's reasonable 
objectives in drafting the regulations.  Br. for Appellants at 
27.  We find nothing in the statute requiring the Secretary to 
adopt an individualized, case-by-case approach to standing.  
Nor does the statute rule out a categorical approach to 
standing that corresponds roughly to categories of employees 
whose interests are affected by plan terminations and amend-
ments respectively.  If former employees are only rarely 
affected by plan amendments made after their employment is 
over, it is eminently reasonable to limit standing to current 
employees, whose benefits will almost always be affected by 
amendments.

     Second, the regulatory distinction between current and 
former employees does not leave the latter group entirely 
without recourse when a plan amendment arguably affects 
their benefits.  As appellants recognize, they and other for-
mer employees in their position can seek redress by filing 
civil actions under ERISA s 502(a), 29 U.S.C. s 1132(a).  
Indeed, plan participants have had some success bringing civil 
actions in district court to challenge violations of the back-
loading rules.  See, e.g., Carollo v. Cement & Concrete Work-
ers Dist. Council Pension Plan, 964 F. Supp. 677, 682-84 
(E.D.N.Y. 1997).  In other words, it is not unreasonable for 
the Secretary to issue regulations that leave former employ-
ees with one remedy, rather than two.

     In sum, appellants' challenge to the regulations fails be-
cause they are unable to demonstrate that the basic division 
between current and former employees in the plan amend-
ment context is arbitrary and capricious.  The Secretary's 
regulations need not perfectly accommodate all anomalous 
situations in order to be reasonable under the statute, partic-

ularly when another remedy is available to those who are 
excluded.  Because the regulations are plainly consistent with 
the statutory delegation to the Secretary and are based on a 
reasonable division between present and former employees, 
they are valid.

C.   The "Notice" Regulations

     Appellants' final argument is that, although they are not 
interested parties under the regulations promulgated pursu-
ant to s 7476, the Union conferred standing on them by 
mailing them a notice to interested parties.  This argument is 
premised on the requirement in 26 C.F.R. 
s 601.201(o)(3)(xvi)(g) that the notice to interested parties 
contain a statement that any person to whom the notice is 
addressed is entitled to submit comments.  Appellants argue 
that under this regulation, the fact that the Union chose to 
send appellants notice conferred interested party status upon 
them.  Br. for Appellants at 28-30.  In essence, appellants 
argue that Part 601 incorporates a waiver principle into the 
s 7476 regulatory scheme, thereby creating an additional 
category of people -- notice recipients -- who may employ 
the statutorily provided declaratory judgment remedy.  This 
is a specious claim.

     The regulation cited by appellants does not state that any 
person to whom notice is addressed thereby becomes an 
interested party entitled to institute a declaratory judgment 
action.  Rather, the regulation merely requires the notice to 
provide that its recipient is entitled to submit comments on 
the plan.  Nowhere does the regulation suggest that notice 
confers standing on recipients who are not interested parties 
under Treas. Reg. s 1.7476-1(b).  This construction of the 
regulations accords with the overall regulatory structure:  
Treas. Reg. s 1.7476 defines the interested parties under 
s 7476, while Part 601 simply governs the content of the 
notice that must be given to those interested parties when 
plans seek determinations from the IRS.  Part 601 acknowl-
edges that the notice must be given in accordance with the 
regulations under s 7476.  26 C.F.R. s 601.201(o)(3)(xiv).  
Taken together, ss 601.201(o)(3)(xiv) and (xvi)(g) do not sug-

gest that they add a new category of interested parties to 
those enumerated in s 1.7476.

     Even if Part 601 did appear to contradict the regulations 
under s 7476 by adding a new category of interested parties, 
it would not displace or override those regulations.  We have 
previously explained the weight to be accorded the procedural 
rules of Part 601:

     Part 601 rules differ significantly from the [Treasury] 
     regulations....  Issued by the Commissioner, without 
     need for approval by the Secretary, they serve merely as 
     guidelines for conducting the internal affairs of the agen-
     cy.  The authority of the Commissioner to issue such 
     rules derives from [5 U.S.C. s 301].  As such, the State-
     ment of Procedural Rules is held to be directory, not 
     mandatory in nature.
     
Boulez v. Comm'r, 810 F.2d 209, 215 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (cita-
tions omitted).  By contrast, the Treasury regulations defin-
ing "interested parties" are promulgated by the Secretary 
pursuant to his specific statutory delegation in s 7476(b).  
And as noted above, under the Supreme Court's decision in 
Mead, Treas. Reg. s 1.7476 is binding as written.  Part 601, 
however, does not have the same status under Mead, so it 
surely does not override s 1.7476.  Thus, appellants' argu-
ments on this point are meritless.

                         III. Conclusion

     As former employees, appellants are not interested parties 
as defined by Treas. Reg. s 1.7476-1(b).  As such, they lack 
standing to bring a s 7476 declaratory judgment action.  The 
regulations defining interested parties are valid because they 
are based on a reasonable construction of the statutory 
language and because they are rooted in a rational distinction 
between current and former employees in plan amendment 
cases.  Moreover, the rules governing the content of notice to 
interested parties do not operate to confer standing on appel-
lants.  For these reasons, we affirm the judgment of the Tax 
Court.

                                                          