                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued May 15, 2001      Decided August 21, 2001 

                           No. 00-7221

                           Ron Gilvin, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

        Edward Fire, Individually and as President of the 
     International Union of Electronic, Electrical Salaried, 
             Machine and Furniture Workers, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99-cv-00530)

     James F. Wallington argued the cause and filed the brief 
for appellant.

     Thomas M. Kennedy argued the cause for appellee.  With 
him on the brief was Peter Mitchell.

     Before:  Henderson, Tatel, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Ron Gilvin challenges his suspen-
sion and subsequent removal from the office of Secretary-
Treasurer of the International Union of Electronic, Electrical, 
Salaried, Machine and Furniture Workers, AFL-CIO (IUE).  
Gilvin asserts that the IUE, the IUE's President, and mem-
bers of the IUE's Executive Board violated federal labor law 
and the IUE's constitution by suspending and removing him 
in retaliation for protected speech and participation in a civil 
trial.  The district court dismissed part of Gilvin's lawsuit for 
failing to state a claim, and granted summary judgment 
against the remainder.  We affirm in part and reverse in 
part.

                                I

     In November 1996, the IUE elected defendant Edward 
Fire to the office of IUE President and elected plaintiff 
Gilvin, Fire's political opponent, to be Secretary-Treasurer.  
Both took their posts in January 1997 and were scheduled to 
serve until December 31, 2000.  On June 10, 1998, however, 
the IUE Executive Board suspended Gilvin with pay.  And 
on August 26, 1998, the IUE's Trustees certified petitions 
from two local unions seeking Gilvin's recall from office.  
Gilvin lost a recall election on October 9, 1998, and was 
removed as IUE Secretary-Treasurer.

     Gilvin and Fire came into conflict soon after their 1996 
election.1  In April 1997, Fire, backed by the Executive 
Board, proposed transferring money from the IUE's Strike 
Insurance Fund to its General Fund in order to reduce the 
union's operating deficit.  Gilvin opposed the proposal on the 

__________
     1 Because Gilvin's complaint was dismissed pursuant to Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) and 56, the following description of 
the facts draws all reasonable inferences in Gilvin's favor.  See 
infra Part III.

ground that it would weaken the Strike Fund and conceal the 
union's failure to maintain a balanced budget.  Gilvin ex-
pressed that opposition in letters to IUE local union presi-
dents and members, which characterized the proposal as a 
"raid" on the Strike Fund, J.A. 1161, "a reckless change in the 
financial structure of our Union," id. at 1163, and an effort to 
grant Fire "dictatorial powers," id. at 1161.  The IUE mem-
bership eventually adopted Fire's proposal.  Thereafter, at an 
Executive Board meeting on April 21, 1997, defendant Board 
members made clear, in no uncertain terms, their displeasure 
with Gilvin's efforts to oppose the Strike Fund plan.2

     In May 1997, Gilvin began questioning increases in IUE 
subsidies to IUE District Councils, as well as raises and 
travel reimbursements approved by President Fire.  Gilvin 
charged that checks for those expenditures were issued with-
out his knowledge or approval.  Article VII(C) of the IUE 
constitution requires that "[a]ll checks of the Union must bear 
the signatures of the President and the Secretary- 

__________
     2 See, e.g., J.A. 1375 ("[T]here are letters all over my District 
really taking on what we did.  I think that's g*dd**ned outra-
geous....");  id. at 1376 ("I hope to h*ll we don't have to see any 
more of these disruptive letters in this International Union.");  id. at 
1378 ("I was appalled at that letter.  I think it does nothing but 
disrupt this International Union and the goals that we're trying to 
achieve.");  id. ("I also don't appreciate the officers ... out there 
with the staff at the locals, undercutting this Board.  That's been 
happening in my district and I want it to stop.");  id. at 1339 ("The 
way this thing came down I think was bull c**p....  I resented the 
h*ll out of that [letter] being at the district meeting.");  id. at 1410 
(describing Gilvin's letter as "garbage trash--that goes out to our 
membership and to the leadership ... to denounce our President," 
and charging that Gilvin "took the credibility of the Executive 
Board and knifed us");  id. at 1417-18 ("If anybody has any 
problems with the leadership of this union ... these things have to 
be dealt with behind closed doors.  It should not be made public.").

Treasurer," and Gilvin had previously authorized the union's 
comptroller to utilize a facsimile of his signature on IUE 
checks.  In August 1997, Gilvin wrote Fire and the comptrol-
ler revoking that authorization, "[i]n order to assure that no 
funds of the International are disbursed for other than legiti-
mate purposes and with adequate substantiation."  Id. at 
1175.  Gilvin explained his decision in a letter to the Execu-
tive Board and local unions dated September 10, 1997.  Call-
ing the raises and travel expenditures a "raid on the Interna-
tional treasury," id. at 1183, he wrote:

     I will not sign any check until I can verify that all 
     International expenditures are properly authorized and 
     substantiated....  I consider it my Constitutional re-
     sponsibility as Secretary-Treasurer to provide a vigilant, 
     meaningful financial oversight on behalf of the IUE 
     membership, and I won't be bullied into doing less!
     
Id. at 1184 (emphasis omitted).

     Fire responded with his own letter to the members of the 
IUE.  He wrote that Gilvin "always has had the ability and 
always was expected to see to it that expenditures are made 
under proper accounting procedures and have proper docu-
mentation," acknowledging that "[t]hose are the basic respon-
sibilities of the Secretary-Treasurer."  But Fire declared that 
"if he refuses to sign a check, there will be a serious constitu-
tional problem."  Id. at 1189.  Fire also wrote that for "Gilvin 
to continue to characterize the [Strike Fund] plan as a 'raid' 
on the ... Fund is an insult to our members and our 
leadership."  Id. at 1191.  On October 15, 1997, Gilvin reau-
thorized the use of his facsimile signature, with the under-
standing that the IUE's comptroller would provide him with a 
daily register of all checks and with supplemental documenta-
tion upon request.  Id. at 1199.  On November 13, 1997, the 
Executive Board held a meeting at which several members 

again sharply decried Gilvin's letters, and suggested that 
something had to be done to stop him from issuing more.3

     In December 1997, Gilvin wrote an anonymous letter to the 
"Hoekstra Committee," a Congressional subcommittee 
chaired by Representative Peter Hoekstra that was investi-
gating allegations of union corruption.  Gilvin's letter alleged 
that three IUE checks, totaling $163,135.98, had been issued 
without an identifiable union purpose.  Complaint WW 48, 49.  
Gilvin did not inform anyone at the IUE that he had sent the 
letter.  J.A. 449-62.

     On January 5, 1998, Gilvin was present at the United 
States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, 
during the trial of a lawsuit brought against the IUE by 
Gilvin's home local, IUE Local 801.  Fire and other IUE 
officials saw Gilvin in the courtroom.  Several weeks later, 
Fire sent Gilvin a memorandum asking him to explain why 
his weekly attendance record reported that he was away from 
the office that day on "Union Business."  Id. at 1208.  In a 
one-sentence written reply, Gilvin responded that he had 
been subpoenaed.  Id. at 1210.  At the next Executive Board 
meeting, held on March 10, 1998, Gilvin was attacked by 
defendant Board members who interpreted his appearance in 
the courthouse as reflecting a willingness to testify against 
the IUE.4

__________
     3 See, e.g., J.A. 1448 ("[T]he whole problem lies there with the 
rumor mongers, with the letters going out ... that's the bone of 
contention.");  id. at 1449 ("[T]he man's got to be censured....  We 
can't put up with this garbage any more.");  id. at 1460-61 ("I'm not 
going to take any more s**t, right in the area that I live, from him 
and his constituents....  [I]f it doesn't stop, then I don't have a 
problem starting a recall petition....");  id. at 1470 ("I think that 
we should draw the line, and put an end to all this mud-
slinging....").

     4  See, e.g., J.A. 1484-85 ("I would not testify against this 
International Union even if I disagreed with its leadership or its 

     On April 26, 1998, Gilvin sent a letter to an IUE member, 
opposing a proposed division of Local 801 into two separate 
locals.  Gilvin attributed the proposal to Fire, and wrote that 
the President "should keep his nose out of the local's politics."  
Id. at 1221.  He also declared that "President Fire has his 
own problems" in the form of an "International financial 
crisis," charging that the union was operating at a deficit, that 
operating expenses were increasing, and that the Strike Fund 
had suffered a "$6,459,127.56 drop in one year."  Id.  Two 
days later, Gilvin demanded Fire's authorization to mail the 
letter to other IUE members at IUE expense, and Fire 
refused.  On April 30, 1998, the six IUE District Presidents, 
who also served on the IUE's Executive Board and are 
defendants here, responded to Gilvin's April 26 letter with the 
following joint statement:

     1.   Ron Gilvin is hereby CENSORED [sic] for his publi-
          cation and dissemination of false and scurrilous 
          charges.
          
     2.   Ron Gilvin is directed to adhere to the IUE Constitu-
          tion and to serve at the direction of the President.
          
     3.   Ron Gilvin is put on notice that if he continues these 
          scurrilous attacks the undersigned will support the 
          efforts now being considered by members outraged 
          by his actions to recall him from office.
          
     4.   Ron Gilvin['s] right to engage in legitimate debate 
          over the issues facing this union must be conducted 
          
__________
Executive Board....  I guess I have a problem, Ron.... with you 
showing up in the courtroom ... not to testify on our side, but on 
the side of Local 801....");  id. at 1486 ("That bothered me ... 
that the Secretary-Treasurer of this International Union showed up 
to testify against this International Union, that bothered me.");  id. 
at 1500 ("[D]on't kid me that you were subpoenaed.  You were 
subpoenaed because they knew how you were going to testify.").

          in the future in a manner which sticks to the issues 
          and avoids baseless slander.
          
Id. at 1230.

     The conflict between Gilvin and the defendants continued 
to escalate in May of 1998.  On May 20, Gilvin sent Fire a 
memorandum, seeking his assistance in auditing the financial 
records of the IUE's districts, particularly the "wage and 
operating subsidies" paid to the districts by the International.  
Id. at 1232.  Fire refused to authorize an audit, telling Gilvin 
that, under the IUE constitution, the Secretary-Treasurer 
may perform a district audit only if the district "has been 
delinquent for thirty days or more or ... when there is 
reason to believe that [the district's] financial affairs ... are 
being mishandled or a defalcation has occurred."  Id. at 1234 
(quoting IUE Const. Art. XIII(N)).  Fire directed Gilvin to 
provide, immediately and in writing, any information he pos-
sessed pertaining to any such misconduct.  Id.

     Gilvin again revoked permission for the use of his facsimile 
signature on May 27, 1998, stating that he would personally 
sign any check that was accompanied by "proper vouchers or 
other backup" or that he could "verify through audits as 
being constitutionally proper and legal."  Id. at 1263.  The 
next day, Fire wrote Gilvin a memorandum stressing that the 
Secretary-Treasurer was not authorized "to determine the 
spending policies of the International Union," and further 
suggesting that if Gilvin attempted to do so, he would cause 
"a serious constitutional crisis."  Id. at 250.  On June 2, 1998, 
Gilvin refused to sign subsidy checks to the six districts.  In a 
letter to the comptroller, Gilvin stated that he had sought to 
verify by audit "the validity and purpose of these extraordi-
nary payments," but had "been refused my constitutional 
authority to account for these expenditures."  Id. at 1331.  
"Until a resolution is reached," Gilvin said, "I do not intend to 
process any form of supplements [i.e., subsidies] that I cannot 
account for, and [that] I have reason to ... believe violates 
our Constitution or has legal implications."  Id.

     Fire convened the Executive Board to discuss Gilvin's 
revocation of his facsimile signature and his refusal to sign 
the subsidy checks.  On June 9, 1998, the Board passed a 
resolution declaring that the six district checks were properly 
documented and legitimate union expenses, that Gilvin was 
constitutionally required to sign the checks, that a committee 
should investigate Gilvin's conduct, and that Gilvin should in 
the interim be suspended with pay from the office of 
Secretary-Treasurer.  Id. at 351-52.  On July 15, 1998, the 
Board's appointed committee issued a report concluding that 
Gilvin's suspension "was right, proper and fully justified," and 
recommending that the IUE membership consider initiating 
"the recall of Ron Gilvin from the office of International 
Secretary Treasurer."  Id. at 300-01.

     Two local unions petitioned for Gilvin's recall by election.  
Id. at 378-79.  Those petitions were endorsed by 92 addition-
al locals comprising over 37% of the IUE's total membership, 
id. at 380, thus readily satisfying the constitutional require-
ments for initiating a recall.  See IUE Const. Art. X(A).  On 
October 9, 1998, the IUE's Trustees announced that more 
than 75% of the locals, representing more than 75% of the 
eligible union members, had voted in favor of the recall.  J.A. 
419.  As that was more than sufficient to accomplish a recall, 
see IUE Const. Art. X(A), the Trustees declared Gilvin 
recalled from office effective the following day.  J.A. 419.

                                II

     Gilvin filed suit against the IUE, President Fire, and 
individual members of the Executive Board, charging that the 
defendants had violated s 101(a) of the Labor-Management 
Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA), part of the "Bill of 
Rights of Members of Labor Organizations."  29 U.S.C. 
s 411(a); see id. ss 411-15.  Gilvin alleged that, in suspend-
ing him from office, the defendants had violated his rights:  (i) 
to free expression, under s 101(a)(2), because the suspension 
was imposed in retaliation for his criticizing the defen- 

dants;5  (ii) to appear as a witness in a judicial proceeding, 
under s 101(a)(4), because it was imposed for responding to a 
subpoena in the litigation involving Local 801;6  (iii) to commu-
nicate with legislators, under s 101(a)(4), because it was 
imposed for writing to the Hoekstra Committee;  and (iv) to 
equal rights, under s 101(a)(1), because it was imposed for 
criticizing defendants and appearing as a witness.7  Gilvin 
also charged that, in removing him from office, the defen-
dants had violated his rights under:  (v) all three LMRDA 
__________
     5 Subsection 101(a)(2) provides:

         Every member of any labor organization shall have the right to 
         meet and assemble freely with other members;  and to express 
         any views, argument, or opinions...:  Provided, That nothing 
         herein shall be construed to impair the right of a labor organi-
         zation to adopt and enforce reasonable rules as to the responsi-
         bility of every member toward the organization as an institu-
         tion and to his refraining from conduct that would interfere 
         with its performance of its legal or contractual obligations.
  29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(2).

     6 Subsection 101(a)(4) states:

         No labor organization shall limit the right of any member 
         thereof to institute an action in any court, or in a proceeding 
         before any administrative agency, irrespective of whether or 
         not the labor organization or its officers are named as defen-
         dants or respondents in such action or proceeding, or the right 
         of any member of a labor organization to appear as a witness in 
         any judicial, administrative, or legislative proceeding, or to 
         petition any legislature or to communicate with any legisla-
         tor....
  29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(4).

     7 Subsection 101(a)(1) states:

          Every member of a labor organization shall have equal rights 
     and privileges within such organization to nominate candidates, 
          to vote in elections or referendums of the labor organization, to 
     attend membership meetings, and to participate in the deliber-
     ations and voting upon the business of such meetings, subject 
          to reasonable rules and regulations in such organization's con-
     stitution and bylaws.
     29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(1).

subsections cited above;  and (vi) the recall provisions of 
Article X(A) of the IUE constitution.8

     On September 15, 1999, the district court dismissed two 
categories of Gilvin's charges for failure to state a claim upon 
which relief can be granted, pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 12(b)(6).  Gilvin v. Fire (Gilvin I), No. 99-cv-530, 
slip op. at 6, 9-10 (D.D.C. Sept. 15, 1999).  The court dis-
missed Gilvin's LMRDA s 101(a)(1) claim because he had not 
alleged the violation of any "equal right" enumerated in that 
subsection:  i.e., the right to nominate candidates, to vote in 
elections, to attend membership meetings, or to participate in 
such meetings.  See 29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(1).  And the court 
dismissed Gilvin's claim under the IUE constitution because 
he had failed to respond to defendants' contention that the 
recall had been initiated and carried out in accord with the 
requirements of Article X(A).

     On July 21, 2000, the district court granted summary 
judgment against Gilvin's remaining LMRDA claims pursuant 
to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56.  Gilvin v. Fire (Gilvin 
II), No. 99-cv-530, slip op. at 22 (D.D.C. July 21, 2000).  The 
court rejected Gilvin's s 101(a)(2) claim, that defendants had 
suspended him in retaliation for criticizing them, because it 
found Gilvin's speech unprotected by the statute.  Subsection 
101(a)(2) protects only the rights of union members, the court 

__________
     8 The complaint further charged other violations of the IUE 
constitution.  Those charges were dismissed by the district court, 
and Gilvin has not pursued them here.  See Gilvin Br. at 14.

 Gilvin's LMRDA claims were brought pursuant to LMRDA 
s 102, 29 U.S.C. s 412, which provides:  "Any person whose rights 
secured by the provisions of this subchapter have been infringed by 
any violation of this subchapter may bring a civil action in a district 
court of the United States...."  The claims for violation of the 
IUE constitution were brought under s 301(a) of the Labor Man-
agement Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 185(a), which states:  "Suits for 
violation of contracts between ... labor organizations, may be 
brought in any district court of the United States having jurisdic-
tion of the parties...."  See Wooddell v. Int'l Bhd. of Elec. 
Workers, Local 71, 502 U.S. 93, 98 (1991) (holding that s 301(a) 
"extends to suits on union constitutions brought by union mem-
bers").

ruled, not of union officers.  Moreover, the court found 
Gilvin's criticism so harsh that "Gilvin could not effectively 
represent the union as an officer while making such accusa-
tions against its other leaders."  Id. at 17.

     The district court also rejected Gilvin's s 101(a)(4) claim of 
retaliatory suspension for his January 1998 appearance in the 
Local 801 litigation.  The court found that there was "a 
genuine issue of fact as to whether Defendants suspended 
Gilvin in retaliation for his participation in that litigation."  
Id. at 19.  But the court held that Gilvin was unprotected by 
s 101(a)(4) for two reasons:  because, as with s 101(a)(2), the 
statute does not protect union officers, and because Gilvin had 
not actually testified in the Local 801 litigation.  Id. at 20.  
The court further dismissed Gilvin's s 101(a)(4) claim that he 
was suspended in retaliation for writing to the Hoekstra 
Committee, on the ground that Gilvin had failed to submit 
"evidence that Defendants knew of his anonymous letter."  
Id. at 18.

     Finally, the district court rejected all claims concerning 
Gilvin's removal by recall election because that election had 
been conducted fully in accordance with the provisions of the 
IUE constitution.  Since Gilvin had produced no evidence 
that the election's results or procedures were tainted, the 
district court found that the LMRDA provided no basis for 
setting aside the union members' democratic choice.  Id. at 
10-13.

                               III

     We review both of the district court's orders de novo.  See 
Wilson v. Pena, 79 F.3d 154, 160 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("Our 
standard of review under Federal Rules 12(b)(6) and 56 is the 
same:  de novo.").  In considering the claims dismissed pursu-
ant to Rule 12(b)(6), we must treat the complaint's factual 
allegations as true, must grant plaintiff the benefit of all 
reasonable inferences from the facts alleged, and may uphold 
the dismissal only if "it appears beyond doubt that the 
plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his claim which 
would entitle him to relief."  Sparrow v. United Air Lines, 
Inc., 216 F.3d 1111, 1114 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (quoting Conley v. 
Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 45-46 (1957));  see id. at 1113.  As for 
the claims denied on summary judgment pursuant to Rule 56, 

we may affirm only if "there is no genuine issue as to any 
material fact [and] the moving party is entitled to judgment 
as a matter of law."  Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 
U.S. 242, 247 (1986) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)).  A dispute 
about a material fact is "genuine" if a reasonable jury, 
drawing all reasonable inferences in Gilvin's favor, could 
return a verdict against the defendants.  See Flemmings v. 
Howard Univ., 198 F.3d 857, 860 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  Anderson 
v. Zubieta, 180 F.3d 329, 338 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     Applying these standards, we conclude that the district 
court erred in granting summary judgment against two of 
Gilvin's claims:  that he was suspended for exercising his 
LMRDA s 101(a)(2) right to free expression, and for exercis-
ing his s 101(a)(4) right to appear as a witness in a judicial 
proceeding.  We consider these claims in Parts IV and V 
below.  We conclude that the court properly dismissed the 
remainder of Gilvin's claims, which we discuss in Part VI.

                                IV

     We begin with Gilvin's allegation that he was suspended for 
his criticism of Fire and the Executive Board, in violation of 
LMRDA s 101(a)(2).  That subsection states that "[e]very 
member of any labor organization shall have the right to meet 
and assemble freely with other members;  and to express any 
views, argument, or opinions."  29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(2).  It also 
includes a proviso that "nothing herein shall be construed to 
impair the right of a labor organization to adopt and enforce 
reasonable rules as to the responsibility of every member 
toward the organization as an institution and to his refraining 
from conduct that would interfere with its performance of its 
legal or contractual obligations."  Id. Defendants contend 
that Gilvin was not suspended because of his criticism, but 
because his refusal to sign or authorize his facsimile for use 
on IUE checks constituted insubordination and derogation of 
his official duties in a manner that falls within the proviso.  
Summary judgment was warranted, defendants contend, be-

cause there was "no genuine issue of material fact" as to 
whether Gilvin's criticism caused his suspension.

     Defendants may be correct that Gilvin could have been 
suspended for an unreasonable refusal to inscribe his signa-
ture on IUE checks.9  But the district court did not find that 
there was no genuine issue regarding the actual motivation 
for the suspension.  And we certainly cannot make such a 
finding on the record before us, given the defendants' re-
peated attacks on Gilvin for sending critical letters, and their 
declarations that something had to be done to stop him from 
sending more.  See supra notes 2, 3 and pp. 6-7.

     Rather than rely on the absence of a genuine factual 
dispute, the district court determined that Gilvin's criticism of 
the other union leaders was unprotected by s 101(a)(2).  
First, the court held that s 101(a)(2) protects the free speech 
rights only of union members, not of union officers.  That 
holding was an error of law.  In Finnegan v. Leu, 456 U.S. 
431 (1982), the Supreme Court held that s 101(a)(2) does not 
protect appointed union officials from discharge on account of 
the expression of their opinions.  But seven years later, in 
Sheet Metal Workers' International Association v. Lynn, 488 
U.S. 347 (1989), the Court announced a different rule for 
elected officials like Gilvin.  In Lynn, an elected business 
agent was removed from his post in retaliation for statements 
he made at a union meeting in opposition to a dues increase 
sought by the union trustee.  Although removal of an ap-
pointed agent under such circumstances would not have been 
protected under Finnegan, the Lynn Court held that "[t]he 
consequences of the removal of an elected official are much 

__________
     9 The qualifier "unreasonable" is necessary because Gilvin could 
not lawfully have signed a check that, for example, violated his 
fiduciary obligations as Secretary-Treasurer.  See 29 U.S.C. 
s 501(a) (setting forth the fiduciary obligations of the officers of a 
labor organization with respect to the organization's "money and 
property");  IUE Const. Art. VII(B) (requiring the Secretary-
Treasurer to "account for all monies" of the union);  see also 29 
U.S.C. s 501(c) (imposing a fine or imprisonment for, inter alia, 
embezzlement of union funds).

different."  Id. at 355.  "To begin with," the Court said, 
"when an elected official like Lynn is removed from his post, 
the union members are denied the representative of their 
choice."  Id.  "Furthermore," the Court continued, "the po-
tential chilling effect on [LMRDA] free speech rights is more 
pronounced when elected officials are discharged."  Id.  In 
such cases, "[n]ot only is the fired official likely to be chilled 
in the exercise of his own free speech rights, but so are the 
members who voted for him."  Id.  Accordingly, the Court 
held that "Lynn's retaliatory removal stated a cause of action 
under s 102."  Id.

     Defendants seek to distinguish Lynn on the ground that 
there the officer was removed from office, while this aspect of 
Gilvin's claim relates only to his suspension.10  The distinc-
tion, however, is insufficient to persuade us that Lynn is 
inapplicable here.  The term of Gilvin's suspension was indefi-
nite, and it immediately relieved him of all official authority.  
That action implicates the same concerns relied upon by the 
Court in Lynn:  Union members who voted for Gilvin were 
denied the representative of their choice for the length of the 
suspension, and both Gilvin and those who observed what 
happened to him were likely to be "chilled in the exercise" of 
their free speech rights.  Lynn, 488 U.S. at 355.  We are 
unable to perceive a difference in the degree of "chill" gener-
ated by suspension as compared to removal sufficient to 
justify a difference in outcomes.

     Second, the district court held that "Gilvin's letters to union 
members criticizing Defendants were not protected under 
101(a)(2) because they were inconsistent with [his] duties 
[and] preclude[d] his effective representation of the union."  
Gilvin II, slip op. at 16 (internal quotation omitted).  The 
court was particularly concerned that Gilvin's letters were 
"replete with serious accusations against the IUE's President 
and Board."  Id. at 17.  But the fact that the letters were 
critical of the union leadership can hardly suffice to remove 

__________
     10 Gilvin's claims relating to his removal are discussed in Part 
VI.B below.

the protections of s 101(a)(2), a point defendants rightly 
conceded at oral argument.  Indeed, as the Supreme Court 
noted in Lynn, such criticism was "precisely" what Congress 
intended to protect in passing the LMRDA.11

     Nor does it matter that the tone of Gilvin's letters was 
harsh, and even intemperate.  Subsection 101(a)(2)'s protec-
tion of a union member's right "to express any views, argu-
ments, or opinions" is not limited to discourse clothed in the 
polite language of diplomats in striped pants.12  Gilvin's oppo-
nents certainly did not think that they were so constrained, as 
they gave quite as good as they got.  See supra notes 2-4.

     Finally, there was nothing about the substance of Gilvin's 
criticism that was inconsistent with his duties as a union 
official.  To the contrary, Gilvin's letters challenged the finan-
cial policy of the President and Executive Board, a topic well 
within the rights of any union member and certainly of the 
Secretary-Treasurer, whose responsibilities include "per-
form[ing] all such duties as may be deemed necessary to a 
proper and effective administration of the financial affairs of 
the Union."  IUE Const. Art. VII(B);  see id. (requiring 
Secretary-Treasurer to "account for all monies" of the union).  
Indeed, at oral argument defendants candidly agreed that no 
duty of Gilvin's office prevented him from expressing his 
views on such proposals as the transfer of money from the 
Strike Fund.13

__________
     11 See Lynn, 488 U.S. at 355 ("[Congress] recognized that democ-
racy would be assured only if union members are free to discuss 
union policies and criticize the leadership without fear of reprisal." 
(quoting United Steelworkers v. Sadlowski, 457 U.S. 102, 112 
(1982))).

     12 See Petramale v. Local No. 17 of Laborers Int'l Union, 736 
F.2d 13, 17 (2d Cir. 1984) (noting that "union meetings, especially 
those involving ... disputes between rival factions within the union, 
... can be fraught with tension and even sparked with vitriol and 
calumny," and holding that "leeway for the expression of strongly 
held views in emotional terms ... must be afforded union mem-
bers") (internal quotation omitted).

     13 Cf. Lynn, 488 U.S. at 355 n.6 ("There is no suggestion that 
Lynn's speech in opposition to the dues increase contravened any 

     In sum, because Gilvin's criticism of the union leadership 
was protected speech under s 101(a)(2), and because on this 
record a reasonable jury could find that Gilvin was suspended 
because of that criticism, the grant of summary judgment to 
defendants was erroneous.14

                                V

     Gilvin also claims that he was suspended, in violation of 
LMRDA s 101(a)(4), for appearing in federal court in re-
sponse to a subpoena in a lawsuit brought against the Inter-
national by IUE Local 801.  Subsection 101(a)(4) provides 
that "[n]o labor organization shall limit the right of any 
member ... to appear as a witness in any judicial ... 
proceeding."  29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(4).  Defendants dispute that 
Gilvin was suspended for his courthouse appearance, arguing 
that it "occurred months before his suspension, which was 
based upon an entirely different sequence of events."  Fire 
Br. at 37.  Accordingly, defendants insist that the district 
court's grant of summary judgment on this claim was appro-
priate.

     The problem with this argument, as with defendant's paral-
lel argument under s 101(a)(2), is that the district court did 
not hold that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to 

__________
obligation properly imposed upon him as an elected business agent 
of the Local.").

     14 Gilvin also sought, and was denied, recovery under s 101(a)(2) 
on the theory that defendants were involved in a "scheme to 
suppress dissent."  This theory, adopted by the Second Circuit, 
provides a cause of action for appointed union officers who are 
unprotected under Finnegan and Lynn.  See Maddalone v. Local 
17, United Bhd. of Carpenters, 152 F.3d 178, 184 (2d Cir. 1998).  At 
least with respect to elected officers, however, the Supreme Court 
expressly rejected the contention "that a union official must estab-
lish that his firing was part of a systematic effort to stifle dissent 
within the union in order to state a claim."  Lynn, 488 U.S. at 355 
n.7.  Thus, Gilvin's free speech claim depends only upon whether he 
can show retaliation against protected expression.  He need not 
demonstrate any broader "scheme."

whether Gilvin was suspended for his participation in the 
Local 801 litigation.  To the contrary, the court, referring to 
statements made by defendants at the IUE Executive Board 
meeting of March 10, 1998, held:  "These statements do 
create a genuine issue of fact as to whether Defendants 
suspended Gilvin in retaliation for his participation in that 
litigation."  Gilvin II, slip op. at 19 (emphasis added);  see 
also supra note 4.

     Instead of relying on an absence of a genuine factual 
dispute, the district court once again concluded that the 
LMRDA offered Gilvin no protection.  First, as with 
s 101(a)(2)'s protection of free speech, the court held that 
s 101(a)(4)'s protection of the right to appear as a witness 
applies only to union members and not to officers:  As an 
officer, the court held, "Gilvin was not protected by section 
101(a)(4) against retaliation for his involvement with the Local 
801 lawsuit."  Id. at 20.  For the reasons described in the 
previous section, this conclusion is erroneous as applied to an 
elected officer like Gilvin.  Although Lynn itself involved 
s 101(a)(2), there is no reason to suspect that its principles 
are not equally applicable to s 101(a)(4).  The right at stake 
here--the right to appear as a witness in a judicial proceed-
ing--is just as likely as the right of free speech to be chilled 
by punishment for its exercise.15

     Second, the district court held that because Gilvin "never 
did actually testify at the January 1998 proceeding," he "did 
not engage in activity that would be protected by section 
101(a)(4) even if undertaken by a union member."  Gilvin II, 
slip op. at 20.  But if s 101(a)(4)'s command--that a union 

__________
     15 See International Org. of Masters v. Prevas, 175 F.3d 341, 344 
(4th Cir. 1999) (holding that the LMRDA bars any conduct that 
either limits or is "likely to chill the exercise of a member's right to 
[sue]" (quoting NLRB v. Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuild-
ing Workers, 391 U.S. 418, 425 (1968))).

may not "limit" a member's right to "appear" as a witness--
were restricted to those members who actually testify, it 
would be a flimsy protection indeed.  Witnesses often are 
called to the courthouse, yet end up not testifying.  The 
reasons vary widely, and are usually wholly beyond the 
witnesses' control:  ranging from judicial rulings, to stipula-
tions on the subject of their testimony, to counsel's last-
minute strategic decisions.  Since potential witnesses can 
rarely be guaranteed that they will testify, a rule like that 
adopted by the district court would chill their willingness to 
appear.  Indeed, carried to its logical extreme, restricting the 
protection of s 101(a)(4) to those who actually testify would 
permit an antagonist to impose all kinds of impediments to a 
witness' appearance at the courthouse--as long as the impedi-
ments succeed in keeping the witness off the stand, or are put 
in place before the testimony actually begins.  There is no 
justification for such a narrow reading of such an important 
element of a union member's Bill of Rights.16

     Accordingly, because Gilvin's appearance at the federal 
courthouse in connection with the Local 801 litigation was 
protected conduct under LMRDA s 101(a)(2), and because 
there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Gilvin 
was suspended because of that appearance, the grant of 
summary judgment to defendants on this claim must be 
reversed.

                                VI

     In the following sections, we consider Gilvin's remaining 
claims.  These do not fare as well, substantially for the 
reasons stated by the district court.

__________
     16 See Phillips v. Int'l Ass'n of Bridge, Structural & Ornamental 
Iron Workers, Local 118, 556 F.2d 939, 942 (9th Cir. 1977) (declar-
ing that "[i]f a union member's right [under s 101(a)(4)] is to have 
any meaning, courts must be ever vigilant in protecting that right 
against indirect and subtle devices as well as against direct and 
obvious limitations").

                                A

     Gilvin contends that his suspension violated LMRDA 
s 101(a) on two grounds in addition to those discussed in 
Parts IV and V.  First, Gilvin claims that his suspension for 
criticizing defendants and for appearing as a witness violated 
not only LMRDA ss 101(a)(2) and (4), but also s 101(a)(1)--
which guarantees every member of a labor organization:

     equal rights and privileges within such organization to 
     nominate candidates, to vote in elections or referendums 
     of the labor organization, to attend membership meet-
     ings, and to participate in the deliberations and voting 
     upon the business of such meetings....
     
29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(1).  But Gilvin does not dispute that he did 
vote, did attend membership meetings, and did participate in 
deliberations.  Accordingly, this claim was properly dismissed 
because, as the district court held, Gilvin has failed to articu-
late how he was deprived of any of the specific rights 
protected by s 101(a)(1).  See Carothers v. Presser, 818 F.2d 
926, 931 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (holding that to prevail on an equal 
rights claim under s 101(a)(1), a plaintiff must demonstrate 
that defendants "deprived the plaintiff[ ] of a right specifical-
ly enumerated in the statute, such as the right to an equal 
vote").

     Second, Gilvin claims that he was suspended in violation of 
LMRDA s 101(a)(4) for writing a letter to the Hoekstra 
Committee alleging that IUE checks had been issued without 
an identifiable union purpose.  Retaliation for such an act 
would have violated Gilvin's right "to communicate with any 
legislator."  29 U.S.C. s 411(a)(4).  But Gilvin acknowledges 
that he sent the letter anonymously, and, as the district court 
found, he "has not offered any evidence that Defendants knew 
of his anonymous letter to the Hoekstra Committee, thus 
leaving no foundation for his argument that they suspended 
him in retaliation for it."  Gilvin II, slip op. at 18.

                                B

     Gilvin further contends that his ultimate removal from 
office violated the rights guaranteed by LMRDA s 101(a) and 
the recall provisions of the IUE constitution.  Neither the 
statute nor the theory of the Lynn case, however, protects a 
union official--elected or otherwise--from removal by a recall 
election.  The Lynn Court noted that, in adopting "Title I of 
the LMRDA ....  Congress sought to further the basic 
objective of the LMRDA:  ensuring that unions [are] demo-
cratically governed and responsive to the will of their mem-
berships."  Lynn, 488 U.S. at 352.  The Court concluded that 
protecting elected officials from removal by other officials in 
retaliation for their speech was necessary to ensure demo-
cratic responsiveness.  Id. at 355.  But that rationale has no 
application to removal by a recall election.  Removing an 
officer by a vote of the union's membership, because his 
opinions no longer represent the will of that membership, 
represents the expression of democracy, not its subversion.

     Moreover, we agree with the district court's conclusion that 
"Gilvin provide[d] no evidence to support his claim that the 
recall vote was tainted" or that the IUE constitution was 
violated in any way.  Gilvin II, slip op. at 13.  Two local 
unions initiated the petition for recall, with the endorsement 
of 92 other locals comprising over 37% of the IUE's total 
membership.   J.A. 380.  This was substantially more than 
was constitutionally required for initiation of a recall.  See 
IUE Const. Art. X(A) (requring initiation by one local, with 
the endorsement of at least 25 others comprising 25% of the 
IUE membership).  More than 270 locals, representing more 
than 75% of both the locals and the eligible IUE membership, 
voted in favor of the recall, J.A. 419--far in excess of the 
number required to remove Gilvin from office.  See IUE 
Const. Art. X(A) ("The President or Secretary-Treasurer 
shall be declared recalled if locals having a majority of the 
members of the Union in good standing have voted for his or 
her recall.").  Although Gilvin had every right to disagree 
with the policies of the IUE's President and Executive Board, 

it is apparent that the union's membership did not share that 
disagreement, and Gilvin had no right to remain in office once 
the members resoundingly voted him out.

                               VII

     For the reasons stated in Parts IV and V, we reverse the 
district court's grant of summary judgment against Gilvin on 
his claims that defendants violated his rights to free speech 
and to appear as a witness, by suspending him from office in 
retaliation for the exercise of those rights.  See LMRDA 
ss 101(a)(2), (4), 29 U.S.C. ss 411(a)(2), (4).17  In making this 
determination, we have, as required by the applicable stan-
dard of review, examined the evidence in the light most 
favorable to Gilvin, and we express no views regarding the 
merits or ultimate outcome of the case.  See Borgo v. Goldin, 
204 F.3d 251, 254 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  For the reasons stated in 
Part VI, the remaining portions of the district court's judg-
ment, including the court's grant of summary judgment 
against Gilvin on claims arising out of the recall election, are 
affirmed.

                                        Affirmed in Part and Reversed in Part.

__________
     17 The district court granted summary judgment in favor of 
defendants in their individual capacities solely on the ground "that 
Gilvin's public speech and anticipated testimony in judicial proceed-
ings were not protected from retaliation under the LMRDA."  
Gilvin II, slip op. at 22;  see id. at 21 (noting that "an individual 
union officer may be individually liable under Title I [of the 
LMRDA] if he or she 'aids, abets, instigates or directs a wrongful 
use of union power to deprive a member of his rights under s 101' " 
(quoting Rosario v. Amalgamated Ladies' Garment Cutters' Union, 
Local 10, 605 F.2d 1228, 1246 (2d Cir. 1979))).  Since we hold that 
Gilvin's speech and courthouse appearance were protected, we 
necessarily reverse the grant of summary judgment in favor of the 
individual defendants as well.

               