                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 13, 2000     Decided April 14, 2000 

                           No. 99-5125

            Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                   Aramark Corporation, Inc., 
                             Appellee

                        Consolidated with 
                             99-7042

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00716) 
                         (No. 97cv00734)

                            ---------

     Barbara L. Sloan, Attorney, Equal Employment Opportu-
nity Commission, argued the cause for appellant.  With her 
on the briefs was Philip B. Sklover, Associate General Coun-
sel.

     Leslie Robert Stellman argued the cause and filed the brief 
for appellant Rebecca L. Fennell.

     Ronald S. Honberg was on the brief for amicus curiae The 
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill.

     Ronald S. Cooper argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellees Aramark Corporation, Inc. and Aetna Life Insur-
ance Company.

     Phillip E. Stano was on the brief for amici curiae the 
Health Insurance Association of America, the Equal Employ-
ment Advisory Council, the Chamber of Commerce of the 
United States of America and the American Council of Life 
Insurance.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Claiming a violation of the Ameri-
cans with Disabilities Act, appellants challenge an employee 
benefit plan that provides twenty-four months of long-term 
disability benefits for persons suffering from mental or psy-
chological disabilities but a longer period of benefits for those 
with physical disabilities.  Because the employer adopted the 
plan prior to the ADA's enactment and because circuit prece-
dent holds that such plans are protected by the statute's "safe 
harbor" provision, we affirm the district court's grant of 
summary judgment for the employer and plan administrator.

                                I

     Appellant Rebecca Fennell worked as a food service man-
ager for appellee Aramark Corporation for ten years until 
mental illness prevented her from performing her duties.  
Following Fennell's extended leave of absence due to depres-
sion and post-traumatic stress disorder, Aramark terminated 
her employment on February 15, 1996.  She received Social 
Security disability benefits and long-term disability payments 

under Aramark's employee benefit plan, administered by 
appellee Aetna Life Insurance Company.  The plan provides 
income replacement amounting to two-thirds of base monthly 
salary for employees unable to work due to long-term disabili-
ty resulting from illness, injury, or disease.  Funded by 
contributions from Aramark and participating employees, the 
plan limits disability payments to twenty-four months if the 
disability is caused by a mental condition but continues 
payments until at least age sixty-five if the disability is 
physical.  In accordance with the plan's terms, Aetna notified 
Fennell that because she had no physical impairment, her 
benefit payments would be discontinued effective April 16, 
1997, two years after she began receiving them.

     Alleging that the plan's different benefit terms for mental 
and physical disabilities amount to discrimination prohibited 
by the Americans with Disabilities Act, Fennell filed a com-
plaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
and then filed suit against Aramark and Aetna in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia.  Three 
days later, EEOC also filed suit, and the two cases were 
consolidated.  Fennell claimed that the cutoff in benefit pay-
ments violates Title III of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. ss 12181-89, 
which prohibits discrimination "on the basis of disability in 
the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, 
privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of 
public accommodation...."  Id. s 12182(a).  EEOC argued 
that the two-year limit violates Title I of the ADA, Id. 
s 12111-17, which prohibits a covered employer from dis-
criminating "against a qualified individual with a disability 
because of the disability of such individual in regard to [the] 
terms, conditions, and privileges of employment."  Id. 
s 12112(a).

     The district court granted summary judgment for Aramark 
and Aetna.  See Fennell v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., 37 F. Supp.2d 
40 (D.D.C. 1999).  With respect to EEOC's claim, the district 
court observed that Title I protects only a "qualified individu-
al with a disability," defined as "an individual with a disability 
who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform 

the essential functions of the employment position that such 
individual holds or desires."  42 U.S.C. s 12111(8).  Because 
Fennell had become totally disabled and unable to perform 
the essential functions of her job, the district court held that 
she no longer met the definition of a "qualified individual with 
a disability" and was therefore unprotected by Title I of the 
ADA.  Fennell, 37 F.Supp. 2d at 43-44.  With respect to 
Fennell's claim, the district court held that Title III only 
requires elimination of barriers to access for the disabled in 
places of public accommodation, which the court limited to 
"physical locations."  Id. at 45.  Because a disability benefit 
plan does not constitute a physical place of public accommo-
dation, the court said, it is not regulated by Title III.

     EEOC and Fennell appeal.  EEOC argues that the district 
court erred by construing Title I narrowly to prevent former 
employees no longer able to perform essential functions of 
their previous jobs from ever suing under the ADA.  Accord-
ing to EEOC, the district court's ruling would prevent a 
totally disabled former employee from suing for discrimina-
tion in post-employment benefits, even if those benefits had 
been earned when she was a "qualified individual with a 
disability."  Fennell argues that public accommodation refers 
not just to physical locations, as the district court held, but 
also to all available products and services including benefit 
plans.  Our review is de novo.  See Cones v. Shalala, 199 
F.3d 512, 516 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

                                II

     Our sister circuits are divided on both issues that formed 
the basis of the district court's grant of summary judgment 
for Aramark and Aetna.  The Seventh, Ninth, and Eleventh 
Circuits have held (as did the district court) that Title I of the 
ADA provides no protection to a totally disabled former 
employee because that person is no longer a "qualified indi-
vidual with a disability."  See Weyer v. Twentieth Century 
Fox Film Corp., 198 F.3d 1104, 1110 (9th Cir. 2000);  EEOC 
v. CNA Ins. Cos., 96 F.3d 1039, 1045 (7th Cir. 1996);  Gon-
zales v. Garner Food Services, Inc., 89 F.3d 1523, 1531 (11th 
Cir. 1996).  Reaching the opposite conclusion, the Second and 

Third Circuits have held that a former employee who had 
earned fringe benefits while employed and "qualified" could 
sue under Title I for discrimination in post-employment bene-
fits despite the fact that at the time of the suit the former 
employee had become completely disabled and no longer 
"qualified."  See Ford v. Schering-Plough Corp., 145 F.3d 
601, 608 (3d Cir. 1998), cert. denied, --- U.S. ----, 119 S. Ct. 
850 (1999);  Castellano v. City of New York, 142 F.3d 58, 68 
(2d Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 820 (1998).  With respect 
to Title III, the Third and Sixth Circuits (like the district 
court) have limited Title III to ensuring access to physical 
locations open to the public.  See Ford, 145 F.3d at 614;  
Parker v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 121 F.3d 1006, 1014 (6th 
Cir. 1997) (en banc), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1084 (1998).  The 
First and Second Circuits have held that the ADA's prohibi-
tion on disability discrimination in the products and services 
of places of public accommodation is not limited to physical 
structures and may in some instances include insurance poli-
cies and underwriting practices.  See Pallozzi v. Allstate Life 
Ins. Co., 198 F.3d 28 (2d Cir. 1999), amended on denial of 
reh'g, 204 F.3d 392 (2d Cir. 2000);  Carparts Distrib. Ctr., Inc. 
v. Automotive Wholesaler's Ass'n of New England, Inc., 37 
F.3d 12, 19 (1st Cir. 1994).

     This circuit has expressed itself on neither of these disput-
ed issues, nor need we do so now, for we have circuit 
precedent under which we may affirm the district court on a 
different ground--that the challenged plan is protected by 
the ADA's safe harbor for bona fide employee benefit plans.  
Although the district court never addressed the safe harbor 
provision, the issue is fully briefed, and because we review the 
district court's judgment, not its reasoning, we may affirm on 
any ground properly raised.  See, e.g., Doe v. Gates, 981 F.2d 
1316, 1321-22 (D.C. Cir. 1993).

     The ADA's safe harbor appears in section 501(c):  "Sub-
chapters I through III of this chapter and title IV of this Act 
shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict ...  a person or 
organization covered by this chapter from establishing, spon-
soring, observing or administering the terms of a bona fide 
benefit plan that is not subject to State laws that regulate 

insurance."  42 U.S.C. s 12201(c)(3).  This safe harbor "shall 
not be used as a subterfuge to evade the purposes" of Title I 
or Title III of the ADA.  Id. s 12201(c).

     The parties agree that Aramark's benefit plan "is bona fide 
in that it exists and pays benefits."  Public Employees Re-
tirement Sys. of Ohio v. Betts, 492 U.S. 158, 166 (1989) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  They also agree the plan 
is not subject to state insurance regulation by virtue of 
ERISA's preemption provisions.  Their disagreement centers 
on the meaning of the safe harbor's "subterfuge" exception.  
Relying on our decision in Modderno v. King, 82 F.3d 1059 
(D.C. Cir. 1996), Aramark and Aetna argue that their benefit 
plan cannot fall into the subterfuge exception because Ara-
mark adopted it before the ADA's enactment.  Fennell and 
EEOC contend that any benefit plan that includes disability-
based distinctions, no matter when adopted, is a subterfuge if 
those distinctions are not "based on sound actuarial princi-
ples."

     Modderno involved a challenge to a benefit plan's lifetime 
limit on mental health treatment reimbursement.  Although 
the case arose under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which 
prohibits disability discrimination in government employment, 
that Act incorporates the ADA's safe harbor provision.  See 
29 U.S.C. s 794(d).  The appellant in Modderno argued, as 
do Fennell and EEOC, that in order to escape the safe 
harbor's subterfuge exception, the employer had to show that 
any differential treatment of disabled persons in a benefit 
plan is actuarially justified.  Modderno rejected this actuarial 
defense interpretation of subterfuge, finding it " 'at odds with 
the plain language of the statute itself.' "  Modderno, 82 F.3d 
at 1065 (quoting Betts, 492 U.S at 171).

     Of particular significance to this case, Modderno went on to 
hold that the plan challenged in that case could not be a 
subterfuge because the employer had adopted it prior to the 
Rehabilitation Act amendment that incorporated the subter-
fuge provision.  In support of this conclusion, Modderno 
relied on two Supreme Court decisions interpreting a similar 
subterfuge provision in the Age Discrimination in Employ-

ment Act of 1967: United Air Lines, Inc. v. McMann, 434 
U.S. 192 (1977), and Betts, 492 U.S. 158.  In those two cases, 
the Supreme Court construed "subterfuge" to have its "ordi-
nary meaning as 'a scheme, plan, stratagem, or artifice of 
evasion.' "  Betts, 492 U.S. at 167 (quoting McMann, 434 U.S. 
at 203).  Recognizing that the ordinary meaning of subter-
fuge includes a specific intent to circumvent or evade a 
statutory purpose, the Supreme Court held there could be no 
such intent if the challenged provision had been adopted prior 
to the statute's enactment.  "In McMann, for instance, where 
the plan at issue had been adopted in 1941, long before the 
enactment of the ADEA, the Court observed that '[t]o spell 
out an intent in 1941 to evade a statutory requirement not 
enacted until 1967 attributes, at the very least, a remarkable 
prescience to the employer.' "  Modderno, 82 F.3d at 1064 
(quoting McMann, 434 U.S. at 203).

     Modderno's application of Betts and McMann to section 
501(c) of the ADA controls this case.  It is undisputed that 
Aramark's long-term disability benefit plan, including the 
twenty-four-month cap on mental disability benefits chal-
lenged here, has been in place since at least 1982, long before 
the ADA's 1990 enactment.  Under Modderno, therefore, the 
twenty-four-month benefit limit cannot fall within section 
501(c)'s subterfuge exception to the safe harbor.

     Appellants offer three arguments why Modderno should 
not control this case, none of which is convincing.  First, they 
claim that Modderno was wrongly decided because it over-
looked a difference between the language of section 501(c)'s 
subterfuge provision and the language of the similar provision 
in section 4(f)(2) of the ADEA interpreted by Betts.  They 
point out that while the ADEA gave safe harbor to a benefit 
plan "which is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of this 
chapter," the ADA substitutes the phrase "shall not be used 
as a subterfuge to evade the purposes of subchapter[s] I and 
III of this chapter" 29 U.S.C. s 623(f)(2) (1990);  42 U.S.C. 
s 12201(c) (emphasis added).  Even if a panel of this court 
could depart from settled precedent, which of course it can-
not, see, e.g., LaShawn v. Barry, 87 F.3d 1389, 1395 (D.C. Cir. 
1996) (en banc), we are unpersuaded that what EEOC itself 

acknowledges to be a "subtle difference in language"--the 
addition of the words "used as"--would compel a different 
result.

     In enacting section 501(c) of the ADA, Congress repeated 
the phrase "a subterfuge to evade the purposes of ... this 
chapter" just one year after Betts had interpreted that pre-
cise phrase in section 4(f)(2) of the ADEA to exclude pre-Act 
benefit plan provisions.  According to EEOC, Congress sig-
naled its rejection of the Betts interpretation by changing the 
words preceding that phrase from "is not" in the ADEA to 
"shall not be used as" in the ADA.  While a benefit plan 
cannot be a subterfuge to evade the purposes of a not-yet-
enacted statute, EEOC argues, it "can be 'used as a subter-
fuge' regardless of when the plan was adopted."  EEOC 
contends that merely by including the words "used as" in 
section 501(c), Congress expanded the subterfuge exception 
to remove pre-ADA benefit plans from safe harbor protection.  
Instead of protecting all pre-Act plans, the safe harbor, as 
EEOC reads it, functions as an affirmative defense that 
allows employers, benefit plan administrators, and insurance 
underwriters to avoid liability for disability-based distinctions 
by showing on the basis of "sound actuarial principles" that 
the distinctions are risk- or cost-justified.

     The language of the two safe harbor provisions actually 
differs more extensively than even EEOC points out.  The 
ADEA provision examined in McMann and Betts reads in 
pertinent part:

     It shall not be unlawful for an employer, employment 
     agency, or labor organization ... to observe the terms of 
     ... any bona fide employee benefit plan such as a 
     retirement, pension, or insurance plan, which is not a 
     subterfuge to evade the purposes of this chapter....
     
29 U.S.C. 623(f)(2) (1990).  The ADA provision reads as 
follows:

     Subchapters I through III of this chapter and title IV of 
     this Act shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict--
     
     (1) an insurer, hospital or medical service company, 
     health maintenance organization, or any agent, or entity 
     
     that administers benefit plans, or similar organizations 
     from underwriting risks, classifying risks, or administer-
     ing such risks that are based on or not inconsistent with 
     State law;  or
     
     (2) a person or organization covered by this chapter from 
     establishing, sponsoring, observing or administering the 
     terms of a bona fide benefit plan that are based on 
     underwriting risks, classifying risks, or administering 
     such risks that are based on or not inconsistent with 
     State law;  or
     
     (3) a person or organization covered by this chapter from 
     establishing, sponsoring, observing or administering the 
     terms of a bona fide benefit plan that is not subject to 
     State laws that regulate insurance.
     
     Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall not be used as a 
     subterfuge to evade the purposes of subchapter[s] I and 
     III of this chapter.
     
42 U.S.C. s 12201(c).  Under the ADEA, a benefit plan falls 
within the safe harbor only if the plan is both (1) bona fide 
and (2) not a subterfuge.  In the ADA, by contrast, a benefit 
plan receives safe harbor protection if it is (1) bona fide and 
(2) either consistent with or exempt from state law, but the 
safe harbor provision "shall not be used as a subterfuge to 
evade the purposes of" Titles I and III of the ADA.  In other 
words, under the ADA, it is not the benefit plan, but the safe 
harbor itself that shall not be used as a subterfuge.

     We think these semantic distinctions, including the one on 
which appellants rely, do not undermine Modderno.  As 
Modderno pointed out, the Supreme Court interpreted the 
phrase "subterfuge to evade" to require a specific intent to 
circumvent a statutory purpose, thus excluding from the 
subterfuge exception all pre-Act plans.  82 F.2d at 1064.  
Fully aware of the judicial construction of this phrase, Con-
gress used the very same phrase in the ADA's safe harbor.  
"[W]hen Congress chose the term 'subterfuge' for the insur-
ance safe-harbor of the ADA, it was on full alert as to what 
the Court understood the word to mean and possessed (obvi-
ously) a full grasp of the linguistic devices available to avoid 

that meaning."  Id. at 1065.  See also Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 
U.S. 624, 645 (1998) ("When ... judicial interpretations have 
settled the meaning of an existing statutory provision, repeti-
tion of the same language in a new statute indicates, as a 
general matter, the intent to incorporate its ... judicial 
interpretations as well.").  Whether a benefit plan "is" a 
subterfuge to evade the purposes of the law (the ADEA's 
language), or whether the safe harbor for benefit plans is 
"used as" a subterfuge to evade the purposes of the law (the 
ADA's language), the plain meaning of the phrase "subter-
fuge to evade" remains as defined by McMann, Betts, and 
Modderno--"a scheme, plan, stratagem, or artifice of eva-
sion."  Under the ADA, then, "subterfuge to evade" still 
requires intent and still excludes pre-Act plans like Ara-
mark's because, as McMann said, "[t]o spell out an intent in 
[1982] to evade a statutory requirement not enacted until 
[1990] attributes, at the very least, a remarkable prescience 
to the employer."  McMann, 434 U.S. at 203.  For the same 
reason, "subterfuge to evade" cannot mean merely a lack of 
actuarial justification.  Indeed, appellants' contention that the 
safe harbor applies only to plans whose terms are actuarially 
justified has been rejected not only by Modderno but also by 
every other circuit to have considered the issue.  See Leon-
ard F. v. Israel Discount Bank of New York, 199 F.3d 99, 105 
(2d Cir. 1999) ("In the context of the subterfuge clause of 
Section 501(c) of the ADA, neither the dictionary definition 
nor the Supreme Court's reasonably suggests that absence of 
actuarial justification for differential insurance benefits is 
sufficient to demonstrate a 'subterfuge' to evade the purposes 
of an Act, at least where the insurance policy was adopted 
prior to the Act's passage.");  Rogers v. Department of Health 
and Envtl. Control, 174 F.3d 431, 437 (4th Cir. 1999) ("[W]e 
do not find anything in s 501(c) of the ADA (or anywhere else 
in the Act) that requires a plan sponsor or administrator to 
justify a plan's separate classification of mental disability with 
actuarial data.");  Ford, 145 F.3d at 611-12 ("[W]e will not 
construe section 501(c) to require a seismic shift in the 
insurance business, namely requiring insurers to justify their 
coverage plans in court after a mere allegation by a plain-

tiff.");  Parker, 121 F.3d at 1012 n. 5 (rejecting as inconsistent 
with the statutory text the view expressed in the Department 
of Justice Technical Assistance Manual that different insur-
ance benefit or coverage levels based on disability are permit-
ted only where "based on sound actuarial principles" or 
"related to actual or reasonably anticipated experience");  
Krauel v. Iowa Methodist Med. Ctr., 95 F.3d 674, 678-79 (8th 
Cir.1996) (rejecting EEOC's interim guidance explaining ac-
tuarial justification defense as contrary to the plain language 
of the statute and thus not entitled to deference).

     Congress's addition of the words "used as" is simply too 
thin a reed on which to support appellants' claim that Con-
gress intended to overrule Betts, remove pre-Act plans from 
safe harbor protection, and give life to EEOC's uniformly 
rejected actuarial justification theory.  After all, Congress 
responded to Betts by totally deleting the subterfuge lan-
guage from the ADEA, just before it included the similar 
subterfuge provision in section 501(c) of the ADA.  See Older 
Workers Benefit Protection Act of 1990, Pub.L. No. 101-433, 
s 103(1) (codified at 29 U.S.C. s 623(f)(2)).  Had Congress 
also intended to repudiate Betts for ADA purposes, it could 
have omitted the provision from that statute as well.

     Appellants' second argument is that Modderno's discussion 
of section 501(c) is dicta.  As they read the case, the decision 
rested on the observation that the plan provision challenged 
there, a lifetime limit on reimbursement for mental health 
treatment, did not discriminate on the basis of disability.  
Given that "holding," the Commission claims, the panel's 
discussion of section 501(c) was merely "ruminations" "not 
necessary to its holding," and therefore not binding on us.  
Not only did EEOC fail to raise this argument until its reply 
brief, see, e.g., Presbyterian Med. Ctr. of the Univ. of Penn. 
Health Sys. v. Shalala, 170 F.3d 1146, 1152 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
(noting that we need not consider arguments raised for the 
first time in a reply brief), but it rests on a misreading of 
Modderno.  After concluding that "[b]ecause the coverage 
limitations challenged by Modderno were enacted before the 
1992 amendment of s 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (and there 
is no suggestion that their enactment was prompted by an 
expectation of amendment), they do not fall into the subter-
fuge exception to the ADA's safe-harbor," Modderno went on 

to say, in language the Commission fails to account for:  
"Thus, whether or not Modderno stated a claim under the 
1992 amendment of s 504 apart from the safe-harbor provi-
sion--a question on which we express no opinion--the cover-
age limitations challenged by Modderno cannot violate 
amended s 504."  Modderno, 82 F.3d at 1065 (emphasis 
added).  Because Modderno's interpretation of the safe har-
bor was essential to its reasoning as well as to its disposition 
of the claims before it, it stands as binding precedent.

     Finally, EEOC argues that even assuming we follow Mod-
derno's interpretation of section 501(c), this case differs from 
Modderno because Aramark modified the plan after the 
ADA's enactment.  Appellants rely on two specific changes in 
Aramark's long-term disability benefit plan.  First, the twen-
ty-four-month limit on benefit payments previously applied to 
anyone whose disability is "a result of a mental or emotional 
illness," but now applies to disabilities "caused to any extent 
by a mental condition (including conditions related to alcohol-
ism or drug abuse) described in the most current edition of 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
published by the American Psychiatric Association."  Second, 
for a mentally disabled participant confined to an inpatient 
psychiatric hospital at the time the twenty-four-month period 
ends, benefit payments under the prior plan would continue 
for the duration of hospitalization;  under the revised plan, 
continuation of benefits is limited to ninety days beyond the 
twenty-four-month cutoff.   According to EEOC, these two 
changes remove Aramark's plan from automatic safe harbor 
protection.  We disagree.

     To begin with, whatever effect the plan amendments may 
have, appellants concede that they did not apply to Fennell, 
whose benefits would have terminated after twenty-four 
months even under the plan's previous version.  Neither 
appellant explains how the plan amendments could be a 
subterfuge to evade the ADA and discriminate against Fen-
nell if they did not affect her.

     Asserting that its suit is not limited to seeking relief for 
Fennell, EEOC argues that the plan amendments affected 
others by "increas[ing] the number of people subject to the 

limitation."  Not only was this argument also raised for the 
first time in EEOC's reply brief, but the Commission's com-
plaint alleges neither that Aramark amended the plan for the 
purpose of circumventing the ADA, i.e., that the amendments 
were a subterfuge (its burden under Betts), nor that the 
amendments have ever been applied to terminate benefits to 
anyone not subject to the same cutoff under the previous 
plan.

     The judgment of the district court is affirmed.

                                                      So ordered.

        