                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 13, 2000      Decided June 9, 2000 

                           No. 99-5089

                        Bruce E. Gardner, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                United States of America, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96cv01467)

     Bruce E. Gardner, appearing pro se, argued the cause and 
filed the briefs for appellant.

     Annette M. Wietecha, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for the Federal Appellees.  With her 
on the brief were Jonathan S. Cohen, Attorney, and Wilma 
A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney.  R. Craig Lawrence and W. Mark 
Nebeker, Assistant U.S. Attorneys, entered appearances.

     Steven J. Green, Dona S. Kahn and Mark D. Silverschotz 
were on the brief of appellees State of California and Califor-
nia Franchise Tax Board.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Bruce E. Gardner appearing pro se 
appeals the dismissal of his complaint alleging violations of 
federal and state law by federal and state authorities, primar-
ily as a result of the disclosure of his tax returns and tax 
information, under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12 (b)(1), (2), & (6) and 
41(b).  For the reasons set forth in a companion case, Gard-
ner v. United States, 2000 WL 562820, No. 99-5065 (D.C. Cir. 
May 19, 2000), the dismissal under Rule 41(b) cannot be 
affirmed.  However, we conclude that the dismissal was 
proper under Rule 12(b) essentially for the reasons set forth 
in the district court's opinion of January 29, 1999.  We need 
address only two of Mr. Gardner's contentions for, as the 
district court's opinion makes clear, his other contentions fail 
under well-settled law.  We hold first, that the disclosure of 
Mr. Gardner's tax returns and tax information within the 
Internal Revenue Service was permissible under the tax 
administration exception to the nondisclosure requirements of 
26 U.S.C. s 6103 (1994 and Supp. IV 1998), and second, that 
Mr. Gardner's exclusive remedy for the disclosures of his tax 
records is under the Internal Revenue Code, and not the 
Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552a (1994 and Supp. IV 1998).  
Accordingly, we affirm.

                                I.

     As noted in the companion case, Mr. Gardner formerly 
worked as an attorney in the Sacramento, California Office of 
Chief Counsel to the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") at the 
Treasury Department.  His employment was terminated for 
alleged failures to comply with federal and state tax laws.  
He filed three complaints in the district court, relating to his 
compliance with federal and state tax laws, after unsuccess-

fully pursuing state and federal administrative remedies.  We 
summarize the background to his contentions that the disclo-
sure of his tax returns and tax information violated federal 
law and that he is entitled to relief under the Privacy Act as 
well as the Internal Revenue Code.

     Briefly put, Mr. Gardner's supervisors in Sacramento, Cali-
fornia, suspected as early as 1992 that he was not in full 
compliance with federal and state tax laws.  When he agreed 
in 1994 to provide relevant information and then failed to do 
so, his supervisors obtained his federal tax returns and tax 
audit directly from IRS offices in Houston, Texas, and Fres-
no, California, and his state returns and tax information from 
state agencies in California and Maryland, where he had lived 
while working for the IRS in the District of Columbia.  Upon 
concluding that Mr. Gardner had taken several unsupportable 
positions on his federal income tax returns for 1990-92 and 
that he had not timely filed his Maryland income tax returns 
for 1988-90, his supervisors offered him a chance to resign.  
When he refused, they commenced disciplinary proceedings 
and his employment was terminated November 26, 1994, for 
failure to file proper federal and state income tax returns.  
Thereafter, his application for unemployment benefits was 
denied by the California Unemployment Insurance Appeals 
Board, and his challenge to his termination was rejected by 
the Merit Systems Protection Board.  He then filed a forty-
four count complaint in the district court alleging, among 
other things, that the Treasury Department, the IRS, and 
individual IRS employees violated the Internal Revenue Code 
and the Privacy Act through intra-IRS disclosures of his tax 
return information while he was under investigation by the 
IRS and during the state and federal administrative proceed-
ings that he commenced after his employment was terminat-
ed.  Following the filing of dispositive motions by the defen-
dants, the district court dismissed the complaint under Fed. 
R. Civ. P. 12(b) and 41(b).

     The court has concluded in a companion case that the Rule 
41(b) dismissal of Mr. Gardner's complaint must be reversed.  
Gardner, 2000 WL 562820, at *1, 3-5.  The question remains 
whether Mr. Gardner has demonstrated that the district 

court erred in dismissing his complaint under Rule 12(b).  
Most of his contentions raise issues that are well-settled in 
law adversely to him, and we need not repeat the district 
court's opinion.1  There are, however, two contentions that 
require some explication.

                               II.

     First, Mr. Gardner contends that the district court erred in 
ruling that the disclosure of his tax records fell within the 
exception to nondisclosure of s 6103(h)(1) for "tax administra-
tion purposes."  In making this contention he relies on our 
decision in National Treasury Employees Union v. Federal 
Labor Relations Board ("NTEU"), 791 F.2d 183 (D.C. Cir. 
1986), and therein lies the need for clarification.

     The Internal Revenue Code generally prohibits the disclo-
sure of tax returns and tax information.  Under 26 U.S.C. 
s 6103(a), "return and return information shall be confiden-
tial" and "no officer or employee of the United States ... 

__________
     1 The district court lacked personal jurisdiction over the individ-
ual IRS employees-appellees, because Mr. Gardner failed to allege 
the requisite contacts between these California and Texas residents 
and the District of Columbia under the Constitution and the Dis-
trict's long-arm statute.  See, e.g., International Shoe Co. v. Wash-
ington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945);  D.C. Code Ann. s 13-423 (1995).  
Mr. Gardner's defamation claim against the United States is barred, 
because suits for libel or slander are prohibited under the Federal 
Tort Claims Act.  28 U.S.C. s 2680(h)(1994).  The district court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction of Mr. Gardner's claims for 
alleged violations of the Family Leave Act and the Whistleblower 
Protection Act, because he failed to allege that he had exhausted his 
administrative remedies, as required under the Civil Service Re-
form Act.  Hubbard v. EPA, 809 F.2d 1, 5 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  
Carducci v. Regan, 714 F.2d 171, 174-75 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  Mr. 
Gardner's claims against the California state defendants were 
barred by the Eleventh Amendment, which prohibits suit against a 
state or a state agency in federal court absent their consent or clear 
congressional abrogation of immunity, neither of which was present 
here.  See, e.g., Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44, 
54-55 (1996).

shall disclose any return or return information" unless autho-
rized by statute.  As the court observed in NTEU:

     This general ban on disclosure provides essential protec-
     tion for the taxpayer;  it guarantees that the sometimes 
     sensitive or otherwise personal information in a return 
     will be guarded from persons not directly engaged in 
     processing or inspecting the return for tax administra-
     tion purposes.  The assurance of privacy secured by 
     s 6103 is fundamental to a tax system that relies upon 
     self-reporting.
     
Id. at 184.  In recognition of competing concerns, however, 
the Code includes a number of exceptions.  Two are relevant 
here.

     Under s 6103(h)(1), "[r]eturns and return information shall, 
without written request, be open to inspection by or disclo-
sure to officers and employees of the Department of the 
Treasury whose official duties require such disclosure for tax 
administration purposes."  26 U.S.C. s 6103(h)(1).  Another 
provision, s 6103(h)(4), authorizes disclosure of returns and 
return information "in a Federal or State judicial or adminis-
trative proceeding pertaining to tax administration ... if the 
taxpayer is a party to the proceeding...."2  If the internal 
IRS investigation of Mr. Gardner's tax history, and the 
related state and federal administrative proceedings com-
menced by Mr. Gardner were "tax administration" matters, 
then the disclosures were proper under s 6103(h)(1) and (4).  
We therefore address the scope of the tax administration 

__________
     2 In the district court, the federal appellees also relied on 
s 6103(l )(4)(B), which authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to 
disclose returns and return information to Treasury Department 
employees for their use in an "administrative action or proceeding 
affecting the personnel rights" of an employee or former employee, 
see s 6103(l )(4)(B), (A)(i), and argued that, in addition, the chal-
lenged disclosures were made pursuant to a good faith interpreta-
tion of s 6103.  The district court granted the motion to dismiss the 
complaint under Rule 12(b) without indicating which provision 
applied to which disclosures.  In view of our disposition, we do not 
address these subjects.

exception of s 6103(h)(1) and (4) with respect to these disclo-
sures.

     The Internal Revenue Code defines "tax administration" 
fairly broadly, to include "the administration, management, 
conduct, direction, and supervision of the execution and appli-
cation of the internal revenue laws or related statutes (or 
equivalent laws and statutes of a State)....," id. 
s 6104(b)(4)(A)(i), as well as enforcement and litigation under 
the tax laws.  Id. s 6104(b)(4)(B).  While the language of this 
exception appears readily applicable to the daily work that 
IRS employees do in auditing and otherwise checking taxpay-
er returns and tax information, it is perhaps not as clearly 
applicable to internal personnel investigations.  Taking the 
lead from Congress' broad language, however, courts have 
acknowledged that such investigations, where necessary to 
maintain the integrity of the tax enforcement authorities, are 
"tax administration" matters.  Thus, in Rueckert v. IRS, 775 
F.2d 208 (7th Cir. 1985), the Seventh Circuit held that the tax 
returns of a state employee responsible for investigation of 
tax fraud were properly disclosed to persons within the state 
tax department who were investigating whether the employee 
had engaged in unauthorized outside employment.  Id. at 212.  
Relying on the "tax administration" exception of s 6104(h)(1), 
the Seventh Circuit interpreted "the 'management' and 'su-
pervision' of a state's internal revenue laws [to] include[ ] 
ensuring that its employees are free from conflicts of interest 
that could undermine the integrity of its system of adminis-
tering the state tax laws."  Id.  Similarly, the Fifth Circuit 
recently held the "tax administration" exception of 
s 6103(h)(4) applicable to tax information disclosures made 
with regard to an IRS employee's Title VII and Merit Sys-
tems Protection Board challenges to the termination of his 
employment for noncompliance with the tax laws.  Hobbs v. 
United States, 209 F.3d 408 (5th Cir. 2000).  The Hobbs 
Court observed that the IRS employee's "own compliance 
with the federal tax laws was something of key concern to the 
IRS;  his position required him to examine the accuracy of 
corporate and individual tax returns and, in turn, to have a 
sophisticated understanding of the tax laws," and concluded 

that disclosures made in the context of administrative and 
judicial challenges to his termination "unquestionably encom-
passed tax administration".  Cf. United States v. Mangan, 
575 F.2d 32, 40 (2d Cir. 1978).  Given this reasonable con-
struction of the broad language of s 6103(h)(1) and (4), it 
would seem that the disclosures of which Mr. Gardner com-
plains were proper for purposes of enabling the IRS to 
conduct its internal investigation of his tax history, and to 
explain the basis for the termination of his employment in the 
subsequent administrative proceedings.

     Mr. Gardner contends, however, that our decision in NTEU 
not only bars the wholesale disclosures that he alleges oc-
curred here, but holds that the "tax administration" exception 
of s 6103(h)(1) is inapplicable to personnel matters, and thus 
to his case.  Although there is some broad language in NTEU 
suggesting Mr. Gardner's point, properly read in context 
NTEU does not demonstrate error by the district court.  To 
the extent that NTEU concluded that an employee grievance 
unrelated to the employee's tax compliance history could 
entail disclosure only upon proper authorization under 
s 6103(l )(4)(A) and thus implicitly concluded that the griev-
ance was not a "tax administration" matter justifying 
s 6103(h)(1) disclosure, NTEU is not dispositive of whether 
the IRS may, as a matter of tax administration, disclose an 
employee's tax records to IRS officials as part of an internal 
investigation of the employee's compliance with the tax laws, 
or in subsequent proceedings relating to a resulting termi-
nation decision.

     In NTEU, the court held that disclosures by two IRS 
employees of confidential taxpayer information in the course 
of preparing for a grievance proceeding against the IRS 
violated the Internal Revenue Code's non-disclosure require-
ment.  791 F.2d at 184.  The employees had disclosed to each 
other and to their union attorneys their "Revenue Officer 
Dailies" while challenging a negative performance evaluation 
of one of the employees.  The unredacted dailies showed how 
each revenue officer spent his time and included the name of 
each taxpayer for whose case the officer was responsible, and 
a description of any action taken.  Id. at 185.  The court, 

recognizing that for a union to fulfill its duty to represent 
federal employees, it must have access to agency records for 
bargaining and grievance resolution purposes, concluded that 
s 6103(l )(4)(A) provided for such access.3  Id. at 184.  Pursu-
ant to that provision, IRS had authorized certain upper level 
officers to act on the Treasury Secretary's behalf in approv-
ing disclosures.4  The problem in NTEU was that the em-
ployees had not obtained such authorization, and consequent-
ly, the court held, the disclosures violated s 6103.  Id. at 184-
85, 187.  The court never addressed the scope of the "tax 
administration" exception under s 6103, although it was im-
plicit that the court did not consider the employee grievance 
to involve "tax administration," given its reliance on the 
authorization procedures of s 6103(l )(4)(A), and its acknowl-
edgment that such procedures would not be necessary for 
disclosures made pursuant to "tax administration" matters 
under s 6103(h)(1).  Id. at 188.  Thus, while the court stated 
broadly that "disclosures for personnel purposes, whether to 
employees or outsiders, are prohibited by statute unless 
__________
     3 Section 6103(l )(4) provides:

          The Secretary may disclose returns and return informa-
     tion--
     
          (A) upon written request--
     
           (i) to an employee or former employee of the Department 
          of the Treasury, or to the duly authorized legal representa-
          tive of such employee or former employee, who is or may be 
          a party to any administrative action or proceeding affecting 
          the personnel rights of such employee or former employee;  
          or
          
           (ii) to any person, or to the duly authorized legal represen-
          tative of such person, whose rights are or may be affected by 
          an administrative action or proceeding under section 330 of 
          title 31, United States Code....  
26 U.S.C. s 6103(l )(4).

     4 In NTEU the court relied on IRS Delegation Order 184-85 
(rev. 2, para. 1(e) (Mar. 21, 1982), which set forth the authorization 
procedure under s 6103(4)(A) and allowed only certain upper level 
officers to act as the Secretary's designees in granting permission 
to disclose tax information.  NTEU, 791 F.2d at 184-85.

authorized in the precise manner indicated in 
s 6103(l )(4)(A)", id., this statement was not made with re-
gard to the scope of the "tax administration exception" under 
s 6104(h)(1) or (h)(4), but merely reiterated the court's con-
clusion that the type of disclosures at issue could not be made 
under s 6103(l )(4)(A) absent proper authorization.  Id. at 
184-85, 187.

     Moreover, the court's implicit holding that the grievance 
proceeding at issue did not constitute "tax administration" 
has no bearing on the instant case.  The disclosures in NTEU 
occurred in the course of an employee grievance proceeding 
against the IRS relating to the quality and quantity of the 
employee's work performance.  As an adversarial personnel 
matter, it did not implicate the IRS' need to guard the 
integrity of its operations.  By contrast, the disclosures that 
Mr. Gardner challenges, as in Rueckert and Hobbs, occurred 
in connection with the IRS' legitimate need to protect the 
integrity of its tax enforcement operations by ensuring that 
its employees were in compliance with the tax laws.  Because 
the disclosures of Mr. Gardner's tax records were made for 
the limited purposes of determining whether he had failed to 
comply with the tax laws and in justifying the resulting 
decision to terminate his employment, they were integral to 
the IRS' need to ensure that its employees' conduct does not 
"undermine the integrity of [the IRS'] system of administer-
ing the ... tax laws," Rueckert, 775 F.2d at 212, and thus the 
disclosures were proper under the "tax administration" ex-
ception of s 6103(h)(1) and (4).  Accordingly, the district 
court did not err in dismissing Mr. Gardner's disclosures 
claims under Rule 12(b).

                               III.

     Second, Mr. Gardner contends that the district court erred 
by dismissing under Rule 12(b)(6) his claims under the Priva-
cy Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552a.  In his complaint, Mr. Gardner 
raised Privacy Act claims that fall into three primary catego-
ries:  disclosure of his tax information, expungement or 
amendment of information in his tax records, and disclosure 

of non-tax related information.  Only the first category merits 
more than summary discussion.5  As to this category, the 
district court ruled that any claims regarding the disclosure 
of tax information are preempted by the Internal Revenue 
Code.  This is a question of first impression for this court.

     In dismissing Mr. Gardner's disclosure claims, the district 
court relied on Lake v. Rubin, 162 F.2d 113 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  
In Lake, the court held that taxpayers could not rely on the 
Privacy Act to obtain access to their tax records because the 
more specific provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, 
s 6103, controlled.  Id. at 115-16.  While Lake concerned 
access by taxpayers to their own records, the decision is 
instructive on whether s 6103 preempts Privacy Act claims 
regarding disclosure of taxpayer records by third parties.

     Following the approach in Cheek v. IRS, 703 F.2d 271, 271-
72 (7th Cir. 1983), the court in Lake noted with approval the 
conclusion of the Seventh Circuit that s 6103 "overrides any 
inconsistent provisions of ... the Privacy Act".  Lake, 162 
F.3d at 116.  That conclusion, the court observed, was sup-
ported by the legislative history, in view of the Senate 
Report's statement "that [tax information] should generally 
be treated as confidential ... except in those limited situa-
tions delineated in ... section 6103...."  Id. at 116, n.3 
(citing S. Rep. No. 94-938 at 318 (1976)).  In addition, the 
Lake court viewed the conclusion of exclusivity to be analo-

__________
     5 In view of the plain language of the Internal Revenue Code, 
the district court correctly ruled that 26 U.S.C. s 7852(e) stripped 
the court of subject matter jurisdiction over Mr. Gardner's Privacy 
Act claims for expungement or amendment of his tax records.  26 
U.S.C. s 7852(e) (1994).  See also, e.g., England v. Commissioner, 
798 F.2d 350, 351-52 (9th Cir. 1986).  Similarly, the district court 
correctly ruled that the alleged disclosures of non-tax information, 
including "defamatory statements" made in state and federal ad-
ministrative proceedings by IRS officials and intra-Treasury/IRS 
disclosures of Mr. Gardner's wage records, constitute "routine uses" 
exempt from Privacy Act protection.  See 5 U.S.C. s 552a(b)(3);  57 
Fed. Reg. 13900, 14058-59 (1992).  Cf. Department of the Air Force 
v. Federal Labor Relations Authority, 104 F.3d 1396, 1401-02 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997).

gous to its precedent that the Freedom of Information Act 
does not govern the disclosure of information when another 
statute more specifically addresses the disclosure of that 
information through " 'comprehensive, carefully tailored and 
detailed' provisions 'designed to protect both the interest of' 
those seeking the information and the interest in 'confiden-
tiality.' "  Id. at 116 (citing Ricchio v. Kline, 773 F.2d 1389, 
1395 (D.C. Cir. 1985)).  That precedent is even more directly 
analogous to the instant case than it was to Lake, because it 
concerns the preemption of statutory provisions regarding 
disclosure to third parties by other, more specific provisions.

     From the analysis in Lake, the district court could properly 
conclude with regard to Mr. Gardner's unauthorized disclo-
sure claims that s 6103, with its detailed framework for 
access to and disclosure of tax records, preempts the relative-
ly generic provisions of the Privacy Act.  The Fifth Circuit, 
citing Lake and Cheek, likewise concluded that s 6103 trumps 
Privacy Act claims for unauthorized disclosures where the 
disclosures fall within s 6103's "tax administration" exception.  
Although declining to opine on whether preemption would 
exist absent a direct conflict between the Internal Revenue 
Code and the Privacy Act, the Fifth Circuit concluded that 
such a conflict did exist, and that the former thus trumped 
the latter, where a disclosure that related to "tax administra-
tion" (and thus was exempt from the Internal Revenue Code's 
nondisclosure restriction) was the basis for a claim under the 
Privacy Act.6  The Fifth Circuit also cited Cheek and Lake for 
the broader proposition that the majority of courts to con-
front the issue have concluded that the Internal Revenue 
Code preempts the Privacy Act in "provid[ing] the exclusive 
remedy for disclosures of tax return information."  Hobbs, 
209 F.3d at 411.  Those circuit courts of appeals allowing 
Privacy Act claims based on tax return disclosures neither 

__________
     6 In Hobbs, the Fifth Circuit cited Sinicki v. United States 
Department of the Treasury, No. 97 Civ. 0901, 1998 WL 80188 
(S.D.N.Y. Feb. 24, 1998), in which the district court had ruled that 
" '[s]ection 6103 should only implicitly repeal the Privacy Act to the 
extent it presents an irreconcilable conflict.' "  Hobbs, 209 F.3d at 
412 (quoting Sinicki, 1998 WL 80188, at *5).

addressed s 6103 preemption directly nor faced a situation in 
which the Privacy Act provided a remedy for conduct permis-
sible under the Internal Revenue Code.  See Taylor v. Unit-
ed States, 106 F.3d 833, 836-37 (8th Cir. 1997);  Long v. IRS, 
891 F.2d 222, 224 (9th Cir. 1989).

     Because our analysis in Lake, supported by decisions in the 
Fifth and Seventh Circuits, leads inexorably to the conclusion 
that the Internal Revenue Code preempts the Privacy Act for 
remedies for disclosure of tax information, we hold that 
s 6103 is the exclusive remedy for a taxpayer claiming unlaw-
ful disclosure of his or her tax returns and tax information.  
The district court, therefore, did not err in dismissing under 
Rule 12(b)(6) Mr. Gardner's Privacy Act claims based on IRS 
disclosures of his tax returns and tax information.

     Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the district court.

                                  