                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 4, 2001       Decided June 15, 2001 

                           No. 00-1031

               Baltimore Gas and Electric Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

         Columbia Gas Transmission Corporation, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
           00-1034, 00-1035, 00-1041, 00-1051, 00-1052

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Peter C. Lesch argued the cause for petitioners.  With him 
on the briefs were Jennifer N. Waters, Stanley W. Balis, 

John F. Harrington, Kevin J. McKeon, John K. Keane, Jr. 
and Paul S. Buckley.  Jeffrey A. Gollomp and Lillian S. 
Harris entered appearances.

     Beth G. Pacella, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 
the brief was Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Marilyn L. Doria, Sanford M. Saunders, Jr., Stephen R. 
Melton and Kurt L. Krieger were on the brief for intervenors 
Columbia Gulf Transmission Corporation and Columbia Gulf 
Transmission Company.  Robin M. Nuschler entered an ap-
pearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Baltimore Gas & Electric and 
several other petitioners (collectively "BG&E") challenge the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's ("FERC") agree-
ment to settle an enforcement action against Columbia Gas 
Transmission and Columbia Gulf Transmission (collectively 
"Columbia"), two natural-gas vendors.  The Commission ini-
tially had alleged that Columbia violated the Natural Gas Act, 
("NGA"), 15 U.S.C. s 717 et seq., by engaging in unauthorized 
service abandonment.  Because FERC's decision to settle is 
committed to the agency's nonreviewable discretion under 
Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (1985), we conclude that we 
lack jurisdiction to hear petitioners' claim.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     The NGA requires all vendors of natural gas in interstate 
commerce to obtain from FERC a certificate authorizing 
service at specified "certificated" levels.  15 U.S.C. s 717f(c).  
Having obtained such authority, a natural-gas vendor must 
obtain Commission approval before abandoning a portion, or 
all, of its certificated service.  Id. s 717f(b).

     In 1992, FERC discovered that the available capacity on 
one of Columbia's pipelines was lower than the level at which 
it had been certificated.  FERC suspected that the decline in 

the pipeline's capacity was due to Columbia's failure to re-
place deteriorated compressor units.  The Commission there-
fore ordered Columbia to show cause why it had not aban-
doned capacity without prior authorization.  It also directed 
its General Counsel to begin a formal, non-public investiga-
tion into whether Columbia had unlawfully abandoned service 
without first obtaining FERC approval.  See Columbia Gas 
Transmission Corp., 64 FERC p 61,365 (1993).

     After a four-year investigation, FERC in August 1997 
approved a settlement between Columbia and the Commis-
sion's Enforcement section.  The settlement expressly de-
clined to resolve whether Columbia had violated the Natural 
Gas Act.  Instead Columbia, "without admitting or denying 
that any violation of the NGA or the Commission's regula-
tions occurred, agree[d] to the remedies" the settlement 
contained.  Columbia Gas Transmission Corp., 80 FERC 
p 61,220, 61,867 (1997).  The centerpiece remedy was the 
requirement that Columbia conduct a 30-day "open season" 
to determine whether there was any demand for additional 
capacity on its pipeline, and to make that capacity available 
(up to its certificated level) to customers that desired it.  Id.  
The settlement stopped short of requiring Columbia to pay 
money damages to customers that may have incurred higher 
costs as a result of the decline in its pipeline's capacity.

     In September 1997, BG&E, one of Columbia's customers, 
moved to intervene in the administrative proceedings, and 
also petitioned for rehearing.  BG&E argued both that 
FERC should not have settled with Columbia without submit-
ting the agreement's terms to public notice and comment, and 
that the 30-day open season was inadequate to remedy the 
damages it had suffered from Columbia's capacity decline.

     In December 1998, FERC permitted BG&E to intervene 
but denied its request for rehearing.  See Columbia Gas 
Transmission Corp., 85 FERC p 61,437 (1998).  The Commis-
sion explained that it was entitled to settle without notice and 
comment because the settlement was reached in the course of 
an agency investigation, and third parties have no right to 
participate in investigations.  Because the investigation had 

now concluded, and because of BG&E's interests, FERC 
granted its motion to intervene.  However, the Commission 
declined BG&E's invitation to reconsider its decision on re-
hearing.  FERC cited its broad discretion to impose sanc-
tions, which "includes the discretion not to order remedies for 
past violations in appropriate circumstances."  Id. at 62,642.  
In particular, FERC explained that monetary relief was 
unwarranted because the magnitude of BG&E's asserted 
injuries was speculative, and because of Columbia's poor 
financial condition (it had been in bankruptcy from 1991 to 
1995).  Id. at 62,642-43.

     Later that month BG&E filed another motion for rehear-
ing.  BG&E again complained that FERC had unlawfully 
excluded it from the investigation of Columbia, and that 
FERC was required to award it monetary relief for the losses 
it suffered.  In December 1999, the Commission again denied 
rehearing.  FERC explained that BG&E had no right to 
participate in its investigation of Columbia.  FERC further 
claimed that its decision to proceed against Columbia through 
a settlement was "well within [its] discretion."  And money 
damages against Columbia were unwarranted because calcu-
lating them would require "an undetermined expenditure of 
Commission ... resources" that FERC preferred to devote 
to "its current regulatory programs and initiatives."  Colum-
bia Gas Transmission Corp., 89 FERC p 61,325, 61,992 
(1999).

     BG&E then filed a petition for review with this Court.  It 
maintains that FERC abused its discretion by approving the 
Columbia settlement without first giving BG&E an opportuni-
ty to participate in the proceedings.  BG&E further argues 
that the Commission abused its discretion by remedying 
Columbia's assertedly unlawful conduct with a prospective 
open season, and not with money damages.1  Intervenor 
Columbia moved to dismiss BG&E's petition.  FERC and 

__________
     1  In a related case before this Court, No. 00-1138, BG&E 
argued that FERC unlawfully approved a later request by Colum-
bia to increase the certificated capacity on its natural-gas pipeline.  
We rejected that claim in an order dated May 14, 2001.

Columbia claim that this Court lacks jurisdiction to consider 
FERC's decision to settle, which is committed to the agency's 
nonreviewable discretion pursuant to Heckler v. Chaney, 470 
U.S. 821 (1985).  In a similar vein, they argue that, since this 
Court has no power to issue an order that could redress 
BG&E's claimed injury, BG&E lacks standing.

                          II. DISCUSSION

     The Administrative Procedure Act ("APA") both authorizes 
and limits judicial scrutiny of the actions of administrative 
agencies.  While there is a strong presumption of reviewabili-
ty under the APA, Abbott Labs. v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 140 
(1967), that statute expressly provides that no judicial review 
is available of an "agency action [that] is committed to agency 
discretion by law."  5 U.S.C. s 701(a)(2).  The ban on judicial 
review of actions "committed to agency discretion by law" is 
jurisdictional.  See, e.g., Fort Sumter Tours, Inc. v. Babbitt, 
202 F.3d 349, 357 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (explaining that "the 
nonreviewability of a similar kind of agency decision is not 
simply a question of deference to agency discretion, but of the 
absence of jurisdiction").  That is, Congress has not given the 
courts the power to hear challenges to an agency's exercise of 
the discretion with which Congress has entrusted it.

     In Heckler v. Chaney, the Supreme Court announced one 
specific application of s 701(a)(2)'s denial of jurisdiction.  
Chaney sets forth the general rule that an agency's decision 
not to exercise its enforcement authority, or to exercise it in a 
particular way, is committed to its absolute discretion.  Such 
matters are not subject to judicial review.  470 U.S. at 831;  
see also American Gas Ass'n v. FERC, 912 F.2d 1496, 1505 
(D.C. Cir. 1990) (remarking that "nonenforcement decisions 
are ordinarily unreviewable by virtue of ... the Administra-
tive Procedure Act").  This Court has held that the Chaney 
presumption of nonreviewability extends not just to a decision 
whether to bring an enforcement action, but to a decision to 
settle.  New York State Dep't of Law v. FCC, 984 F.2d 1209, 
1214 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (concluding that "an agency's decision to 

settle or dismiss an enforcement action is nonreviewable 
under Heckler v. Chaney").

     The Chaney Court identified three reasons why agency 
enforcement decisions generally are nonreviewable.  First, an 
agency's decision not to enforce "often involves a complicated 
balancing of a number of factors which are peculiarly within 
its expertise," including the allocation of agency resources 
and the likelihood of success.  Chaney, 470 U.S. at 831.  
Second, an agency's refusal to act generally does not involve 
the exercise of "coercive power over an individual's liberty or 
property rights, and thus does not infringe upon areas that 
courts often are called upon to protect."  Id. at 832.  Third, 
and perhaps most importantly, an agency's decision not to 
enforce resembles a prosecutor's constitutional prerogative 
not to indict--"a decision which has long been regarded as 
the special province of the Executive Branch"--and so is 
entitled to similar deference.  Id.

     Indeed, Chaney's recognition that the courts must not 
require agencies to initiate enforcement actions may well be a 
requirement of the separation of powers commanded by our 
Constitution.  The power to take care that the laws be 
faithfully executed is entrusted to the executive branch--and 
only to the executive branch.  See U.S. Const. art. II, s 3.  
One aspect of that power is the prerogative to decline to 
enforce a law, or to enforce a law in a particular way.  See, 
e.g., Hotel and Rest. Employees' Union v. Smith, 846 F.2d 
1499, 1519 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (en banc) (Silberman, J., separate 
opinion) ("The extrastatutory decision to withhold enforce-
ment is an exercise of the Executive Branch's discretion to 
decide whether to prosecute a case that flows from the 
Constitution's admonition that that Branch 'take Care that 
the Laws be faithfully executed.'  U.S. Const. art. II, s 3.").  
When the judiciary orders an executive agency to enforce the 
law it risks arrogating to itself a power that the Constitution 
commits to the executive branch.

     This is not, of course, to suggest that the Congress may not 
restrict an executive agency's enforcement discretion.  In-
deed, as we discuss below, the Chaney Court itself recognized 

that the presumption of nonreviewability may be overcome by 
congressional limitations.  Unlike a judicial command to initi-
ate an enforcement action, Congress's authority to impose 
discretion-curtailing limitations is fully consistent with the 
executive's power to take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed.  Such restrictions are simply an instance of law-
making, a power committed to Congress by the Constitution.  
See U.S. Const. art. I, s 1.  The executive, in turn, is charged 
with enforcing the law as it has been defined by the legisla-
ture.

     The present case falls squarely within the Chaney pre-
sumption.  In 1993, FERC began an investigation of Colum-
bia's alleged service abandonment.  Columbia Gas Transmis-
sion Corp., 64 FERC p 61,365 (1993).  Four years later, the 
Commission announced that it would not prosecute an en-
forcement action against Columbia, but rather that the par-
ties had agreed to settle.  Columbia Gas Transmission 
Corp., 80 FERC p 61,220 (1997).  FERC's decision to settle 
with Columbia, and its consequent decision not to see its 
enforcement action through to fruition, is a paradigmatic 
instance of an agency exercising its presumptively nonreview-
able enforcement discretion.  This Court recognized as much 
in New York State Department of Law v. FCC, 984 F.2d 1209 
(D.C. Cir. 1993), where we confronted a strikingly similar fact 
pattern.  In that case, the FCC issued a show-cause order in 
an enforcement proceeding and then, without any public 
notice, agreed to settle with the companies it was investigat-
ing.  A group of third parties objected to the FCC's settle-
ment, and sought to force the Commission to reopen the 
proceedings.  We rejected their suit, finding that the FCC's 
decision to settle was "a legitimate exercise of that agency's 
enforcement discretion" and hence was presumptively non-
reviewable under Chaney.  Id. at 1215.  Just so here.

     Of course, Chaney established only a presumption, not a 
categorical rule.  470 U.S. at 832 (explaining that an agency's 
enforcement "decision is only presumptively unreviewable");  
see also Block v. SEC, 50 F.3d 1078, 1082 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
("The presumption against judicial review in Chaney is not 
irrebuttable.").  The Supreme Court went on to identify three 

circumstances in which the presumption of nonreviewability 
may be overcome:  (1) where "the substantive statute has 
provided guidelines for the agency to follow in exercising its 
enforcement powers";  (2) where the agency refuses "to insti-
tute proceedings based solely on the belief that it lacks 
jurisdiction";  and (3) where the agency "has conspicuously 
and expressly adopted a general policy that is so extreme as 
to amount to an abdication of its statutory responsibilities."  
Chaney, 470 U.S. at 833 & n.4 (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted).2

     None of those three circumstances is presented here.  
First, although this Court has recognized that the Commis-
sion's discretion is "at [its] zenith" when enforcing the Natu-
ral Gas Act, Niagara Mohawk Power Corp. v. FPC, 379 F.2d 
153, 159 (D.C. Cir. 1967), we have not yet had occasion to hold 
that the NGA--the "substantive statute" here--lacks guide-
lines against which to measure FERC's exercise of its en-
forcement discretion.  We do so now.  At every turn the 
NGA confirms that FERC's decision how, or whether, to 
enforce that statute is entirely discretionary.  Nowhere does 
the act place an affirmative obligation on FERC to initiate an 
enforcement action, nor does it impose limitations on FERC's 
discretion to settle such an action.  "Certainly the statute 
does not lay out any circumstances in which the agency is 
required to undertake or to continue an enforcement action."  
New York State, 984 F.2d at 1215.

     The closest approximation of a guideline BG&E identifies is 
what it describes as the Commission's "affirmative responsi-
bility to protect consumer interests."  Reply Brief of Petition-
ers at 7 (citing 15 U.S.C. ss 717c, 717f).  This is not suffi-
cient.  A recitation of the boilerplate truism that FERC must 
advance "consumer interests"--which phrase appears no-

__________
     2 In Chaney, the Court endorsed only the first of these three 
exceptions but noted the possibility of the other two, "express[ing] 
no opinion on whether such decisions would be unreviewable" but 
"not[ing] that in those situations the statute conferring authority on 
the agency might indicate that such decisions were not 'committed 
to agency discretion.' "  470 U.S. at 833 n.4.

where in the Natural Gas Act--hardly amounts to a discre-
tion-restricting guideline.  In addition, none of the cited NGA 
provisions relate specifically to enforcement.  They instead 
impose restrictions on the primary conduct of both FERC 
and certain natural gas companies.  Granted these provisions 
deny FERC the discretion to, say, permit natural gas compa-
nies to charge unreasonable rates, 15 U.S.C. s 717c(a), or 
permit companies to distribute natural gas without obtaining 
a certificate of public convenience and necessity, id. s 717f(c).  
But they are utterly silent on the manner in which the 
Commission is to proceed against a particular transgressor.

     The NGA's lack of standards by itself is fatal to BG&E's 
claim.  But the Natural Gas Act goes even further, and 
expressly confirms the breadth of the Commission's enforce-
ment discretion.  The NGA states that FERC "may in its 
discretion bring an action" against a violator of the act.  Id. 
s 717s(a) (emphasis added).  It also provides that the Com-
mission "may investigate" any possible violations.  Id. 
s 717m(a) (emphasis added).  FERC's regulations contain 
equally discretionary language:  the Commission "may initi-
ate administrative proceedings ... or take other appropriate 
action."  18 C.F.R. s 1b.7 (emphasis added).  If Congress 
had intended to cabin FERC's enforcement discretion, it 
could have used obligatory terms such as "must," "shall," and 
"will," not the wholly precatory language it employed in the 
act.

     The other two Chaney circumstances are even more easily 
dismissed.  FERC's decision to settle with Columbia did not 
proceed from the Commission's mistaken belief that it 
"lack[ed] jurisdiction" to bring an enforcement action.  470 
U.S. at 833 n.4.  On the contrary, FERC initiated an enforce-
ment action in 1993 and then decided not to pursue it further.

     Similarly, we cannot say that settlement is an "extreme" 
policy that amounts to "an abdication of [FERC's] statutory 
responsibilities."  Id.  Like other federal agencies, FERC 
routinely approves settlement agreements in enforcement 
proceedings.  See, e.g., H. Bruce Cox, 90 FERC p 61,239 
(2000);  Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 79 FERC 

p 61,008 (1997).  In this case the Commission decided to settle 
with Columbia for reasons that the Chaney Court expressly 
held to be legitimate.  Compare Chaney, 470 U.S. at 831 
(recognizing agencies' need to determine whether a "particu-
lar enforcement action requested best fits the agency's overall 
policies, and, indeed, whether the agency has enough re-
sources to undertake the action at all"), with Columbia Gas 
Transmission Corp., 85 FERC p 61,437, 62,642-43 (1998), 
and Columbia Gas Transmission Corp., 89 FERC p 61,325, 
61,992 (explaining that the Commission had decided to settle, 
and not to award money damages, because it chose to devote 
its resources to current regulatory initiatives).

     We conclude, therefore, that FERC's decision to settle its 
enforcement action against Columbia was within the agency's 
nonreviewable discretion.  Because we have no jurisdiction 
under 5 U.S.C. s 701(a)(2) as illuminated by Heckler v. 
Chaney, we need not reach FERC's alternative argument 
that BG&E lacks standing.  Nor need we evaluate the sub-
stantive reasonableness of FERC's decision to settle.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     The Administrative Procedure Act provides that no judicial 
review may be had of agency actions that are "committed to 
agency discretion by law."  Heckler v. Chaney clarifies that 
one type of presumptively nonreviewable action is an agency's 
decision to enforce the law in a particular way.  Because 
FERC had this nonreviewable discretion to settle its enforce-
ment action against Columbia, we lack jurisdiction to consider 
BG&E's challenge to it.  BG&E's petition for review there-
fore is dismissed.

                              