                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 15, 1999   Decided February 18, 2000 

                           No. 97-7123

                           Thu McGill, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                          George MuNoz, 
             President and Chief Executive Officer, 
            Overseas Private Investment Corporation, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 95cv01953)

     Morgan D. Hodgson argued the cause for appellant. With 
her on the briefs was Shannen W. Coffin.

     Thu Minh McGill, appearing pro se, argued the cause and 
was on the brief for appellee.

     Joanne Zimolzak, appointed by this court, argued the 
cause as amicus curiae on the side of appellee. With her on 
the brief was Tami Lyn Azorsky.

     Before:   Williams, Rogers, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Plaintiff Thu McGill filed suit 
against her former employer, the Overseas Private Invest-
ment Corporation (OPIC), alleging, inter alia, that OPIC 
discriminated against her in violation of the Rehabilitation 
Act.  The district court denied OPIC's post-trial motion for 
judgment as a matter of law on that claim, and OPIC 
appealed.  We hold that because McGill failed to offer evi-
dence from which a reasonable jury could have concluded that 
OPIC discriminated against her, the decision of the district 
court must be reversed.

                                I

     OPIC is a federal agency established by Congress to 
"facilitate the participation of United States private capital 
and skills in the economic and social development of less 
developed countries."  22 U.S.C. s 2191.  McGill was em-
ployed there as a secretary in the Department of Legal 
Affairs.  On October 18, 1995, she sued her employer, citing 
violations of two statutes.  First, she alleged that OPIC 
discriminated against her on the basis of her race and nation-
al origin, and retaliated against her for making discrimination 
complaints, in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, 42 U.S.C. ss 2000e et seq.  Second, she alleged that 
OPIC discriminated against her on account of her disability 
(depression), and failed to reasonably accommodate that dis-
ability, in violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 
ss 701 et seq.

     The district court granted OPIC's motion for summary 
judgment against McGill on all of the Title VII claims.  
Plaintiff proceeded to trial on the remaining Rehabilitation 
Act claims and secured a $75,000 verdict.  After trial, the 
court granted OPIC's motion for judgment as a matter of law 
against McGill on the reasonable accommodation claim, but 

denied OPIC's motion for judgment as a matter of law on the 
disability discrimination claim.  Because the jury had not 
apportioned the recovery between the two claims, the court 
let McGill's $75,000 judgment stand.  See McGill v. Callear, 
973 F. Supp. 20, 23-24 (D.D.C. 1997).

     Both McGill and OPIC appealed.  A prior panel of this 
court rejected McGill's appeal, affirming both the order 
granting OPIC summary judgment against her on the Title 
VII claims, and the order granting judgment as a matter of 
law against her on the reasonable accommodation claim.  See 
McGill v. MuNoz, 172 F.3d 920 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (unpublished 
table decision).  OPIC's appeal was then set for argument.  
Although McGill was represented by counsel at trial, she 
appealed pro se, and we appointed an amicus curiae to 
present arguments on her behalf.1  We now decide the sole 
remaining issue:  whether the district court improperly de-
nied OPIC's motion for judgment as a matter of law on the 
claim of disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act.

                                II

     We review de novo a trial court's denial of a motion for 
judgment as a matter of law.  See Duncan v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., No. 99-7073, 2000 WL 45501, at 
*2 (D.C. Cir. Jan. 28, 2000).  We do not, however, lightly 
disturb a jury verdict.  Judgment as a matter of law is 
appropriate only if "the evidence and all reasonable infer-
ences that can be drawn therefrom are so one-sided that 
reasonable men and women could not" have reached a verdict 
in plaintiff's favor.  Id. (quoting Curry v. District of Colum-
bia, 195 F.3d 654, 659 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (internal quotation 
omitted)).

     The Rehabilitation Act provides that "[n]o otherwise quali-
fied individual with a disability ... shall, solely by reason of 
her or his disability, be ... subjected to discrimination under 
any program or activity ... conducted by any Executive 
agency...."  29 U.S.C. s 794.  Thus, assuming without de-

__________
     1 For purposes of this opinion, we will attribute to McGill argu-
ments made either by her or by amicus.

ciding that McGill is an "otherwise qualified individual with a 
disability," we may uphold the jury's verdict only if McGill 
proved that she was subjected to discrimination "by reason of 
her disability."  Id.;  see Swanks v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 179 F.3d 929, 934 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     A plaintiff may always prove a claim of discrimination by 
introducing direct evidence of discriminatory intent.  As an 
alternative, when the defendant denies its actions were moti-
vated by the plaintiff's disability, the plaintiff may employ the 
McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework to bring her 
Rehabilitation Act claim before a jury.2  See Aka v. Washing-
ton Hosp. Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 1288 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (en banc);  
Barth v. Gelb, 2 F.3d 1180, 1186 (D.C. Cir. 1993);  see also 
Marshall v. Federal Express Corp., 130 F.3d 1095, 1099-1100 
(D.C. Cir. 1997).  Once a case has been fully tried on the 
merits and submitted to the jury, however, the McDonnell 

__________
     2 The Supreme Court has described the McDonnell Douglas 
framework as follows:

     First, the plaintiff has the burden of proving by the preponder-
     ance of the evidence a prima facie case of discrimination.  
     Second, if the plaintiff succeeds in proving the prima facie case, 
     the burden shifts to the defendant 'to articulate some legiti-
     mate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employee's rejection.'  
     Third, should the defendant carry this burden, the plaintiff 
     must then have an opportunity to prove by a preponderance of 
     the evidence that the legitimate reasons offered by the defen-
     dant were not its true reasons, but were a pretext for discrimi-
     nation.
     
     ...
     
     The ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the 
     defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff re-
     mains at all times with the plaintiff.
     
Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 
(1981) (quoting McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 
802 (1973)) (citations omitted).  In Barth, we noted the applicability 
of this framework, originally developed for actions brought under 

Douglas framework "drops from the case" and only the 
ultimate question remains:  "[whether] the defendant inten-
tionally discriminated against the plaintiff."  United States 
Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 715 
(1983) (quoting Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Bur-
dine, 450 U.S. 248, 255 n.10, 253 (1981)) (alteration in origi-
nal);  accord St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 
510-11 (1993);  Mungin v. Katten Muchin & Zavis, 116 F.3d 
1549, 1554 (D.C. Cir. 1999).3  On appeal, that question under-
goes further refinement:  we ask only whether a reasonable 
jury could have found such intentional discrimination.  See 
Swanks, 179 F.3d at 933;  Mungin, 116 F.3d at 1554.

     At trial, McGill alleged that OPIC discriminated against 
her in two respects during the summer of 1994.  First, she 
was required to make up time she took off from work to 
participate in an aerobics class.  Second, she was required to 
submit medical documentation when she used sick leave 
credits for absences from work.4  We apply the legal analysis 
set forth above to each of these allegations.

                                A

     At some time prior to January 1994, McGill began taking 
part in a mid-day aerobics class conducted on OPIC's premis-

__________
Title VII, to claims of disability discrimination under the Rehabilita-
tion Act.  See Barth, 2 F.3d at 1186.

     3 Although plaintiff is correct in noting that the elements of a 
"prima facie case" may vary depending upon the circumstances of 
the allegations, see Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253 n.6, the plaintiff's 
"ultimate burden" is always to prove "that she has been the victim 
of intentional discrimination," id. at 256.

     4 These are the only two examples of discriminatory treatment 
discussed in the brief of amicus curiae.  The district court noted 
that "[p]laintiff also testified about training opportunities but the 
record does not reflect a colorable claim of disparate treatment on 
that basis."  McGill, 973 F. Supp. at 22 n.2.  We agree, and reach 
the same conclusion regarding other claims raised in plaintiff's pro 
se brief but not mentioned by either the district court or amicus.

es.  In July of 1994, McGill's supervisors became concerned 
that she was spending an inordinate amount of time away 
from her desk, particularly at lunchtime.  McGill explained 
that, in addition to the authorized lunch break, she needed an 
extra half hour to shower and dress after the aerobics class.  
In response, McGill's supervisors advised her by memoran-
dum that she would be permitted to take "one and one-half 
hour" off for the class, but would have to "make up the extra 
half hour" that was "beyond the time provided for lunch."  
Pl.'s Ex. E (J.A. at 49).

     McGill contends that OPIC discriminated against her on 
account of her mental disability by requiring her to make up 
the extra half hour.  Lacking any direct evidence of discrimi-
natory intent, McGill argues that OPIC's intent can be in-
ferred from its disparate treatment of her;  she asserts that 
other, similarly-situated employees who participated in the 
same class did not have to make up any time.5  Yet, while 
there was testimony that numerous employees attended the 
aerobics class, which lasted forty minutes, no witness testified 
that any employee other than McGill took more than the 
allotted lunch hour to return to work.

     McGill's argument that others were treated more favorably 
than she reduces to an argument that others "must" have 
taken off more than just the lunch hour.  For this, plaintiff 
relies on testimony by Frederick Jenney, one of her attorney 
supervisors, who stated that "it could take an hour-and-a-
half" for someone "to take an aerobics class and get showered 
and everything in the middle of the day."  J.A. at 763.  But 
Jenney's speculation that it "could" take an hour-and-a-half is 
not evidence that it "did" take anyone--other than plaintiff--
that long.  See Brown v. Brody, 199 F.3d 446, 458-59 (D.C. 

__________
     5 Cf. Holbrook v. Reno, 196 F.3d 255, 261 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (noting 
that "[t]o establish a prima facie case under the McDonnell Douglas 
framework, [plaintiff] must demonstrate (1) that she is a member of 
a protected class;  (2) that she was similarly situated to an employee 
who was not a member of the protected class;  and (3) that she and 
the similarly situated person were treated disparately").

Cir. 1999) (holding speculation insufficient to avoid summary 
judgment);  Al-Zubaidi v. M.A. Ijaz, 917 F.2d 1347, 1348 (4th 
Cir. 1990) (holding that "mere speculation is insufficient" to 
support a jury verdict) (internal quotation omitted).  Indeed, 
immediately after the above-quoted remark, Jenney testified 
that he knew of no one else in the department who did take 
an hour-and-a-half off to attend the class.  See J.A. at 765.  
The time taken by McGill, he said, "was an unusual situation."  
Id.  The only other evidence in the record is to the same 
effect.  See J.A. at 458 (testimony of office manager Connie 
Downs, stating that OPIC "just didn't have problems with 
other people being away for such a long period of time").6

     In sum, because plaintiff failed to offer any evidence that 
she was treated unfavorably compared to other employees,7 
and because she offered no other evidence of discrimination, 
we find that no reasonable jury could have concluded that the 
compensatory time requirement was the product of intention-
al discrimination.

                                B

     McGill also contends that OPIC discriminated against her 
by requiring her to provide a doctor's note for absences from 
work for which she sought to use sick leave.  Relying once 

__________
     6 McGill cites the testimony of secretary Ida Kingsberry as 
assertedly supporting her claim that none of the other secretaries 
who participated in the class were required to compensate for extra 
time away from their desks.  See McGill Br. at 8, 11;  Amicus Br. at 
44-45.  Kingsberry, however, did not testify that she (or any of the 
others) took off more than the lunch hour.  To the contrary, 
Kingsberry testified that she "d[id] not ... think that Thu McGill 
was treated less favorably than others" in the department.  J.A. at 
375.

     7 See Neuren v. Adduci, Mastriani, Meeks & Schill, 43 F.3d 1507, 
1514 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (holding plaintiff failed to demonstrate dispa-
rate treatment because she failed to show she was similarly situated 
to co-worker to whom she compared herself).

again on indirect evidence of discriminatory intent, McGill 
asserts that office policy did not require documentation for 
such absences, and thus that OPIC's claimed reliance on such 
policy was pretextual.8

     OPIC's written policy defines "sick leave" as "a period of 
approved absence with pay from official duty," which is 
authorized only in limited circumstances, including "[w]hen 
the employee is unable to satisfactorily perform the assigned 
duties because of sickness [or] mental illness."  J.A. at 308.  
The policy states that it is the supervisor's responsibility to 
determine "that the nature of the employee's illness was such 
to incapacitate him for his job," and provides that "[a] medical 
certificate signed by appropriate medical authority is general-
ly required for sick leave exceeding 3 days duration."  Id.  
Because McGill was never absent for more than three days at 
a time, she contends that OPIC violated its policy by requir-
ing written documentation.

     In fact, there is no evidence that OPIC violated its sick 
leave policy.  That policy does not end with the passages 
quoted above.  It also includes the following procedures for 
dealing with the apparent abuse of sick leave:

     When the employee appears to be using sick leave im-
     properly (for example, chronic use of brief periods of sick 
     leave), the employee may be required to comply with 
     special leave procedures more stringent than those ap-
     plied to other employees.  For example, the employee 
     may be required ... to provide evidence to substantiate 
     
__________
     8 Cf. Aka, 156 F.3d at 1289 (noting that one form of evidence from 
which a jury may be able to infer discriminatory intent is "evidence 
the plaintiff presents to attack the employer's proffered explanation 
for its actions");  id. at 1290 n.5 (noting that the "sufficiency of the 
finding of pretext to support a finding of discrimination depends on 
the circumstances of the case") (quoting Fisher v. Vassar College, 
114 F.3d 1332, 1338 (2d Cir. 1998) (en banc)).

     brief periods of illness.  An employee who is being 
     placed on leave restriction shall be notified in writing, in 
     advance, of the procedures and their duration.  At the 
     end of six months, the employee's record will be reviewed 
     to see if the restrictions can be lifted.
     
Id. (emphasis added).  It is this aspect of the policy that 
OPIC applied to McGill.

     In the summer of 1994, McGill's office manager, Connie 
Downs, noted that McGill had missed work five times in a 
one-month period.  The absences conformed to a clear pat-
tern--each time McGill received a poor performance apprais-
al, she took off the following one or two days of work.  See id. 
at 59, 409.  Responding to what appeared to her to be an 
abuse of sick leave, Downs sent McGill a memorandum, 
entitled "Special Leave Procedures."  Id. at 59.  The memo 
advised McGill that her "pattern" of leave "raise[d] a question 
about whether you are using sick leave for the purposes for 
which it is intended," and therefore "warrant[ed] special leave 
procedures."  Id. at 59-60.  Pursuant to OPIC's written 
policy, which was quoted in the letter, Downs instructed 
McGill that she would be required to provide a physician's 
certificate when she wanted to take sick leave for future 
absences.  See id. at 60.  The memorandum also notified 
McGill that the requirement would be reviewed in six months 
to determine whether it could be rescinded.  See id.

     As Downs' memorandum fully complied with the written 
sick leave policy set forth above,9 there is no evidence to 

__________
     9 McGill contends that a fragment of Downs' trial testimony 
shows that Downs did not act in compliance with OPIC's policy, 
which expressly permits sick leave for both physical and mental 
illness.  Although at one point Downs did testify that she doubted 
McGill's need for leave because McGill "didn't appear ...  physical-
ly sick," J.A. at 410, in context it is clear that Downs was distin-
guishing between real and feigned illness, rather than between 
kinds of illnesses.  See, e.g., id. ("[T]he question is whether you're 
using sick leave for actual sick leave, or whether you're just using 
sick leave for leave that you just want to take.").

support McGill's contention that it was mere pretext.  Nor 
did McGill furnish other evidence of intentional disparate 
treatment--or, for that matter, of disparate treatment at all.  
McGill offered no evidence that employees with similarly 
suspicious patterns of absenteeism were treated any differ-
ently than she was.  See Neuren v. Adduci, Mastriani, 
Meeks & Schill, 43 F.3d 1507, 1514 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (finding 
that terminated employee failed to show that retained em-
ployee had similar difficulty in getting along with others in 
the firm).  In fact, McGill offered no evidence that employees 
with a similar frequency of absenteeism--whether suspicious 
or not--were treated any differently.  See Mungin, 116 F.3d 
at 1554, 1558 (overturning jury verdict where plaintiff failed 
to show that employer's explanation for his treatment was 
pretextual, or that similarly-situated colleagues were treated 
more favorably).

     In short, McGill offered no evidence--either direct or cir-
cumstantial--from which a reasonable jury could have con-
cluded that OPIC imposed the medical documentation re-
quirement because of her disability.

                               III

     For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that no reasonable 
jury could have found that OPIC intentionally discriminated 
against McGill.  We therefore reverse the order denying in 
part OPIC's motion for judgment as a matter of law, and 
remand the case for entry of judgment for defendant.  See 
Mungin, 116 F.3d at 1558;  see also Scott v. District of 
Columbia, 101 F.3d 748, 760 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (reversing and 
remanding when "the facts, viewed in the light most favorable 
to [plaintiff], indicate that he cannot recover on any of his 
claims").

                                                                               