                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 20, 2000      Decided June 30, 2000 

                           No. 99-1336

              Traction Wholesale Center Co., Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Terrence J. Nolan argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Christopher H. Mills.

     Rachel I. Gartner, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  On the brief were 
Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, Associate 
General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate 

General Counsel, Peter Winkler, Supervisory Attorney, and 
Jill A. Griffin, Attorney.

     Before:  Randolph, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

             Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Concurring statement filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner challenges the National 
Labor Relations Board's determination that it committed 
unfair labor practices in response to a union organizing 
campaign.  Petitioner also challenges the Board's imposition 
of a bargaining order.  Because we conclude that the Board's 
unfair labor practice determinations are supported by sub-
stantial evidence and that the Board adequately explained the 
need for the bargaining order, we deny the petition for review 
of those issues and grant the Board's cross-petition for en-
forcement.

                                I

     Petitioner Traction Wholesale Center Company, Inc., a 
wholesale tire distributor, buys tires and wheels from manu-
facturers and larger distributors, reselling them to tire retail-
ers and gas stations.  Operating out of four warehouses--two 
in New Jersey and one each in Delaware and Philadelphia--
Traction employed approximately thirty-six people at the time 
of the events that gave rise to this case.  Traction Wholesale 
Ctr. Co., Inc., 328 NLRB No. 148, 1999 WL 1186753 at *10 
(July 28, 1999).  The unfair labor practices at issue occurred 
when Traction learned that a union had garnered support 
from a majority of its employees.  As determined by an 
administrative law judge, the relevant facts are as follows.

     In March 1997, several Traction employees approached 
Charles Schiavone, one of the company's Philadelphia drivers, 
"seeking guidance on how to form a union."  Id. at *10.  A 
seven-year Traction veteran, Schiavone contacted and met 
with the Teamsters Union, Local No. 115, about organizing 
warehouse employees and drivers working in the company's 

four warehouses.  At the end of that meeting, Schiavone 
signed a union authorization card designating the union as his 
"chosen representative in all matters pertaining to wages, 
hours, and working conditions."  Id.  He also took blank 
authorization cards to distribute to Traction drivers and 
warehousemen.  During the next month, Schiavone kept the 
union apprized of his organizing efforts.  By April 14, the 
union had received signed authorization cards from eleven of 
Traction's twenty drivers and warehousemen.  Id. at *11.

     Armed with the eleven authorization cards, two union rep-
resentatives went to the Philadelphia warehouse on April 15 
to ask Traction to recognize the union.  There they met with 
the on-site manager, Scott Adams, and showed him the 
signed authorization cards.  Id. at *11.  When Adams told 
the union representatives that he had no authority to recog-
nize the union, they asked him to deliver a letter to Traction's 
owners, Joseph O'Donnell and Jeffrey Cohen, in which the 
union demanded recognition.  Id. at *12.

     Immediately after the union representatives left, Adams 
summoned Schiavone to his office, telling him that he was 
upset that Schiavone had not told him about the union 
organizing effort and demanding to know who had started it.  
Id. at *15, 22.  Adams warned that Traction would either 
close the warehouse or subcontract for delivery services if the 
union campaign succeeded.  Id. at *15.  If Schiavone "wanted 
to be a union thug like other union supporters who destroy 
other people's property," Adams said, "then go right on 
ahead."  Adams then told Schiavone to "get the fuck out of 
here."  Id.  When Schiavone called Adams the next morning 
asking whether he should return to work, Adams told him 
that he had been fired.  Id.

     On the same day that the union representatives met with 
Adams and showed him the eleven signed cards, Adams 
asked Kevin Tryon, another Philadelphia driver, whether he 
had signed an authorization card.  Id. at *16, 23.  When 
Tryon, who in fact had signed a card, answered no, Adams 
revealed that he had seen Tryon's signature on a card.  Id. at 
*16.  Later that evening, Adams told Tryon that Traction 

would "rather pay niggers $5.00 an hour" than work with the 
union.  Id.  He also told Tryon that Traction was "not afraid 
to close down, if that's what it takes."  Id.

     That same day, Adams announced two policy changes for 
the Philadelphia warehouse.  First, employees would have to 
begin "punching out" and "punching in" on the time clock to 
document that they took no more than thirty minutes for 
lunch.  Id. at *16-17.  Second, employees could no longer use 
company vans after work for personal reasons.  Id.  Until 
this announcement, Adams had allowed such use even though 
company policy prohibited it.

     The union then filed a representation petition, and the 
Board ordered an election.  During the two months before 
the election, Traction's two owners and Adams conducted two 
meetings with the Philadelphia drivers and warehousemen 
that led to additional unfair labor practice charges.  At the 
first meeting, on April 23, Adams told Tryon that although he 
was "due for a raise, he would not be getting it...."  Id. at 
*18.  Also during that meeting, Cohen (one of the owners) 
asked the employees what Traction had done to make them 
bring in a union, telling them not only that Traction could 
offer them more than the union, but that if they had any 
personal or job-related problems, Traction could help.  Id. at 
*18, 24.  At a second meeting, this one on June 3, Cohen told 
the employees that Traction would "give them more than the 
union" and that once they "got past this thing, we can move 
on to something bigger and better."  Id. at *24.

     The union lost the election.  Sixteen employees voted 
against the union, two voted for it, and two ballots were 
contested.  Id. at *19.  Following an evidentiary hearing, an 
administrative law judge found that Traction had committed a 
series of unfair labor practices in violation of sections 8(a)(1) 
and (3) of the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 
ss 158(a)(1), (a)(3), by firing Schiavone, denying Tryon's 
raise, and changing its policies with respect to personal use of 
vans and clocking in and out for lunch.  Id. at *37.  The ALJ 
also concluded that Adams' comments to both Schiavone and 
Tryon amounted to unfair labor practices in violation of 

section 8(a)(1), as did Cohen's comments to Traction's Phila-
delphia employees.  Id.  The ALJ recommended that the 
Board invalidate the election and issue a bargaining order.  
Id. at * 38.

     The Board agreed that Traction had committed the enu-
merated unfair labor practices and that a bargaining order 
was appropriate.  Id. at *1.  The Board disagreed with the 
ALJ on just one issue.  Despite concluding that Traction had 
committed an unfair labor practice by changing its van policy, 
the ALJ recommended no remedy because Traction had 
offered evidence that its insurance policy would not cover 
personal use of company vans.  Id. at *38 n.30.  Without 
explanation, the Board ordered Traction to rescind its person-
al use prohibition.  Id. at *1 n.2.  Member Brame dissented 
on two grounds:  he thought that Cohen's remarks at the 
April 23 and June 3 meetings did not amount to unfair labor 
practices;  he also thought the bargaining order inappropriate 
because, in his view, the union had never attained majority 
support.  Id. at *5-6.

     In its petition for review, Traction argues that the unfair 
labor practice charges stemming from the Schiavone firing, 
the changed van policy, the denial of Tryon's raise, and 
Cohen's comments are not supported by substantial evidence 
in the record.  Traction also challenges two of the Board's 
remedies:  the reinstatement of its personal van use policy 
and the bargaining order.  With respect to the latter, Trac-
tion argues that the Board failed to satisfy this circuit's strict 
standards for imposing bargaining orders.  See, e.g., Avecor, 
Inc. v. NLRB, 931 F.2d 924, 934-39 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  The 
Board cross-petitions for enforcement.

                                II

     Section 8(a)(1) of the NLRA makes it an unfair labor 
practice for employers "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce 
employees" in the exercise of their rights "to self-
organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to 
bargain collectively through representatives of their own 
choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the 

purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or pro-
tection...."  29 U.S.C. ss 158(a)(1), 157.  Section 8(a)(3) 
makes it an unfair labor practice for employers "by discrimi-
nation in regard to hire or tenure of employment or any term 
or condition of employment to encourage or discourage mem-
bership in any labor organization."  Id. s 158(a)(3).  To es-
tablish that an employer's conduct (in this case, Schiavone's 
firing, the change in van policy, and the denial of Tryon's 
raise) violates section 8(a)(3), the general counsel must first 
show that the "protected activity was a motivating factor in 
the adverse employment decision."  Frazier Indus. Co., Inc. 
v. NLRB, No. 99-1297, Slip Op. at 8 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (internal 
quotation marks omitted).  If this prima facie showing is 
made, the burden shifts to the employer to demonstrate that 
"it would have made the adverse decision even had the 
employee not engaged in protected activity."  Vincent Ind. 
Plastics, Inc. v. NLRB, 209 F.3d 727, 735 (D.C. Cir. 2000) 
(citing Wright Line, Inc., 251 N.L.R.B. 1083, 1089 (1980)).  
In determining whether an employer had a discriminatory 
motive, "the NLRB may 'consider[ ] such factors as the em-
ployer's knowledge of the employee's union activities, the em-
ployer's hostility toward the union, and the timing of the em-
ployer's action.' "  Id. (quoting Power Inc. v. NLRB, 40 F.3d 
409, 418 (D.C. Cir.1994)).

     Our review of Board unfair labor practice determinations is 
quite narrow.  "The Board's findings of fact, if supported by 
substantial evidence, are conclusive."  Avecor, 931 F.3d at 
928. In reviewing the Board's conclusions, "[w]e ask not 
whether [petitioner's] view of the facts supports its version of 
what happened, but rather whether the Board's interpreta-
tion of the facts is reasonably defensible."  Harter Tomato 
Prods. Co. v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 934, 938 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  Moreover, "we must 
accept the ALJ's credibility determinations, as adopted by the 
Board, unless they are patently insupportable."  Exxel/At-
mos, Inc. v. NLRB, 28 F.3d 1243, 1246 (D.C. Cir 1994).  "We 
are even more deferential when reviewing the Board's conclu-
sions regarding discriminatory motive, because most evidence 
of motive is circumstantial."  Vincent Plastics, 209 F.3d at 

734.  Bearing this deference in mind, we turn to Traction's 
four challenges to the Board's unfair labor practice determi-
nations.

                         Schiavone Firing

     This record contains more than substantial evidence to 
support the Board's conclusion that anti-union animus moti-
vated the Schiavone firing.  Adams fired Schiavone immedi-
ately after learning not only that the union had obtained 
eleven authorization cards, but that Schiavone had signed 
one.  Equally indicative of anti-union animus, the ALJ con-
cluded that Adams violated section 8(a)(1) by telling Tryon 
and Schiavone that the company would shut down before 
working with a union (a conclusion that Traction does not 
contest).  See Vincent Plastics, 209 F.3d at 735 ("Evidence 
that an employer has violated section 8(a)(1) of the Act can 
support an inference of anti-union animus.").

     Challenging the Board's determination that the general 
counsel had made out a prima facie case of anti-union animus, 
Traction maintains that Adams decided to fire Schiavone on 
April 11, four days before learning that employees had autho-
rized the union.  Traction claims that it decided to fire 
Schiavone because of two incidents having nothing at all to do 
with the union.  The first involved Schiavone's alleged misuse 
of a company policy that entitled employees to discounts on 
tire purchases.  When Schiavone bought tires in early April, 
he took not just the employee discount to which he was 
entitled, but also a discount available only to cash-paying 
customers.  The latter discount reduced the price of the tires 
by an additional $6.59.  The other incident involved graffiti 
that Adams found on the warehouse wall that said "Chuck" 
and "Chuck is cool."  Schiavone's first name is Charles.

     Adams testified that on April 11, after discovering that 
Schiavone had taken the extra discount and after seeing the 
graffiti, he told owner O'Donnell that he planned to fire 
Schiavone.  Adams further testified that he and O'Donnell 
had agreed to fire Schiavone on Monday, April 14, but 
because one employee called in sick and another was on 

vacation on that day, he postponed firing Schiavone until the 
next day.  O'Donnell's testimony confirmed the basic ele-
ments of Adams' story.  Relying on Adams' and O'Donnell's 
testimony, Traction argues that Schiavone's firing could not 
have been motivated by discriminatory animus because on 
April 11--the day it decided to fire him--it was unaware of 
the union organizing campaign.

     Traction's argument suffers from a fatal flaw:  The ALJ 
credited neither Adams' nor O'Donnell's testimony.  "It was 
patently obvious," the ALJ found, "that Adams could not 
keep his story straight on several matters, and that much, if 
not all, of his testimony was simply fabricated to suit [Trac-
tion's] case."  Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *19.  Calling 
Adams' testimony "self-contradictory and filled with inconsis-
tencies," the ALJ rejected it as "simply not credible."  Id.  
O'Donnell's testimony, the ALJ found, was "equally unpersua-
sive."  Id. at *20.  Traction has offered nothing to suggest 
that the ALJ's credibility determinations are "patently insup-
portable."  See Exxel/Atmos, 28 F.3d at 1246.  Absent 
O'Donnell's and Adams' testimony, all evidence in the record, 
including the timing of the firing and the section 8(a)(1) 
violations, points to anti-union animus.

     A prima facie case of discriminatory animus having been 
established, Traction could have avoided an unfair labor prac-
tice finding only by demonstrating that it would have fired 
Schiavone regardless of his union activities.  Traction failed 
to meet this burden.  The Board concluded that neither the 
discount policy error nor the graffiti otherwise would have led 
to Schiavone's firing.  Substantial evidence supports the 
Board's conclusion.  O'Donnell testified not only that employ-
ees often made price code mistakes, but also that when they 
inadvertently took extra discounts, the company simply re-
quired repayment of the discounted amount.  Traction, 1999 
WL 1186753 at *27.  Moreover, from his "observation of 
[Schiavone's] demeanor on the witness stand and throughout 
the hearing," the ALJ found that Schiavone was not "some-
one who would risk losing his job of 7 years for a meager 
$6.59."  Id.  With respect to Traction's other explanation for 
firing Schiavone, the ALJ credited Schiavone's testimony that 

the graffiti had been on the wall for close to a month before 
Traction fired him.  Id.  Disbelieving both Adams and 
O'Donnell and believing Schiavone, the ALJ thought it 
"strain[ed] credulity to believe that Adams, having declined to 
take action against Schiavone when he first observed the 
writing sometime in March, would decide one month later to 
discharge Schiavone, in part, for such activity."  Id.

     To be sure, the ALJ could have chosen to credit record 
evidence supporting Traction's version of events.  The only 
question before us, however, is whether substantial evidence 
supports the Board's view of the disputed events, not Trac-
tion's.  See Frazier, Slip Op. at 9 (affirming Board's unfair 
labor practice finding because "[a]lthough [the employer's] 
interpretation of evidence may be reasonable, the Board's 
finding to the contrary was supported by substantial evi-
dence").  Because we find no basis for questioning the ALJ's 
credibility determinations, we affirm the Board's conclusion 
that the Schiavone firing amounted to an unfair labor prac-
tice.

                   Personal Use of Company Vans

     Challenging the Board's determination that it violated sec-
tions 8(a)(3) and (1) by changing its van policy in retaliation 
for its employees' organizing efforts, Traction argues (as it 
did with respect to the Schiavone firing) that it could not have 
been motivated by anti-union animus.  When O'Donnell told 
Adams to start enforcing the company policy prohibiting 
personal use of vans (on April 11), the company says, it did 
not know about the union's organizing efforts.  According to 
Adams, O'Donnell told him to start enforcing the personal use 
prohibition because the company had received a summons for 
an unpaid New York parking ticket on one of the vans.  
Traction also offered a letter from its insurance company 
stating that its policy does not cover personal use of company 
vans.  From this, Traction argues that substantial evidence 
does not support the Board's unfair labor practice determina-
tion.

     Again, Traction misunderstands the substantial evidence 
standard.  Having discredited both Adams' and O'Donnell's 
testimony, the ALJ found that they had not discussed the van 
policy on April 11.  Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *31.  
"[T]he more credible scenario, and the one I accept as 
true,"--and the one to which we owe deference--"is that 
Adams never received any such instruction from O'Donnell in 
the first place, and imposed the ban only after learning that 
his Philadelphia store employees were supporting the Union."  
Id.  The ALJ also found that the insurance company letter 
could not possibly have motivated Adams' April 15 van policy 
announcement because the letter was dated May 14.  Id. at 
*31 n.27.  Absent Traction's proffered explanations, the only 
record evidence shows that employees were told on April 15, 
the same day Adams spoke with the union representatives, 
that he would start enforcing the van policy.  Given this 
timing, together with Adams' threats to close the company if 
the union prevailed, the ALJ's conclusion that the enforce-
ment of the van policy was motivated by discriminatory 
animus finds more than adequate support in the record.

     Insisting that its van policy was not in fact motivated by 
anti-union animus, Traction maintains that after April 15, 
Adams made exceptions for certain employees, including 
Tryon, a known union supporter.  Again, while such evidence 
may well support Traction's version of the events, the critical 
point is that substantial evidence supports the ALJ's view of 
the evidence.  See Frazier, Slip Op. at 9.  We therefore find 
no deficiency in the Board's conclusion that the change in van 
policy constituted an unfair labor practice.

     The Board's remedy is a different matter.  The ALJ 
recognized that rescission was the ordinary remedy for this 
type of unfair labor practice, but he thought it "improper" to 
order Traction to rescind the unilateral change, i.e., to order 
it to reinstate its prior practice of allowing employees person-
al use of vans, because it "appears to be the case" that "such 
practice is prohibited by its insurance policy."  Traction, 1999 
WL 1186753 at *38 n.30.  The Board disagreed.  Stating only 
that "rescission ... is the customary remedy for the viola-
tions found in this case," it rejected the ALJ's recommenda-

tion and directed Traction to rescind "the unilateral changes 
in ...  the van policy."  Id. at 1 n.2.  Of course, the Board 
"is free to substitute its judgment for the ALJ's," Local 702, 
Int'l B'hood of Elec. Workers, AFL-CIO v. NLRB, 2000 WL 
520950 at *2 (D.C. Cir. 2000), but "when the Board reverses 
an ALJ it 'must make clear the basis of its disagreement.' "  
Mathews Readymix, Inc. v. NLRB, 165 F.3d 74, 77 (D.C. Cir. 
1999) (quoting United Food & Commercial Workers Int'l 
Union, Local 152 v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 1463, 1470 (D.C.Cir.
1985).  See also Chicago Local No. 458-3M v. NLRB, 206 
F.3d. 22, 29 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("In order for the court properly 
to review the Board's decision, it 'must be able to discern the 
rationale' underlying the Board's conclusions.") (quoting Oil, 
Chemical & Atomic Workers Int'l Union v. NLRB, 46 F.3d 
82, 90 (D.C.Cir.1995)).  Because the Board has failed to 
explain, in either its decision or its brief, why it disagreed 
with the ALJ that the insurance policy made rescission 
inappropriate, we grant the petition for review with respect to 
this issue and remand to the Board.

                           Tryon Raise

     In testimony credited by the ALJ, Tryon said that when he 
began working for Traction in early March, Adams told him 
that he would probably get a raise within thirty to sixty days.  
Tryon testified that at the April 23 meeting, Adams said:  
"You're due for your raise but now I can't give it to you 
because of the union."  Adams denied promising Tryon a 
raise, explaining that when Tryon requested one, he refused 
because he thought it would be "improper" to give Tryon any 
benefits during the union organizing campaign.  Traction, 
1999 WL 1186753 at *29.

     Again crediting Tryon's testimony over Adams', the ALJ 
found Adams' denial of the raise to have been motivated by 
anti-union animus.  Id. at *28-29.  As the ALJ concluded, 
because Adams had promised Tryon a raise, Adams was 
obligated to act as he would have had no organizing campaign 
been underway, i.e., to give him the raise.  See Perdue 
Farms, Inc., Cookin' Good Div. v. NLRB, 144 F.3d 830, 836 

(D.C. Cir. 1998) ("[A]s a general rule, an employer's legal 
duty in deciding whether to grant benefits while a representa-
tion proceeding is pending is to decide that question precisely 
as it would if the union were not on the scene.").

     Traction argues that even if Adams had promised Tryon a 
raise within thirty to sixty days, because the denial of the 
raise had not occured until after sixty days, Tryon was no 
longer entitled to it, leaving Adams' explanation--that he 
denied the raise because of his concern that it might be 
viewed as an unlawful benefit--as the only credible evidence 
in the record.  To accept this argument, we would have to 
infer from the fact that Tryon was told that he was entitled to 
a raise within thirty to sixty days that he was not entitled to 
the raise unless he asked for it before the sixtieth day.  Not 
only do we think this rather unlikely, but more important, the 
ALJ chose not to draw this inference.

                         Cohen Statements

     Traction begins its challenge to the Board's determination 
that Cohen committed unfair labor practices at the employee 
meetings on April 23 and June 3 by claiming that substantial 
evidence does not demonstrate that Cohen even made the 
statements.  This argument fails for the same reason that 
Traction's other substantial evidence challenges fail:  the ALJ 
credited the General Counsel's witnesses and reached a dif-
ferent conclusion, a conclusion supported by substantial evi-
dence.  Not only did Tryon testify that Cohen made the 
statements, but Cohen never directly contradicted Tryon.  
Cohen did not testify at all about the June 3 meeting, and 
with respect to the April 23 meeting, "while generally deny-
ing making any unlawful remarks, [he] admitted to recalling 
'absolutely nothing' of what he or O'Donnell may have said."  
Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *24.

     Traction next argues that even if Cohen made the April 23 
statements, they were not unlawful.  (Traction does not ap-
pear to challenge the ALJ's ULP determination with respect 
to Cohen's June 3 comments).  Tryon testified about Cohen's 
statements at the April 23 meeting as follows:  "He just 

stated that if there was ever a problem, ... whether it be 
personal or job-wise, Traction was always there to help....  
Somebody from management or through the company was 
always willing to help or lend a hand."  According to Tryon, 
Cohen also asked the employees "what it was that the compa-
ny did wrong ... to bring somebody from the union into the 
company," and he told them that "Traction would be able to 
offer more than" the union.

     Traction does not challenge the standard the Board uses to 
determine whether an employer's solicitation of grievances 
constitutes an unfair labor practice:  Soliciting grievances is 
not in itself an unfair labor practice, but implicit or explicit 
promises to correct grievances may violate section 8(a)(1) 
because "the combined program of inquiry and correction" 
suggests that "union representation [is] unnecessary."  Reli-
ance Electric Co., 191 NLRB 44, 46 (1971), enf'd, 457 F.2d 503 
(6th Cir. 1972).  An employer who has not previously solicited 
grievances but who begins to do so in the midst of a union 
campaign creates a "compelling inference" that the employer 
is "implicitly promising" to correct the problems.  Id.  The 
ALJ found, and the Board agreed, that neither Traction nor 
Cohen had any past practice of soliciting grievances and that 
there was a "compelling inference" that Cohen was implicitly 
promising to correct any problems, a promise that was "clear-
ly coercive and designed to show that [management] alone 
had the wherewithal to address and resolve employee prob-
lems."  Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *1-2, 25.

     Relying on Member Brame's dissent, Traction argues that 
it made no implied promise to correct grievances because 
"Cohen's alleged statement merely reflects his view of Trac-
tion's past practice with respect to its treatment of employees 
and cannot reasonably be construed as a promise to take any 
particular action in the future."  Because Cohen's statements 
were framed in the past tense, Member Brame asserted, 
there is no "basis from which it can be inferred 'that the 
grievances will be remedied and [no] circumstances giving 
rise to the inference that the remedy will only be provided if 
the union loses the election.' "  Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at 
*6.

     No doubt Member Brame's interpretation--that Cohen's 
statements referred only to Traction's past practice--is plau-
sible.  But the opposite interpretation, the one drawn by the 
ALJ and the Board, is equally plausible, and it is to the 
Board, not the dissenter, that we owe deference.  According 
to both the Board and the ALJ, Cohen was "plainly sending 
the message that ... [Traction] was now (and would continue 
to be) willing to 'lend a hand or help' with any problems 
employees might have."  Id. at *2.  Moreover, because it is 
not at all clear whether Tryon was quoting Cohen or para-
phrasing what Cohen had said--"He just stated that if there 
was ever a problem, ... Traction was always there to help"--
we defer to the interpretation of the ALJ who heard the 
testimony and found that "at the April 23 meeting Cohen ... 
assured [employees] that if they had any personal or job-
related problem, [Traction's] management team was there to 
help them."  Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *24.  We there-
fore think the Board had sufficient basis for inferring that 
Cohen's statements represented an implicit promise to cor-
rect grievances and, by extension, coercion in violation of 
section 8(a)(1).  See Avecor, 931 F.2d at 931 ("We recognize 
the Board's competence in the first instance to judge the 
impact of utterances made in the context of the employer-
employee relationship.") (internal quotation marks omitted).

                               III

     This brings us to the heart of this case--Traction's chal-
lenge to the bargaining order.  Our starting point is the 
Supreme Court's decision in NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 
Inc., 395 U.S. 575 (1969).  "[W]here an employer has commit-
ted ... unfair labor practices [in addition to its refusal to 
bargain] which have made the holding of a fair election 
unlikely or which have in fact undermined a union's majority 
and caused an election to be set aside.... [the Board] has the 
authority to issue a bargaining order....  [T]he Board has 
the same authority even where it is clear that the union, 
which once had possession of [authorization] cards from a 
majority of the employees, represents only a minority when 
the bargaining order is entered."  Id. at 610.  Bargaining 

orders are sometimes necessary, the Court explained, because 
"[i]f an employer has succeeded in undermining a union's 
strength and destroying the laboratory conditions necessary 
for a fair election, he may see no need to violate a cease-and-
desist order by further unlawful activity.  The damage will 
have been done...."  Id. at 612.

     Because bargaining orders can deprive employees of their 
section 7 right to choose their representative, this court has 
carefully delineated the circumstances under which the Board 
may issue such orders.  Absent "outrageous and pervasive 
ULP's," the Board may issue a bargaining order only if it has 
substantial evidence that (1) "the Union, at some time, ...  
had majority support within the bargaining unit";  (2) "the 
employer's unfair practices ... had the tendency to under-
mine majority strength and impede the election process";  
and (3) "the Board [has] determine[d] that the possibility of 
erasing the effects of past practices and of ensuring a fair 
rerun election by the use of traditional remedies is slight and 
that employee sentiment once expressed in favor of the Union 
would be better protected by a bargaining order."  Avecor, 
931 F.2d at 934.  We also require the Board "to explicitly 
balance" several factors to determine whether the need for a 
bargaining order outweighs employees' section 7 rights to a 
representation election.  Vincent Plastics, 209 F.3d at 734.

     One additional principle guides our review of the Board's 
bargaining order.  "In fashioning its remedies ... the Board 
draws on a fund of knowledge and expertise all its own, and 
its choice of remedy must therefore be given special respect 
by reviewing courts."  Gissel Packing, 395 U.S. at 612 n.32.  
"Our essential task as a reviewing court is to assure ourselves 
that the Board 'has considered the factors which are relevant 
to its choice of remedy, selected a course that is remedial 
rather than punitive, and chosen a remedy which can fairly be 
said to effectuate the purposes of the Act.' "  Caterair Int'l v. 
NLRB, 22 F.3d 1114, 1120 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (quoting Peoples 
Gas Sys., Inc. v. NLRB, 629 F.2d 35, 42 (D.C. Cir. 1980)).

     Traction argues that the bargaining order was not justified 
because (1) the union never had majority support, (2) there is 

not substantial evidence to support a bargaining order, (3) the 
Board failed adequately to explain the need for the bargain-
ing order, and (4) the Board failed to consider the effect of 
employee turnover.  We consider each argument in turn.

                         Majority Support

     The Board found that a majority of the bargaining unit 
supported the union prior to the election because eleven of 
the twenty employees in the unit had signed cards designat-
ing the union as their "chosen representative in all matters 
pertaining to wages, hours and working conditions."  Claim-
ing that the Board should not have counted two of the eleven 
authorization cards, Traction argues that the union never 
enjoyed majority support.

     One of the disputed cards was Anthony Hess's.  In support 
of its claim that this card should not have been counted, 
Traction points to Hess's testimony that he had not read the 
card before signing it, that he had not understood that by 
signing he was authorizing the union, and that he had been 
told that the only effect of signing would be that the union 
could hold an election.  The ALJ, however, discredited this 
testimony, relying instead on Hess's earlier affidavit in which 
he said that he had in fact read the card before signing.  
Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *33.  Finding that Hess had 
both read and understood the card, the ALJ counted it.  
Because Traction has offered nothing to suggest that the 
ALJ's credibility determination is "patently insupportable," 
we have no basis for questioning his conclusion.  See 
Exxel/Atmos, Inc. v. NLRB, 28 F.3d at 1246.

     The other disputed card was James Michener's.  Michener 
never testified, nor did any witness testify to having seen him 
sign the card.  The ALJ authenticated the card by comparing 
the signature on it with Michener's signatures on two forms 
in Traction's personnel files:  his employment application and 
a signed copy of the company's work rules.  Traction, 1999 
WL 1186753 at *33-34.  Agreeing with the ALJ that the card 
was authentic, the Board not only examined the two docu-
ments itself, but also compared the signature on the card to 

Michener's W-4 federal income tax withholding form.  Id. at 
*2-3.

     Not contesting the authenticity of the three documents on 
which the ALJ and the Board relied, Traction argues that the 
signatures on those documents have never been properly 
authenticated.  It relies on Federal Rule of Evidence 
901(b)(3), which it says requires the Board to compare the 
signature on a card to an authenticated signature, not just to 
a signature on an authentic document.  Rule 901 provides:

     (a) General provision.  The requirement of authentica-
     tion or identification as a condition precedent to admissi-
     bility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a 
     finding that the matter in question is what its proponent 
     claims;
     
     (b) Illustrations.  By way of illustration only, and not by 
     way of limitation, the following are examples of authenti-
     cation or identification conforming with the requirements 
     of this rule:
     
                              * * *

          (3)  ... Comparison by the trier of fact or by expert 
          witness with specimens which have been authenticated.
          
     We do not share Traction's interpretation of Rule 901.  Not 
only is subparagraph (3) "by way of illustration only," but 
Rule 901 "is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a 
finding that the matter in question is what its proponent 
claims."  Rule 901(a).  Surely evidence that the signed docu-
ments came from Traction's business files and that the com-
pany relied on one of them to hire Michener and another to 
withhold federal income taxes is "sufficient to support a 
finding" that the signature appearing on them--James P. 
Michener--is in fact Michener's.  See Weinstein's Federal 
Evidence s 901.05[2][b] at 901-26 (listing business records as 
an illustration of a method for authenticating handwriting 
specimens).  For decades, moreover, the Board has treated 
employee documents from an employer's personnel files as 
genuine specimens for purposes of authenticating signatures 

on authorization cards.  See, e.g., Aero Corp., 149 NLRB 
1283, 1287 (1964), enf'd 363 F.2d 702 (D.C. Cir. 1966);  Heck's, 
Inc., 166 NLRB 186 n.1 (1967).

     Nothing in Be-Lo Stores v. NLRB, 126 F.3d 268 (4th Cir. 
1997), on which Traction relies, persuades us otherwise.  In 
that case, the Fourth Circuit took the Board to task for 
counting "highly questionable Union authorization cards," 
including thirteen cards "based upon [the ALJ's] comparison 
of the signatures on the cards with the signatures on the 
respective employees' W-4 forms."  Id. at 279.  But because 
the court made this statement only after it had concluded that 
a bargaining order was not warranted and because it indicat-
ed that the authorization card issue "only contribute[s] to our 
concern that the Union's majority status was one of agency 
construct, rather than grassroots support," id. at 280, we view 
the statement as dictum.  In any event, to the extent that Be-
Lo suggests that Rule 901 precludes authenticating signa-
tures by comparing them to signatures on authentic business 
records including W-4 forms, we disagree and find that the 
Board, consistent with long-standing policy, satisfied Rule 901 
by comparing the signature on the challenged authorization 
card with Michener's signature on the three authentic em-
ployment forms.

                       Substantial Evidence

     Traction's second challenge to the bargaining order--that it 
is not supported by substantial evidence in the record--
requires little discussion, for the Board's order easily satisfies 
the standards we set forth in Skyline Distributors, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 99 F.3d 403, 410-11 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  There, we 
summarized the factors justifying a bargaining order as fol-
lows:

     "First, an unfair labor practice that is viewed as 'deliber-
     ate' or 'calculated' is more likely to lead to a bargaining 
     order than one that is not.  Second, much turns on the 
     significance of the interest being endangered.  If the 
     employer's statements or acts can be characterized as 
     threatening either a significant economic interest, such 
     
     as retention of jobs, or a fundamental legal right, it is 
     more likely to lead to a bargaining order.  Third, acts of 
     reprisal, particularly discharges, are considered to be 
     extremely effective in swaying votes and very difficult to 
     remedy.  Not only is there a great deal of language to 
     this effect in Board opinions, but also the coincidence of 
     section 8(a)(3) violations and bargaining orders is nota-
     ble.  Fourth, promises to correct the grievance that led 
     to union organization are also considered particularly 
     effective.  Finally, and most significantly, the vast major-
     ity of bargaining order cases involve a series of unfair 
     labor practices rather than a single act of illegality."
     
Skyline, 99 F.3d at 411 (quoting Julius G. Getman & Bret-
rand B. Pogrebin, Labor Relations:  The Basic Processes, Law 
And Practice 76 (1988) (footnotes omitted)).

     Beginning with the first factor, we have no doubt that 
Traction's unfair labor practices were " 'deliberate' or 'calcu-
lated.' "  The ALJ found that Traction's response to the union 
organizing drive, particularly Adams' interrogation of Tryon 
and Schiavone and Adams' threat that Traction would "close 
down, if that's what it takes," were "clearly designed to nip 
the Union's organizational drive in the bud."  Traction, 1999 
WL 1186753 at *21, 35.  Adams' comments, moreover, threat-
ened "a significant economic interest," indeed perhaps the 
employees' most significant economic interest--"retention of 
jobs."  (Factor 2).  Not only did Traction threaten to close 
down or hire others, but by firing Schiavone, the person most 
identified with the union, the company made clear that by 
voting for the union, employees risked their jobs.  (Again, 
Factor 2).  Traction's "acts of reprisal, particularly [Schia-
vone's] discharge[ ]" in violation of section 8(a)(3) "are consid-
ered to be extremely effective in swaying votes and very 
difficult to remedy."  (Factor 3).  Repeatedly interrogating 
employees, Adams sought to learn what grievances led to the 
union campaign, and both Adams and Cohen suggested that 
they would correct those grievances and that employees 
would get "bigger and better things" by rejecting the union.  
Put another way, they "promise[d] to correct the grievance 
that led to union organization."  (Factor 4).

     Finally, this case involved "a series of unfair labor practices 
rather than a single act of illegality."  (Factor 5).  For 
starters, Traction's response to the union organizing drive 
was "immediate, swift, and retributive."  Traction, 1999 WL 
1186753 at *35.  Summoning Schiavone to his office, Adams 
interrogated him about his union activity, then fired him.  
The company "did not stop there."  Id.  Adams twice interro-
gated Tryon, denied Tryon's raise, threatened to close the 
Philadelphia warehouse, and imposed new and retributive 
policies on Philadelphia employees.  At two employee meet-
ings, Cohen committed additional unfair labor practices.  
Taken together, the evidence reveals a company engaged in a 
course of retribution designed not only to punish employees 
who gave the union its strongest support, but also to intimi-
date other employees into voting against the union.  And 
contrary to Traction's argument, the effects of its actions 
extended well beyond the Philadelphia warehouse.  Id. at *36.  
Such evidence more than sufficiently supports the bargaining 
order.  See Davis Supermarkets, Inc. v. NLRB, 2 F.3d 1162, 
1176 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (affirming bargaining order where com-
pany's "large number of unfair labor practices, ... committed 
by some of the top officials in the company, and ... directed 
at numerous employees ... instilled a strong fear of union 
representation in the employees.") (internal quotation marks 
omitted).

                            Balancing

     Before enforcing a bargaining order, "we require the Board 
to explicitly balance three considerations:  (1) the employees' 
Section 7 rights;  (2) whether other purposes of the Act 
override the rights of employees to choose their bargaining 
representatives;  and (3) whether alternative remedies are 
adequate to remedy the violations of the Act."  Vincent 
Plastics, 209 F.3d at 738.  Because of the Board's failure to 
balance these factors, we have repeatedly refused to enforce 
bargaining orders that have come before us in recent years.  
In Avecor, for instance, we declined to enforce a bargaining 
order because although "the ALJ briefly discussed the first 
two factors," he never considered the third, i.e., why tradi-

tional remedies, including a re-run election, would have been 
inadequate.  931 F.2d at 938.  "The ALJ never explained," 
we said, "why the cloud created by these violations was likely 
to linger."  Id.  Rejecting another bargaining order in Char-
lotte Amphitheater Corp. v. NLRB, 82 F.3d 1074, 1078-1080 
(D.C. Cir. 1996), we "searched the ALJ's decision but ...  
found no explanation of why a fair election would not be 
possible once the Company has been required to post notices 
and reinstate the improperly discharged employees with back 
pay."  Id. at 1079.

     In our most recent rejection of a bargaining order, Vincent 
Plastics, neither the ALJ nor the Board had provided any 
explanation for the order.  Remanding the case with instruc-
tions to either provide an adequate justification or vacate the 
bargaining order, we expressed our frustration with the 
Board's continued recalcitrance:  "What is ultimately dissatis-
fying about this familiar dance is not a sense that this court's 
institutional integrity is undermined by the Board's refusal to 
modify its behavior in response to operant conditioning, but 
that those left in the lurch are precisely those who, in this 
case, sought protection from the Board."  Vincent Plastics, 
209 F.3d at 739.

     In this case, the ALJ explored in depth the need for the 
bargaining order.  After summarizing Traction's "immediate, 
swift, and retributive" response to the union's organizing 
effort, including its threats to close or hire other workers, as 
well as the retaliatory section 8(a)(3) violations, the ALJ 
discussed the effect of those actions on Traction's employees.  
Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *35.  The nature of Traction's 
unfair labor practices, he concluded, combined with the unit's 
size and the involvement of the two owners in the unfair labor 
practices, had created fear so pervasive that a re-run election 
would not fairly reflect the views of the majority of the unit.  
Id. at 35-36.  Adopting the ALJ's recommendation and im-
posing a bargaining order, the Board rejected Traction's 
argument that "an effective alternative to a bargaining order" 
would be for a Traction representative to "read the notice to 
affected employees prior to the running of a second election."  
Id. at 1 n.2.  "[S]uch a remedy," the Board explained, would 

be "insufficient to cure the gross interference with free choice 
in the election in this case."  Id.

     The Board's explanation suffers from none of the deficien-
cies that led to our rejection of bargaining orders in earlier 
cases.  For instance, in Avecor the Board never explained 
"why the cloud created by [the employer's] violations was 
likely to linger."  931 F.2d at 938.  Here, the ALJ carefully 
explained that the section 8(a)(3) violations, particularly Trac-
tion's threats to close the warehouse and its discriminatory 
discharge of Schiavone, were not only " 'hallmark violations' 
of the most pernicious type," but given the small size of the 
unit, likely not to have been forgotten.  Traction, 1999 WL 
1186753 at *35.  Moreover, as the ALJ explained, the fact 
that the union, having once enjoyed majority support, gar-
nered only two votes in the election provided additional 
evidence that Traction's unfair labor practices were both 
particularly effective and "likely to linger."  Avecor, 931 F.2d 
at 938.  In Charlotte Amphitheater, we "found no explanation 
of why a fair election would not be possible once the Company 
has been required to post notices and reinstate the improper-
ly discharged employees with back pay."  82 F.3d at 1079.  
But here, the ALJ found that the magnitude of Traction's 
unfair labor practices, the small size of the unit, and the 
involvement of the company's two owners made its "campaign 
to undermine employee support for the Union through fear 
and intimidation" so successful that it was unlikely that 
traditional remedies would "eras[e] the effects" of that cam-
paign.  Traction, 1999 WL 1186753 at *36.

     In view of the Board's thorough discussion, and keeping in 
mind our deferential standard of review, Gissel Packing, 395 
U.S. at 612 n.32, we cannot imagine what more we could 
require the Board to say.  Indeed, asked at oral argument 
what else the Board should have said, Traction's counsel had 
no response.  In the end, we think the words of Gissel aptly 
describe this case:  Having "succeeded in undermining [the] 
union's strength and destroying the laboratory conditions 
necessary for a fair election, [Traction would] see no need to 
violate a cease-and-desist order by further unlawful activity.  
The damage [had been] done."  Id. at 612.

                        Employee Turnover

     We turn finally to Traction's argument that the Board 
failed to consider the effect of employee turnover between the 
time the unfair labor practices occurred and the issuance of 
the bargaining order.  "[W]e have repeatedly instructed the 
Board to determine the appropriateness of a Gissel bargain-
ing order in light of the circumstances existing at the time it 
is entered" rather than at the time of the election.  Flamingo 
Hilton-Laughlin v. NLRB, 148 F.3d 1166, 1171 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

     The Board argues that Traction waived this issue by failing 
to raise it during the administrative proceedings.  Claiming 
that it had raised the issue, Traction points out that it 
excepted to the ALJ's "failure to consider the effect of 
mitigating circumstances on the need for a bargaining order."  
According to the company, this exception "put the Board on 
notice that Traction was challenging, inter alia, the ALJ's 
failure to consider the effect of employee turnover."  We 
disagree.  How could the Board have known that by "mitigat-
ing circumstances" Traction meant employee turnover?  Not 
only did Traction fail to mention employee turnover in its 
brief to the Board, but the brief contained no citation to the 
pages of the record that the company now contends support 
its argument that employee turnover actually occurred.

     We expect much of the Board, but we have never required 
it to sift through a six-hundred plus page record to find 
evidence supporting an argument that a petitioner never 
made.  See Charlotte Amphitheaters 82 F.3d at 1080 ("[T]he 
Board has no affirmative duty to inquire whether employee 
turnover or the passage of time has attenuated the effects of 
earlier unfair labor practices....").  Because Traction does 
not claim that some "extraordinary circumstance" explains its 
failure to raise employee turnover, we may not consider the 
issue.  See 29 U.S.C. s 160(e) ("No objection that has not 
been urged before the Board, its member, agent, or agency, 
shall be considered by the court, unless the failure or neglect 
to urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordi-
nary circumstances.").

                                IV

     With the exception of that portion of the order requiring 
Traction to allow personal use of company vans, Traction's 
petition for review is denied and the Board's cross-petition for 
enforcement is granted.

                                                                            So ordered.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, concurring:  The Board thinks it 
an unfair labor practice for an employer, during an election 
campaign, to ask employees what they find wrong at the 
workplace.  The Board's theory is that in making the solicita-
tion, the employer implies that something will be done to 
correct whatever problems are identified, which in turn im-
plies that the employees do not need a union.  See Reliance 
Elec. Co., 191 N.L.R.B. 44, 46 (1971), enforced, 457 F.2d 503 
(6th Cir. 1972).  I have my doubts about this theory, but as 
the court points out, the company did not challenge it in this 
case.  See op. at 13.  The company's argument was that the 
evidence did not make out a violation, an argument the 
court's opinion rightly rejects.  See id. at 14.

                                                                     