                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 4, 2001   Decided December 28, 2001 

                           No. 00-5266

                    Federal Trade Commission, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                  Ken Roberts Company, et al., 
                            Appellants

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00ms00204)

     Neil A. Goteiner argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs was Richard E. Nathan.

     Lawrence DeMille-Wagman, Attorney, Federal Trade 
Commission, argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the 
brief was John F. Daly, Assistant General Counsel.

     John G. Gaine was on the brief for amicus curiae Man-
aged Funds Association.

     Before:  Edwards, Rogers, and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  The appellants - Ken Roberts 
Company ("KRC"), Ken Roberts Institute, Inc. ("KRI"), 
United States Chart Company ("Chart"), and Ted Warren 
Corporation ("Warren") (collectively "Ken Roberts") - sell 
instructional materials that purport to teach would-be inves-
tors how to make money investing in the commodities and 
securities markets.  In an effort to determine whether Ken 
Roberts had engaged in deceptive advertising or selling of 
goods or services in violation of sections 5 and 12 of the 
Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C. ss 45, 52, the 
Federal Trade Commission ("FTC") issued civil investigative 
demands ("CIDs") requiring Ken Roberts to produce docu-
ments and to respond to interrogatories relating to the com-
panies' business practices.  The appellants answered some of 
the interrogatories, but declined to respond to most of what 
had been requested.  Ken Roberts then filed a Petition to 
Quash with the FTC.  The appellants claimed that, because 
the regulation of their advertising practices was subject to the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the Commodities Futures Trading 
Commission ("CFTC") or the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission ("SEC"), the FTC lacked authority to investigate.  
The FTC denied the petition and then filed its own petition in 
District Court seeking an order to enforce the CIDs.  On 
May 26, 2000, the District Court granted the FTC's petition 
and ordered Ken Roberts to comply with the CIDs.  The 
appellants now seek review of that judgment.

     Ken Roberts contends that, pursuant to the express terms 
of the Commodity Exchange Act ("CEA"), the CFTC has 
exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the disputed business prac-
tices of Ken Roberts Company and United States Chart 
Company.  Ken Roberts claims further that, because Ken 
Roberts Institute and Ted Warren Corporation are subject to 
pervasive regulation by the SEC under the Investment Advis-
ors Act ("IAA"), the FTC's authority to investigate these 
companies has been impliedly preempted.  Therefore, accord-
ing to Ken Roberts, because the FTC is without authority to 

regulate the cited advertising and promotional practices of 
Ken Roberts, the CIDs cannot be sustained.  We disagree.

     With rare exceptions (none of which applies here), a sub-
poena enforcement action is not the proper forum in which to 
litigate disagreements over an agency's authority to pursue 
an investigation.  Unless it is patently clear that an agency 
lacks the jurisdiction that it seeks to assert, an investigative 
subpoena will be enforced.  Whatever the ultimate merit of 
Ken Roberts' preemption arguments - and we believe they 
have little - appellants cannot overcome the long-standing 
doctrine that precludes courts from entertaining challenges to 
the jurisdiction of administrative agencies during subpoena-
enforcement proceedings.  Because under no reasonable 
reading of the CEA or the IAA does either of those statutes 
manifestly strip the FTC of its broad power over deceptive 
advertising, we affirm the District Court's decision that appel-
lants must comply with the FTC's compulsory process.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     KRC and Chart market courses in commodities trading and 
are therefore subject to the jurisdiction of the CFTC.  KRI 
and Warren offer instruction in securities trading, which 
places them within the regulatory ambit of the SEC.  These 
companies rely heavily on Internet advertising:  their web-
sites feature grandiose claims about potential earnings by 
investors and testimonials from persons who have allegedly 
benefitted from Ken Roberts' instructional materials.

     Since 1994, the CFTC has carefully monitored the activities 
of KRC to determine whether the company had violated 
various sections of the CEA, particularly the statute's anti-
fraud provisions, 7 U.S.C. s 6o (1999).  In at least four 
separate investigations, the Commission sought to determine 
whether KRC's advertising claims, both in print and, more 
recently, on-line, can be substantiated.  To this end, the 
CFTC repeatedly used its subpoena power to compel KRC to 
turn over business records and detailed documentation sup-
porting the promotional claims that it has made.  The compa-
ny always has responded to CFTC subpoenas, and never has 

been sanctioned or forced to admit any wrongdoing.  While 
one investigation did lead to a consent decree, pursuant to 
which KRC and Chart registered with the CFTC as commod-
ity trading advisers ("CTAs"), see 7 U.S.C. s 1a(5), the Com-
mission has never taken enforcement action against KRC.

     In 1999, the FTC, in conjunction with the CFTC and the 
SEC, announced a coordinated investigation of deceptive day 
trading promotions.  In early September 1999, the FTC 
formally authorized the use of compulsory process to deter-
mine whether various on-line merchants were engaged in 
deceptive marketing practices.  With an investigative agenda 
aimed at high-risk/high-yield investment activity and suspi-
cious Internet advertising, the Commission soon focused on 
Ken Roberts.  On September 30, 1999, the FTC issued CIDs 
requesting a wide variety of information through written 
interrogatories and documents relating to Ken Roberts' busi-
ness practices.  The CIDs were designed to reveal whether 
the companies had mislead the public in promoting their 
instructional courses.  To this end, the Commission demand-
ed a full accounting of the companies' sales volume, as well as 
evidence underlying the claims made in their testimonials and 
other advertising materials.

     Appellants resisted complying fully with the CIDs, believ-
ing them to be duplicative of the subpoenas that had already 
been issued by the CFTC and beyond the FTC's power to 
issue.  Thus, Ken Roberts responded only to some of the 
interrogatories and produced none of the requested docu-
ments.  They then filed an administrative petition with the 
FTC to quash the CIDs.  In that proceeding, Ken Roberts 
argued, as they do here, that the CEA and the IAA deprive 
the Commission of its jurisdiction to regulate - and therefore 
to investigate - deceptive advertising practices of, respective-
ly, CTAs and investment advisers.  The FTC rejected this 
petition, holding that the subpoenas were issued as part of a 
lawful investigation, one fully authorized by the Federal 
Trade Commission Act ("FTC Act"), 15 U.S.C. s 41 et seq. 
(1997), and not foreclosed by any rival regulatory statute.  
See In re Petition of The Ken Roberts Co. et al. to Quash 
Civil Investigative Demands, File No. 9923259 (Feb. 25, 2000), 

reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 72.  When Ken Roberts 
persisted in refusing to comply with the CIDs, the FTC 
petitioned the District Court to compel enforcement pursuant 
to 15 U.S.C. s 57b-1(e).  In a brief order, the District Court 
granted the agency's petition to enforce.  See FTC v. Ken 
Roberts Co., Order, Misc. No. 00-204 (May 26, 2000), reprint-
ed in J.A. 248.  Ken Roberts now appeals.

                          II. DISCUSSION

     Appellants ask this court to hold that the jurisdiction-
conferring provisions of the CEA and the IAA preempt - the 
former expressly, the latter implicitly - the jurisdiction that 
the FTC would otherwise possess over appellants' allegedly 
deceptive marketing of their investor-training courses.  
Though the nature of our analysis obliges us to investigate 
these questions, we need not answer them definitively, for we 
have concluded that Ken Roberts' challenge is premature.

A.   Jurisdictional Challenges to Agency Subpoenas

     The threshold issue in this case is whether the appellants 
may raise their challenge to the Commission's jurisdiction 
now, or instead whether they are obliged to await an actual 
enforcement action.  In upholding the judgment of the Dis-
trict Court, we are governed by the long-standing doctrine 
that administrative agencies must be given wide latitude in 
asserting their power to investigate by subpoena.  As the 
Second Circuit has noted:

     [A]t the subpoena enforcement stage, courts need not 
     determine whether the subpoenaed party is within the 
     agency's jurisdiction or covered by the statute it adminis-
     ters;  rather the coverage determination should wait until 
     an enforcement action is brought against the subpoenaed 
     party.
     
United States v. Construction Prods. Research, Inc., 73 F.3d 
464, 470 (2d Cir. 1996).

     The Supreme Court first articulated this doctrine in Endi-
cott Johnson Corp. v. Perkins, 317 U.S. 501 (1943).  Endicott 
established that, as a general proposition, agencies should 

remain free to determine, in the first instance, the scope of 
their own jurisdiction when issuing investigative subpoenas.  
The Court therefore held that the Secretary of Labor was 
entitled to enforce a subpoena for payroll records issued in an 
effort to determine whether Endicott Johnson had run afoul 
of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.  The District 
Court had scheduled a trial to determine whether Endicott 
was covered by the Act, but the Supreme Court rejected this 
approach.  Rather, the Court held that, because "[t]he evi-
dence sought by the subpoena was not plainly incompetent 
or irrelevant to any lawful purpose of the Secretary in the 
discharge of her duties under the Act ... it was the duty of 
the District Court to order its production for the Secretary's 
consideration."  Id. at 509 (emphasis added).

     Following Endicott, courts of appeals have consistently 
deferred to agency determinations of their own investigative 
authority, and have generally refused to entertain challenges 
to agency authority in proceedings to enforce compulsory 
process.  See, e.g., United States v. Sturm, Ruger & Co., 84 
F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1996) ("We have repeatedly admonished 
that questions concerning the scope of an agency's substan-
tive authority to regulate are not to be resolved in subpoena 
enforcement proceedings.");  Construction Prods. Research, 
73 F.3d at 468-73 (enforcing subpoena issued by Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission over objection that the subject mat-
ter of the agency's investigation was reserved by law for the 
Department of Labor);  EEOC v. Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & 
Co., 775 F.2d 928, 930 (8th Cir. 1985) ("The initial determina-
tion of the coverage question is left to the administrative 
agency seeking enforcement of the subpoena.");  Donovan v. 
Shaw, 668 F.2d 985, 989 (8th Cir. 1982) ("It is well-settled 
that a subpoena enforcement proceeding is not the proper 
forum in which to litigate the question of coverage under a 
particular federal statute.");  FTC v. Ernstthal, 607 F.2d 488, 
490 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (acknowledging a concession that "an 
individual may not normally resist an administrative subpoe-
na on the ground that the agency lacks regulatory jurisdiction 
if the subpoena is issued at the investigational stage of the 
proceeding").

     Subpoena enforcement power is not limitless, however.  In 
United States v. Morton Salt Co., 338 U.S. 632, 652 (1950), 
the Court emphasized that a subpoena is proper only where 
"the inquiry is within the authority of the agency, the demand 
is not too indefinite and the information sought is reasonably 
relevant."  Accordingly, "there is no doubt that a court asked 
to enforce a subpoena will refuse to do so if the subpoena 
exceeds an express statutory limitation on the agency's inves-
tigative powers."  Gen. Fin. Corp. v. FTC, 700 F.2d 366, 369 
(7th Cir. 1983).  Thus, a court must "assure itself that the 
subject matter of the investigation is within the statutory 
jurisdiction of the subpoena-issuing agency."  FEC v. Ma-
chinists Non-Partisan Political League, 655 F.2d 380, 386 
(D.C. Cir. 1981);  see also FTC v. Texaco, Inc., 555 F.2d 862, 
879 (D.C. Cir. 1977) (en banc) (administrative subpoenas 
should be enforced unless the information sought is irrelevant 
to "a lawful purpose of the agency").  These cases amply 
demonstrate that while the courts' role in subpoena enforce-
ment may be a "strictly limited" one, it is neither minor nor 
ministerial.  See FTC v. Anderson, 631 F.2d 741, 744 (D.C. 
Cir. 1979).

     In adhering to the foregoing principles, we have held that 
enforcement of an agency's investigatory subpoena will be 
denied only when there is "a patent lack of jurisdiction" in an 
agency to regulate or to investigate.  See CAB v. Deutsche 
Lufthansa Aktiengesellschaft, 591 F.2d 951, 952 (D.C. Cir. 
1979);  see also Gov't of Territory of Guam v. Sea-Land 
Servs., Inc., 958 F.2d 1150, 1155 (D.C. Cir. 1992);  Ernstthal, 
607 F.2d at 492 (declining to relax "the well-established 
barrier against ruling on the agency's regulatory jurisdiction 
in subpoena enforcement proceeding ... where the absence 
of jurisdiction is not patent, and there are no allegations of 
agency bad faith").  As the following discussion will demon-
strate, there is no "patent lack of jurisdiction" in this case.

B.   Preemption of the FTC's Power to Regulate Decep-
     tive Advertising

     On its own terms, the FTC Act gives the FTC ample 
authority to investigate and, if deceptive practices are uncov-

ered, to regulate appellants' advertising practices.  See 15 
U.S.C. ss 45(a) (allowing the Commission to prevent unfair 
competition and deceptive acts or practices in or affecting 
commerce);  52-54 (allowing the Commission to regulate and 
enjoin false advertising);  57b-1(c) (allowing the Commission 
to issue CIDs to investigate possible s 45 violations).  There-
fore, the FTC is entitled to have its subpoenas enforced 
unless some other source of law patently undermines these 
broad powers.  Appellants contend that two federal statutes 
have this effect.  KRC and Chart, who sell courses in com-
modities investing, argue that the 1974 amendments to the 
Commodity Exchange Act expressly preempted the FTC's 
jurisdiction over their activities as registered CTAs.  KRI 
and Warren, who sell courses in securities investing, argue 
that the Investment Advisers Act impliedly preempts the 
Commission's regulatory power over their advertisements.  
We consider these contentions in turn, and conclude that 
neither has merit.

     1.   Appellants' Claim of Express Preemption Pursuant 
          to the Commodity Exchange Act
          
     Though Congress has long sought to regulate the futures 
market, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission is not 
very old.  The first federal statute dealing with commodities 
trading, the 1921 Future Trading Act, was declared unconsti-
tutional by the Supreme Court , see Hill v. Wallace, 259 U.S. 
44 (1922), and quickly replaced by the Grain Futures Act, 
which the Court upheld, see Bd. of Trade of City of Chicago v. 
Olsen, 262 U.S. 1 (1923).  In 1936, this latter enactment was 
amended and renamed the Commodity Exchange Act.  That 
initial version of the CEA delegated certain regulatory re-
sponsibilities to a commission composed of the Attorney 
General, along with the Secretaries of Agriculture and Com-
merce.  See Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith v. Cur-
ran, 456 U.S. 353, 360-63 (1982);  S. Rep. No. 93-1131, at 13-14 
(1974), reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5843, 5855.

     It was not until 1974, however, that the CFTC as it exists 
today was born.  After considerable deliberation, Congress 
enacted the Commodity Future Trading Commission Act 

("CFTCA"), an extensive overhaul of the CEA that both 
expanded the statute's coverage and dramatically altered its 
enforcement scheme.  Curran, 456 U.S. at 365-66.  Most 
importantly, the CFTCA for the first time brought all com-
modities under federal regulation;  the earlier statutes had 
covered only enumerated agricultural goods that in no way 
represented the vast array of products that were actually 
being traded on futures markets.  See H.R. Rep. No. 93-963, 
at 38 (1974).  The Commission spawned by the 1974 statute 
was an independent regulatory agency invested with broad 
powers to regulate futures trading and commodities ex-
changes.  See S. Rep. No. 93-1131, at 2-3, 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 
at 5844-45;  CFTC v. Schor, 478 U.S. 833, 836 (1986) (describ-
ing the "sweeping authority" entrusted to the CFTC).  Con-
gress authorized the CFTC to bring an action for injunctive 
relief in federal district court against anyone violating the 
CEA or the regulations promulgated thereunder.  See Com-
modity Future Trading Commission Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 
93-463, s 211, 88 Stat. 1402 (1974) (codified as amended at 7 
U.S.C. s 13a-1).

     Moreover, and most important to the present case, the new 
agency was invested with exclusive jurisdiction over certain 
aspects of the futures trading market.  See id., s 201, 88 
Stat. 1389 (codified as amended at 7 U.S.C. s 2(a)(1)(A) 
(2001)).  The aim of this provision, according to one of its 
chief sponsors, was to "avoid unnecessary, overlapping and 
duplicative regulation," especially as between the Securities 
and Exchange Commission and the new CFTC.  120 Cong. 
Rec. H34,736 (Oct. 9, 1974) (remarks of House Agriculture 
Committee Chairman Poage);  Philip F. Johnson, The Com-
modity Futures Trading Commission Act:  Preemption as 
Public Policy, 29 Vand. L. Rev. 12-13;  16-17 (1976).

     In determining what Congress intended when it passed 
s 2(a)(1)(A), we must focus on the precise text of the enacted 
legislation.  See Carter v. United States, 530 U.S. 255, 271 
(2000) ("In analyzing a statute, we begin by examining the 
text, not by psychoanalyzing those who enacted it.") (internal 
citations omitted).  Section 2(a)(1)(A) reads as follows:

     The Commission shall have exclusive jurisdiction ... 
     with respect to accounts, agreements (including any 
     transaction which is of the character of, or is commonly 
     known to the trade as, an "option", "privilege", "indemni-
     ty", "bid", "offer", "put", "call", "advance guaranty", or 
     "decline guaranty"), and transactions involving con-
     tracts of sale of a commodity for future delivery, traded 
     or executed on a contract market designated or deriva-
     tives transaction execution facility registered pursuant to 
     section 7 or 7a of this title or any other board of trade, 
     exchange, or market, and transactions subject to regula-
     tion by the Commission pursuant to section 23 of this 
     title.  Except as hereinabove provided, nothing contained 
     in this section shall (I) supersede or limit the jurisdiction 
     at any time conferred on the Securities and Exchange 
     Commission or other regulatory authorities under the 
     laws of the United States or of any State, or (II) restrict 
     the Securities and Exchange Commission and such other 
     authorities from carrying out their duties and responsi-
     bilities in accordance with such laws.  Nothing in this 
     section shall supersede or limit the jurisdiction conferred 
     on courts of the United States or any State.
     
7 U.S.C. s 2(a)(1)(A) (emphasis added).  Appellants (KRC 
and Chart) contend that this provision precludes the FTC 
from regulating their activities as registered CTAs, because 
the statute gives the CFTC "exclusive jurisdiction" over 
"accounts, agreements ... and transactions involving con-
tracts of sale of a commodity for future delivery."  In other 
words, Ken Roberts claims that the advertising and pro-
motion of educational materials that purport to teach inves-
tors how to get rich trading futures are "transactions involv-
ing contracts of sale of a commodity for future delivery."  
Thus, appellants would have us construe this phrase to confer 
exclusive jurisdiction on the CFTC over the marketing prac-
tices of firms that sell not commodities themselves, but rather 
instruction in commodities trading.  We find this interpreta-
tion of the Commission's exclusive jurisdiction to be far-
fetched, to say the least.

     On its face, s 2(a)(1)(A) confers exclusive jurisdiction to the 
CFTC over a limited, discrete set of items related to the 
making of futures contracts.  Specifically, these are (1) "ac-
counts ... involving contracts of sale of a commodity for 
future delivery," (2) "agreements" involving the same, (3) 
"transactions" involving the same, and (4) "transactions sub-
ject to regulation by the Commission pursuant to section 23 of 
this title" (dealing with so-called "margin" or "leverage" 
contracts).  It is certainly not obvious that the advertising at 
issue in this case fits in any of these categories.  "Transac-
tions," broadly construed, is perhaps appellants' best bet.  
Yet, it strains common parlance to construe "transactions 
involving contracts of sale of a commodity" to include the 
marketing practices of a firm that does not buy and sell 
futures, but rather merely instructs others how to do so.  As 
it is generally understood, the word "transactions" conveys a 
reciprocity, a mutual exchange, which seems absent from the 
allegedly deceptive advertising materials that the FTC seeks 
to investigate in this case.  See Webster's Third New Inter-
national Dictionary 2425-26 (defining "transaction" as, inter 
alia, "a business deal" and "a communicative action or activi-
ty involving two or more parties or two things reciprocally 
affecting or influencing each other").

     Appellants seek to overcome this impression by pointing to 
a separate provision in the statute that uses "transactions" in 
a different, and more expansive, way.  As part of the 1974 
overhaul of the CEA, Congress made a set of legislative 
findings in which it announced that the activities of CTAs, 
including "their advice, counsel, publications, writings, analy-
ses, and reports[,] customarily relate to and their operations 
are directed toward and cause the purchase of commodities 
for future delivery...."  7 U.S.C. s 6l.  This finding then 
goes on to say that "the foregoing transactions occur in such 
volume as to affect substantially transactions on contract 
markets."  Id. (emphases added).  Ken Roberts contends 
that because Congress used the term "transactions" to mean 
advice, counsel, publications, etc., in s 6l, we must read that 
term the same way in the exclusive jurisdiction provision in 
s 2(a)(1)(A).  "The rule of in pari materia - like any canon of 

statutory construction - is a reflection of practical experience 
in the interpretation of statutes:  a legislative body generally 
uses a particular word with a consistent meaning in a given 
context."  Erlenbaugh v. United States, 409 U.S. 239, 243 
(1972).  In this case, however, appellants' attempted reliance 
on the in pari materia canon of construction is entirely 
unconvincing, because it proves far too much.

     Appellants ignore the fact that s 6l uses the word "transac-
tions" twice in the same sentence to mean two different 
things.  The second appearance of the word - "transactions 
on contract markets" - cannot reasonably embrace the broad 
set of activities contemplated by the first.  Instead, the 
second reference to "transactions" in s 6l is best understood 
to refer to the actual trading of futures contracts.  As such, 
the in pari materia rule is of little help to appellants, for it 
provides no guidance as to which construction of "transac-
tions" the court should import from s 6l into s 2(a)(1)(A).

     By contrast, when "transactions" is examined in the context 
of s 2(a)(1)(A), it seems most naturally read as encompassing, 
like its neighbors, a set of arrangements directly related to 
the actual sale of commodities futures.  In statutory interpre-
tation, after all, words are generally known by the company 
they keep.  Gustafson v. Alloyd Co., 513 U.S. 561, 575 (1995) 
(describing and applying the noscitur a sociis canon).  And 
here, because "accounts" and "agreements" seem so plainly to 
denote categories of financial arrangements through which 
the trading of commodities occurs or is facilitated, it makes 
sense to construe "transactions" in the same way.

     These terms were added to the bill that became the 
CFTCA in order to extend the Commission's exclusive juris-
diction over so-called "discretionary accounts," commodity 
options, and other trading agreements described in the stat-
ute.  See Johnson, at 14 & n.44;  H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 93-1383 
(1974), reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N 5894, 5897 ("[T]he 
Commission's [exclusive] jurisdiction ... includes the regula-
tion of commodity accounts, commodity trading agreements, 
and commodity options.").  Noscitur a sociis instructs us to 
construe "transactions" in a similar light, as denoting a set of 

actions closely linked to the actual trading of commodities.  
Under this reading, all of the categories delineated in 
s 2(a)(1)(A) describe business deals that involve the buying 
and selling of futures, which comports with Congress' goal of 
conferring the CFTC with sole regulatory authority over 
"futures contract markets or other exchanges," H.R. Conf. 
Rep. No. 93-1383, 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 5897 (emphasis add-
ed), or "over options trading in commodities (but not in 
securities)," S. Rep. No. 93-1131, at 31, 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 
5870 (emphasis added).

     A second problem with the broad definition of "transac-
tions" proposed by the appellants is that it produces poten-
tially absurd results.  See Griffin v. Oceanic Contractors, 
Inc., 458 U.S. 564, 575 (1982) ("[I]nterpretations of a statute 
which would produce absurd results are to be avoided if 
alternative interpretations consistent with the legislative pur-
pose are available.").  The first use of that word in s 6l 
sweeps more broadly than just the "advice," "counsel," and 
"publications" of CTAs;  indeed, it includes their very "opera-
tions" as well.  And an interpretation of s 2(a)(1)(A) under 
which the CFTC was given exclusive authority over all CTA 
"operations involving contracts of sale of a commodity," espe-
cially when coupled with the expansive reading of "involving" 
urged by appellants, would seem to preclude virtually any 
other government regulation affecting the futures trading 
industry.  It could suggest, for example, that government 
agencies regulating employment relations or safety and 
health would be powerless to take action against CTAs.  We 
do not believe that this is what Congress intended when it 
enacted s 2(a)(1)(A).

     As noted above, the statute's legislative history repeatedly 
emphasizes that the CFTC's jurisdiction was "to be exclusive 
with regard to the trading of futures on organized contract 
markets." S. Rep. No. 93-1131, at 23, 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 
5863 (emphasis added).  Indeed, as the Seventh Circuit has 
recognized, the goal of the CFTCA was to bring the futures 
markets "under a uniform set of regulations" and that "[o]nly 
in the context of market regulation does the need for uniform 
legal rules apply."  Am. Agric. Movement, Inc. v. Bd. of 

Trade of City of Chicago, 977 F.2d 1147, 1155-57 (7th Cir. 
1992) (relying on this legislative purpose to hold that state 
common law actions against commodities brokers are 
preempted only when they would "directly affect trading on 
or the operation of a futures market").  It is true that the 
CFTC was created to regulate all commodities and commodi-
ties trading, see Point Landing, Inc. v. Omni Capital Int'l 
Ltd., 795 F.2d 415, 420-21 (5th Cir. 1986);  it does not follow 
from this, however, that Congress intended to preempt the 
activities of all other federal agencies in their regulatory 
realms.  "Preemption of the regulation of the market does 
not also mean preemption of all law that might involve 
participants in the market."  Poplar Grove Planting and 
Refining Co. v. Bache Halsey Stuart Inc., 465 F. Supp. 585, 
592 (D. La. 1979).  Appellants' position makes no sense 
insofar as it suggests that the scope of the CFTC's exclusive 
jurisdiction is broader than the scope of the agency's authori-
ty to regulate under the CEA.

     We will give appellants the benefit of the doubt and assume 
that what they really mean to argue is that the limits of the 
exclusive jurisdiction provision in s 2(a)(1)(A) is coterminous 
with the limits of the CFTC's regulatory authority under the 
CEA.  In other words, Ken Roberts appears to assume that, 
at a minimum, whatever the Commission may regulate, it 
regulates exclusively.  This is a specious contention.  Both 
the text and purpose of the statute contemplate a regime in 
which other agencies may share power with the CFTC over 
activities that lie outside the scope of s 2(a)(1)(A), but that 
still involve the activities of commodities advisers or that 
implicate other provisions of the CEA.  Indeed, the inclusion 
of the so-called "regulatory savings clauses," s 2(a)(1)(A)(I)-
(II), makes clear that other agencies, such as the FTC, retain 
their jurisdiction over all matters beyond the confines of 
"accounts, agreements, and transactions involving contracts of 
sale of a commodity for future delivery."  Cf. Chicago Mer-
cantile Exch. v. SEC, 883 F.2d 537, 550 (7th Cir. 1989) (noting 
that s 2 "carries no implicit preemptive force").

     The imperfect overlap between s 2(a)(1)(A) and the rest of 
the CEA is neatly demonstrated by the statute's antifraud 

provision, on which the CFTC's own power to investigate 
appellants, which it has done since 1994, presumably rests.  7 
U.S.C. s 6o makes it unlawful, inter alia, for a CTA "to 
engage in any transaction, practice, or course of business 
which operates as a fraud or deceit upon any client or 
participant or prospective client or participant."  Thus, while 
the CFTC has the clear statutory authority to regulate a 
CTA's deceitful "practices" - and "practices," far more so 
than "transactions," comfortably describes the advertising at 
issue in this case - there is no reason to think that this 
authority is exclusive.  A "practice" or "course of business" is 
quite plainly not a "transaction" - either in life or in this 
statutory provision.  (Nor for that matter is it an "account" 
or "agreement.")  As such, a comparison of the texts of s 6o 
and s 2(a)(1)(A) appears to indicate that the CFTC's authori-
ty over CTAs is broader than the substantive scope of its 
exclusive jurisdiction to regulate futures and futures markets.

     In sum, then, both context (textual and historical) and 
common sense support a reading of the exclusive jurisdiction 
provision in which the phrase "accounts, agreements, and 
transactions involving contracts of sale of a commodity" does 
not cover the marketing of investor-education courses that 
leads only tangentially to the actual purchase of futures.  
While the FTC's investigation may implicate the CEA, we 
believe that it falls outside of the range of subjects described 
by s 2(a)(1)(A).  At the very least, the foregoing discussion 
illustrates that there is no "patent lack of jurisdiction" in the 
FTC to investigate or regulate in this case.  Appellants' 
preemption arguments are simply not compelling enough to 
overcome this court's long-standing chariness about entertain-
ing jurisdictional challenges to administrative subpoenas.  Ac-
cordingly, we hold that the District Court's properly allowed 
the FTC to proceed with its investigation of KRC and Chart.

     2.   Implied Preemption Under the Investment Advisers 
          Act
          
     KRI and Warren, whose businesses involve securities rath-
er than commodities, assert that the comprehensive scope of 
the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. s 80b-1 et 

seq. (1997), preempts the FTC's jurisdiction to regulate the 
fraudulent practices of "investment advisers" such as them-
selves.  Even if there were something to this claim, which we 
doubt, it does not come close to establishing that the FTC is 
manifestly without jurisdiction in regard to the subject mat-
ter of its subpoenas.

     In contrast to the CEA, the IAA contains no express 
exclusive jurisdiction provision.  As such, the only vehicle by 
which the FTC's otherwise-plenary power to investigate and 
uproot unfair or deceptive trade practices could be disturbed 
is through the doctrine of implied repeal.  We have recog-
nized that, where intended by Congress, " 'a precisely drawn, 
detailed statute pre-empts more general remedies.' "  Galli-
ano v. U.S. Postal Serv., 836 F.2d 1362, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1988) 
(quoting Brown v. Gen. Servs. Admin., 425 U.S. 820, 834 
(1976)).  This can occur either where the two enactments are 
in "irreconcilable conflict" or where the latter was clearly 
meant to serve as a substitute for the former.  Posadas v. 
Nat'l City Bank, 296 U.S. 497, 503 (1936);  cf. Demby v. 
Schweiker, 671 F.2d 507, 513 (D.C. Cir. 1981) (Wright, J., 
concurring) (describing the two kinds of implied repeals).  
Appellants contend that the antifraud provision of the IAA, 
which prohibit investment advisers from engaging "in any 
transaction, practice, or course of business which operates as 
a fraud or deceit upon any client or prospective client," 15 
U.S.C. s 80b-6(2), stands as just such a specific remedy that 
displaces the more general coverage of the FTC Act.

     To prevail at this stage of the litigation, KRI and Warren 
must establish not merely that the IAA, properly construed, 
deprives the FTC of jurisdiction, but that it does so patently.  
However, the entire structure of the implied preemption 
inquiry militates against such a finding in this case.  Both the 
Supreme Court and this court have observed that implied 
repeals of one statute (or a provision in one statute) by 
another are "not favored."  Radzanower v. Touche Ross & 
Co., 426 U.S. 148, 154 (1976) (quoting United States v. United 
Cont'l Tuna Corp., 425 U.S. 164, 168 (1976));  Galliano, 836 
F.2d at 1369 ("strongly disfavored").  They are recognized 
only where the intention of the legislature is "clear and 

manifest."  Posadas, 296 U.S. at 503;  Morton v. Mancari, 
417 U.S. 535, 549-50 (1974) (some "affirmative showing" of 
intent to repeal is necessary).

     Because we live in "an age of overlapping and concurring 
regulatory jurisdiction," Thompson Med. Co. v. FTC, 791 
F.2d 189, 192 (D.C. Cir. 1986), a court must proceed with the 
utmost caution before concluding that one agency may not 
regulate merely because another may.  E.g., Galliano, 836 
F.2d 1369-70 (relying on the First Amendment and the canon 
of constitutional doubt in holding that the Federal Election 
Campaign Act partially preempted the postal fraud prescrip-
tions of 39 U.S.C. s 3005);  see also Pennsylvania v. ICC, 561 
F.2d 278, 292 (D.C. Cir. 1977) ("It is well established that 
when two regulatory systems are applicable to a certain 
subject matter, they are to be reconciled and, to the extent 
possible, both given effect.").  In this case, while it may be 
true that the IAA and the FTC Act employ different verbal 
formulae to describe their antifraud standards, it hardly 
follows that they therefore impose conflicting or incompatible 
obligations.  See Radzanower, 426 U.S. at 155 (repeals only 
implied to the extent necessary to make the later enacted law 
work).  Undoubtedly, entities in appellants' position can - and 
of course should - refrain from engaging in both "unfair and 
deceptive acts or practices" and "any transaction, practice, or 
course of business which operates as a fraud or deceit upon a 
client or prospective client."  The proscriptions of the IAA 
are not diminished or confused merely because investment 
advisers must also avoid that which the FTC Act proscribes.  
And, because these statutes are "capable of co-existence," it 
becomes the duty of this court "to regard each as effective" - 
at least absent clear congressional intent to the contrary.  
Mancari, 417 U.S. at 551.

     Appellants can point to nothing in the background or 
history of the IAA that demonstrates (or even hints at) a 
congressional intent to preempt the antifraud jurisdiction of 
the FTC over those covered by the new statute.  Nor does 
the subsequent case law interpreting these statutes contain 
such declarations.  The closest case is perhaps Spinner Corp. 
v. Princeville Develop. Corp., 849 F.2d 388, 392 n.4 (9th Cir. 

1988), which notes that the "FTC has never undertaken to 
adjudicate deceptive conduct in the sale and purchase of 
securities, presumably because such transactions fall under 
the comprehensive regulatory umbrella of the Securities and 
Exchange Commission."  Based on this observation, the court 
held that Hawaii's "baby FTC Act," which was patterned 
after the federal statute, did not regulate the purchase and 
sale of securities, despite language that would seem to include 
such activity.  See id.  Even if we agreed with the Ninth 
Circuit's dubious reasoning - which implies that because a 
power has not been exercised, the power does not exist - we 
simply do not think that such indicia of intent are enough to 
allow us to quash the FTC's subpoenas.

     In sum, then, whatever the ultimate force of arguments 
about the structure of the IAA or the FTC's historical 
practice regarding securities transactions, neither of these 
are sufficiently forceful to deprive the Commission of its 
general prerogative to determine, at least in the first in-
stance, the scope of its own investigatory authority.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     For the reasons given above, we hold that the FTC is 
entitled to enforce its CIDs against all four appellants in this 
case.  Neither the Commodity Exchange Act nor the Invest-
ment Advisers Act evince an unambiguous intent to deprive 
the FTC of its otherwise applicable authority to investigate 
possibly deceptive advertising and marketing practices mere-
ly because those practices relate to either the commodities or 
the securities business.  Accordingly, the decision of the 
District Court is affirmed.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                