                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 29, 1999   Decided February 22, 2000 

                           No. 99-3010

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Davon M. Harrison, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00216-01)

     Beverly G. Dyer, Assistant Federal Public Defender, ar-
gued the cause for appellant. With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.  Tony W. Miles, Assistant 
Federal Public Defender, entered an appearance.

     Florence Pan, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. Lewis, 

U.S. Attorney, and John R. Fisher, Elizabeth Trosman and 
Darrell Valdez, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Appellant Davon M. Harrison 
was convicted in a jury trial in the district court for unlawful 
possession of a firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 922(g).  He 
appeals the denial of his motion for a directed verdict for 
insufficiency of the evidence on two necessary elements of the 
offense.  Harrison stipulated to the two elements, but the 
stipulations were not formally read to the jury.  The prosecu-
tion offered no other evidence on those elements.  We hold 
that Harrison, by stipulating, waived his right to require the 
government to introduce evidence on the stipulated elements.  
We therefore affirm the conviction.

                          I. Background

     At approximately 9:45 a.m. on May 25, 1998, Metropolitan 
Police Department Officer Raymond Adams heard gunshots 
coming from the direction of the 300 block of K Street, S.E.  
He began to canvas the area, and drove by Davon Harrison 
who was proceeding down the street in his wheelchair.  Un-
successful in his search, Officer Adams then returned to 
Harrison and asked Harrison if he had a gun.  He replied in 
the affirmative.  In his lap was a newspaper, which Adams 
placed on the ground and unwrapped to find a .38 Colt 
containing four empty shell casings and two live rounds.  
Harrison was charged with a violation of 18 U.S.C. s 922(g), 
which prohibits anyone who has been convicted of a crime 
punishable by a sentence exceeding one year from possessing 
a firearm that has been transported in interstate commerce.1

__________
     1 18 U.S.C. s 922(g) provides:

     It shall be unlawful for any person ... who has been convicted 
     in any court of, a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term 
     exceeding one year ... to ... possess in or affecting com-
     merce, any firearm or ammunition....
     
     Before trial, the district court ordered the parties to submit 
a joint pretrial statement including stipulations.  The parties 
filed a statement with the court which included stipulations of 
two necessary elements of a s 922(g)(1) charge:  (1) that the 
firearm had been transported in interstate commerce and (2) 
that the defendant had been convicted of a prior offense 
punishable by a sentence of more than one year.

     The exact language of the stipulations was:
     IV. Stipulations
     
     Stipulation as to Firearm;  Movement in Interstate Com-
     merce:
     
          The parties agree that the pistol recovered in this case 
     was a firearm;  that the firearm was shipped or moved in 
     interstate commerce.
     
     Stipulation as to Prior Convictions ...
     
          The parties agree that the defendant was previously 
     convicted for an offense carrying a potential penalty of 
     more than one year in case F-7372-95, in the District of 
     Columbia.
     
Following the stipulations was a list of a Harrison's prior 
convictions.

     Government counsel referred to the stipulations in his 
opening statement:

     [I]n this case the defense counsel and I have stipulated 
     that this gun did move through interstate commerce 
     because handguns are not manufactured in the District 
     of Columbia, and there is only one way that it could come 
     in the District, by crossing state lines.  We've also 
     stipulated that Mr. Harrison has been convicted [of an 
     offense] carrying the possible punishment of over a year 
     in prison.  So, what I have to prove to you is that Mr. 
     Harrison possessed the gun or the ammunition.
     
No objections were made to the opening statement.  Defense 
counsel's opening statement described "a case where Mr. 
Harrison is being charged with a gun that he did not possess, 
it was a gun that was not his."

     As forecast, the trial focused on whether Harrison was in 
possession of a firearm.  The two stipulations were never 
read to the jury, nor did the prosecution introduce any other 
evidence regarding the stipulated evidence.  Before closing 
arguments, Harrison moved for a judgment of acquittal based 
on the entire record, which was denied.  When the prosecu-
tion referred to the stipulations during closing arguments, 
defense counsel objected.  At a subsequent bench conference, 
defense counsel argued that the stipulations, never having 
been introduced, could not provide proof of the elements, 
although he admitted that the parties had agreed to the 
stipulations.  He claimed he had not raised the issue earlier 
because he hoped to modify the language of the interstate 
commerce stipulation to include the fact that guns are not 
manufactured in the District of Columbia.  The trial judge 
stated that the failure to raise this issue earlier could be 
considered a waiver, and ultimately denied defense counsel's 
motion for a directed verdict.

     During jury instructions, the judge referred to the stipula-
tion that the gun had traveled in interstate commerce:

     During the trial you were told that the parties had 
     stipulated, this is had agreed to certain facts, namely that 
     the gun had travelled in interstate commerce.  Any 
     stipulation of fact is undisputed evidence and you may 
     consider it undisputed evidence.
     
          ....
     
     The parties have stipulated that the firearm which the 
     defendant allegedly possessed has travelled or been 
     transported in interstate commerce.
     
The judge did not give a similar instruction about the prior 
conviction stipulation, but referenced the conviction by cau-
tioning the jury that it "is just being presented to you as an 
element of the crime.  You are not to consider the fact that 
the defendant had been convicted of an offense punishable by 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year in any other 
way....  [Y]ou're not to take any unfavorable impression of 

the defendant from the fact that this element of the crime is 
here."

     The jury found Harrison guilty.  Harrison appeals, assert-
ing that as a result of the prosecution's failure to read the 
stipulations, there was insufficient evidence on the interstate 
commerce and prior conviction elements to support the ver-
dict of guilty and that his conviction must be reversed.

                          II. Discussion

                             A. Issue

     When reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we deter-
mine as a matter of law whether "any rational trier of fact 
could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a 
reasonable doubt."  Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 
(1979);  see also United States v. Harrington, 108 F.3d 1460, 
1464 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  At first, it might appear that the 
standard of review could resolve this case:  because the 
stipulations were never formally read to the jury, they were 
never in evidence (although the jury was aware of them);  
there was no other evidence on the stipulated elements and 
the jury could not have found them beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  See, e.g., United States v. Spinner, 152 F.3d 950, 956 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  Our real inquiry, however, is whether, 
considering the nature and purpose of the stipulations in this 
case, Harrison should be able to challenge now the insuffi-
ciency of the evidence covered by those stipulations.

     The government in this appeal presents two primary theo-
ries to support the validity of the verdict, in spite of its failure 
to formally read the stipulations to the jury or introduce 
other evidence.  The first we can call the "deemed admitted" 
theory.  We have held that a technical failure to introduce 
evidence that was presented to the trier of fact can be 
overlooked in some cases.  See, e.g., United States v. Barrett, 
111 F.3d 947, 951 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (citing United States v. 
Bizanowicz, 745 F.2d 120, 123 (1st Cir. 1984), and United 
States v. Stapleton, 494 F.2d 1269, 1270 (9th Cir. 1974)).  The 
government asks us to apply Barrett on the reasoning that 

the jury was clearly made aware of the stipulations through 
the opening and closing statements and jury instructions.

     The government's second theory is that any error in the 
trial was harmless error.  Rule 52(a) of the Federal Rules of 
Criminal Procedure provides that "[a]ny error, defect, irregu-
larity or variance which does not affect substantial rights 
shall be disregarded," and the Supreme Court has stated that 
"most constitutional errors can be harmless."  Arizona v. 
Fulminante, 499 U.S. 279, 306 (1991) (citations omitted).  The 
government claims that the error here was a failure to take 
"the technical steps" needed to make the stipulations evi-
dence.

     We will not delve into the details of the government's 
arguments on these grounds.  Instead, we hold that Harrison 
has, by stipulating, waived any right to contest the absence of 
proof on the stipulated elements.  This waiver theory of 
stipulations has been addressed by a number of our sister 
circuits, and although the government does not directly ad-
vance it in this case, it is necessarily raised by the nature of 
the appeal.  By failing to advance it explicitly, we could 
perhaps construe the government's brief as having waived the 
waiver theory argument, but we will reach the issue because 
it is squarely presented by this case and was relied upon by 
the trial court.  See, e.g., United States Nat'l Bank of Or. v. 
Independent Ins. Agents of Am., Inc., 508 U.S. 439, 445-49 
(1993) (holding that an appellate court has discretion to 
consider an issue not argued by the parties).  As the Su-
preme Court stated in Kamen v. Kemper Financial Services, 
Inc., 500 U.S. 90, 99 (1991), "[w]hen an issue or claim is 
properly before the court, the court is not limited to the 
particular legal theories advanced by the parties, but rather 
retains the independent power to identify and apply the 
proper construction of governing law."  Moreover, we do not 
deem it unfair to the appellant to rely on this unargued 
theory.  The arguments made by the government, while not 
squarely addressing the question in "waiver" terms, fairly 
noticed the application of the theory, and the authorities cited 
by the two parties clearly evidence an awareness of it.

                            B. Waiver

     The premise of the waiver theory is simple:  Upon entering 
into a stipulation on an element, a defendant waives his right 
to put the government to its proof of that element.  A 
stipulation "constitutes '[a]n express waiver made ... prepa-
ratory to trial by the party or his attorney conceding for the 
purposes of trial the truth of some alleged fact ... thereafter 
to be taken for granted;  so that the one party need offer no 
evidence to prove it and the other is not allowed to disprove 
it....' "  Vander Linden v. Hodges, 193 F.3d 268, 279 (4th 
Cir. 1999) (quoting 9 Wigmore on Evidence s 2588, at 821 
(Chadbourn rev. 1981)).  Because a defendant will often 
stipulate to a prior conviction to keep the government from 
introducing prejudicial details about prior crimes, see Old 
Chief v. United States, 519 U.S. 172, 174 (1997), a number of 
cases have discussed the effect of a stipulation to elements of 
a crime.

     It is well settled that a defendant, by entering into a 
stipulation, waives his right to assert the government's duty 
to present evidence to the jury on the stipulated element.  
See United States v. Meade, 175 F.3d 215, 223 (1st Cir. 1999);  
United States v. Melina, 101 F.3d 567, 572 (8th Cir. 1996);  
United States v. Mason, 85 F.3d 471, 472 (10th Cir. 1996);  
United States v. Keck, 773 F.2d 759, 769-70 (7th Cir. 1985);  
United States v. Houston, 547 F.2d 104, 107 (9th Cir. 1976) 
(per curiam);  see also Vander Linden, 193 F.3d at 279;  
Zuchowicz v. United States, 140 F.3d 381, 392 (2d Cir. 1998);  
Alamo v. Del Rosario, 98 F.2d 328, 330 (D.C. Cir. 1938);  9 
Wigmore on Evidence s 2591, at 824 (Chadbourn rev. 1981).  
The only possible point of contention is whether a defendant 
can contest the government's failure to read the stipulation 
itself to the trier of fact.  We conclude that a defendant 
cannot.

     In two cases directly on point, the Fifth and Eleventh 
Circuits have held that a stipulation waives the government's 
burden to introduce evidence on that stipulation, including a 
reading of the stipulation itself:  United States v. Hardin, 139 
F.3d 813, 816 (11th Cir.), cert. denied, 119 S. Ct. 225 (1998), 

and United States v. Branch, 46 F.3d 440, 442 (5th Cir. 1995). 
Those cases closely resemble the case we consider today.

     In Hardin, the defendant, like Harrison, was charged with 
violating s 922(g), and stipulated to a prior conviction.  De-
spite reference to the stipulation during voir dire and argu-
ments, the stipulation was never read to the jury.  See 139 
F.2d at 814.  The court concluded that "[the defendant] 
waived his right to have the government produce evidence of 
his felon status, including the stipulation itself" and thus had 
"no legal or equitable basis to contest the government's 
mistake."  Id. at 816-17.

     The Fifth Circuit reached the same result in Branch.  The 
defendant was convicted of bank fraud.  He had stipulated 
that a number of the financial institutions involved were 
federally insured, a necessary element of the crime;  but the 
stipulation was never published to the jury.  The court of 
appeals affirmed on waiver grounds:  "Once a stipulation is 
entered, even in a criminal case, the government is relieved of 
its burden to prove the fact which has been stipulated by the 
parties.  Appellant ... cannot now claim that the government 
failed to offer evidence on an element to which he confessed."  
Branch, 46 F.3d at 442 (citing United States v. Harper, 460 
F.2d 705, 707 (5th Cir. 1972), and Poole v. United States, 832 
F.2d 561, 565 (11th Cir. 1987)).

     Two cases cited by appellant that appear at first glance to 
be at odds with Hardin and Branch are, upon further exami-
nation, either reconcilable or unpersuasive.  First, in United 
States v. James, 987 F.2d 648 (9th Cir. 1993), the Ninth 
Circuit reversed a conviction for the complete failure to 
introduce evidence on a stipulated element of the crime.  The 
record showed that the parties had agreed to a stipulation on 
an aspect of the case, but the stipulation was not mentioned 
to the jury nor placed in the record.  The court on appeal 
could not, therefore, have inferred that the stipulation was 
sufficient to satisfy the element.  See id. at 650-51.  Although 
the court further noted that "the stipulation was never en-
tered into evidence or read to the jury" so that there was "no 
fact in evidence that the jury could take as proved," id. at 

651, it is not clear to us exactly what distinction the court 
meant to draw with this statement.  Under the facts of that 
case it did not matter because the stipulation was not avail-
able to review on appeal.

     Second, in United States v. Muse, 83 F.3d 672 (4th Cir. 
1996), the court's opinion includes language that appears to 
require that a stipulation be read to the jury, but that 
language is dicta.  In general, the Muse court spoke approv-
ingly of stipulations.  But it also said that a stipulation 
"waives the requirement that the government produce evi-
dence (other than the stipulation itself) to establish the facts 
stipulated to beyond a reasonable doubt."  Id. at 678 (empha-
sis added) (citing United States v. Clark, 993 F.2d 402, 406 
(4th Cir. 1993)).  Arguably, the italicized phrase contemplates 
a formal reading to the jury of all necessary stipulations.  
But that issue was not before the court.  The stipulation was 
read aloud in Muse (and in the case it cited for support), see 
id. at 678;  the actual issue was the propriety of a jury 
instruction.  See id. at 677.  Therefore, while the Muse court 
accurately described normal trial practice to include the 
reading of stipulations, it had no occasion to consider the 
situation before us today.  See Hardin, 139 F.3d at 817 
(holding that references to reading stipulations in Muse are 
dicta);  see also United States v. Jackson, 124 F.3d 607, 616-
17 & n.8 (4th Cir. 1997) (questioning the validity of Muse).

     We previously commented on the waiver theory in United 
States v. Gilliam, 167 F.3d 628 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 119 
S. Ct. 2060 and 120 S. Ct. 118 (1999).  In Gilliam, a defen-
dant charged under s 922(g) did not concede the existence of 
a prior conviction.  Although the prosecutor told the trial 
court he had a certified copy of a conviction, it was never 
offered into evidence.  We held, not surprisingly, that the 
defendant did not "essentially stipulate" to the conviction 
through his silence.  Id. at 639.  Although there was no 
stipulation involved in Gilliam, we noted that the government 
could have met its burden of offering into evidence proof of 
every element of the charged offense by obtaining a stipula-
tion or "a waiver by the defendant of his right to put the 
government to its proof...."  Id.  We speculated that, in 

addition, the stipulation might need to be formally entered 
into evidence.  See id. (quoting James, 987 F.2d at 651).  But 
as the waiver issue was not presented by the facts, and where 
no evidence of a prior conviction had been presented to the 
jury, we concluded that the s 922(g) conviction must be 
reversed.  See id. at 640.

     Harrison asserts that the government needed to introduce 
the stipulations into evidence, relying, in part, on Gilliam.  
He contends that his stipulations "did not waive his right to 
put the prosecution to its burden of proof of every element of 
the crime."  Thus, he argues that he may contest the failure 
to introduce the stipulations themselves as evidence.  Harri-
son acknowledges that Hardin and Branch are in conflict 
with his claim, but he fails to present a meaningful method of 
distinguishing those cases.

     The government's brief is confused on the applicability of 
waiver to this case, misreading Gilliam to suggest that our 
circuit would require necessary stipulations to be read despite 
Gilliam's careful neutrality.  For that reason, the govern-
ment's brief does not directly advance the applicability of 
waiver, although it discusses the theory.  Of course, agree-
ment or stipulation by parties as to the state of the law does 
not bind us.  See, e.g., Case v. Los Angeles Lumber Products 
Co., 308 U.S. 106, 114 (1939);  NLRB Union, Local 6 v. 
FLRA, 842 F.2d 483, 485 n.6 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

     We conclude that there is little to be gained from holding 
that a stipulation, which unarguably waives a defendant's 
right to require the government to produce any evidence 
regarding that stipulation, nevertheless fails to waive the 
defendant's right to require that stipulation to be read to the 
jury.  Surely, the government's failure formally to read stipu-
lations is not "wise trial practice."  Hardin, 139 F.3d at 817.  
Even if a defendant cannot challenge that error, the potential 
for adverse consequences for the prosecution is great:  the 
jury may become confused and acquit a defendant for lack of 
proof on a stipulated element, see id., and a complete failure 
to enter the stipulations into the record at all will likely be 
fatal, see James, 987 F.2d at 650-51.  Publishing stipulations 

to the jury or moving to reopen upon an inadvertent failure to 
do so is the proper course of action, one which produces a 
complete record.  However, nothing in either law or logic 
compels us to reverse a conviction when the defendant enters 
into a stipulation on an element and then seeks a windfall 
from the government's failure to formally read the stipulation 
to the jury.

     Therefore, we join the Fifth and Eleventh Circuits and hold 
that a defendant who stipulates to an element of an offense 
waives his right to have the government put on evidence to 
prove that element.  Specifically, we hold that when Harrison 
entered into the stipulations that the interstate commerce and 
prior conviction elements of the s 922(g) charge were pres-
ent, he waived his right to challenge the sufficiency of the 
evidence on those elements, even though the government 
failed to introduce any evidence on those elements.  This 
result retains a primary benefit of this type of stipulation:  
when the element is a prior conviction, the defendant is 
benefitted because potentially prejudicial facts about the prior 
conviction will not be admitted.  See Old Chief, 519 U.S. at 
185;  Hardin, 139 F.3d at 817;  Muse, 83 F.3d at 678.  Fur-
thermore, stipulations in general are helpful to both parties 
because they narrow the scope of the trial to the real issues in 
dispute.  See United States v. General Motors Corp., 518 
F.2d 420, 447 (D.C. Cir. 1975);  Zuchowicz, 140 F.3d at 392.

     Today's holding, in addition to not condoning the govern-
ment's conduct in this case, does not prevent a defendant 
from including explicit language that a stipulation shall only 
be valid if it is read to the jury.  We do not find any such 
requirement in the language of the stipulations in the record 
in this case.  In this respect, we are guided by the reasoning 
of the Supreme Court in New York v. Hill, 120 S. Ct. 659 
(2000).  In Hill, the defendant claimed that his agreement to 
a trial date outside the speedy trial period guaranteed by 
applicable law did not serve as a waiver of his speedy trial 
rights.  The Court disagreed, noting this would make waiver 
"turn on a hypertechnical distinction that should play no 
part."  Id. at 666.  Instead, the Court reasoned that defense 
counsel's act of accepting the proposed trial date was suffi-

cient to act as a waiver.  We similarly conclude that the 
stipulations in the instant matter were sufficient to waive the 
appellant's right to require the government to introduce any 
evidence on the stipulated elements, including the stipula-
tions.

                         III. Conclusion

     We conclude that defendant's stipulation to the interstate 
commerce and prior conviction elements of a s 922(g) charge 
waived his right to contest the government's failure to intro-
duce any evidence on those stipulations, including a failure to 
read those stipulations to the jury.  The stipulations were 
filed with the district court, the jury was made aware of them, 
and the jury found all of the elements to exist.  Accordingly, 
we affirm the judgment of the district court.2

__________
     2 Harrison also appeals two evidentiary rulings and further claims 
that the stipulations were not final.  We have examined these 
arguments and find them to be without merit.

                                                        