                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 25, 2002      Decided July 12, 2002 

                           No. 01-5220

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

              All Funds in Account Nos. 747.034/278,
                747.009/278, & 747.714/278 Banco 
                   Espanol de Credito, Spain, 
                             Appellee

                 Nancy Marlene Vasquez-Martinez, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (97cv02436)

     Raymond A. Connell argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellant.

     Laurel Loomis, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause and filed the brief for appellee.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson, and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  This is an appeal from the 
judgment of the district court in favor of the United States in 
a civil forfeiture action.  The government brought the action 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 1355 and 21 U.S.C. s 881 against 
$4.6 million on deposit at the Banco Espanol de Credito in 
Madrid, Spain.  The claimant, Nancy Marlene Vasquez- 
Martinez, intervened and argued that the court had no juris-
diction because the property was outside the court's territori-
al jurisdiction and because the five-year statute of limitations 
had run.  See 19 U.S.C. s 1621.

     Vasquez is the wife of Juan Ramon Matta, the leader and 
organizer of a crime ring that smuggled massive quantities of 
cocaine into the United States in the 1980s.  See, e.g., United 
States v. Matta-Ballestreros, No. 91-50165, 1995 WL 746007 
(9th Cir. Dec. 15, 1995) (per curiam).  Matta is currently 
imprisoned in a federal penitentiary.  The $4.6 million, con-
tained in three accounts at the Banco Espanol, is derived 
from Matta's criminal operations.  See United States v. All 
Funds in Account Nos. 747.034/278, 747.009/278, & 
747.714/278 in Banco Espanol de Credito, Spain, 141 
F. Supp. 2d 548, 549 (D.D.C. 2001) [hereinafter Banco Espa-
nol].

     Civil forfeiture actions are brought against property, not 
people.  The owner of the property may intervene to protect 
his interest.  Forfeiture is an ancient penalty;  its origins can 
be traced to Biblical times.  See generally Calero-Toledo v. 
Pearson Yacht Leasing Co., 416 U.S. 663, 680-90 (1974), 
citing Exodus 21:28 ("If a bull gores a man or a woman to 
death, the bull must be stoned to death, and its meat must 
not be eaten.  But the owner of the bull will not be held 
responsible.").  Although the American common law did not 
adopt forfeiture as a penalty, early federal statutes authorized 
its imposition for violations of customs laws and revenue laws.  

Id. at 683.  In exercising in rem jurisdiction, the court has 
authority over the property (the res) and may adjudicate 
claims of ownership.  Traditionally, the property had to be 
present within the court's territorial jurisdiction.

     Even though the $4.6 million is outside of the United 
States, the district court determined it had "constructive 
possession" of the bank accounts because the record demon-
strated "a degree of cooperation" such that a forfeiture order 
from the court would likely be enforced by the Kingdom of 
Spain.  Banco Espanol, 141 F. Supp. 2d at 551.  The district 
court also held that the statute of limitations had been tolled.  
For one of the bank accounts, containing $985,000 and first 
discovered in 1992, the court held that the statute of limita-
tions did not begin to run until 1993, the effective date of the 
bilateral treaty between the United States and Spain provid-
ing for cooperation in the seizure of drug proceeds.  See 
Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, Nov. 
20, 1990, U.S.-Spain, 1730 U.N.T.S. 113;  Banco Espanol, 141 
F. Supp. 2d at 553-54.  The other two bank accounts were 
not discovered until 1999.  As to these accounts, the court 
ruled that the funds had been concealed.  Concealment tolls 
the running of the limitations period for civil forfeiture.  19 
U.S.C. s 1621(2).

     Congress declared that "no property right shall exist" in 
"all proceeds traceable" to illegal drug sales.  21 U.S.C. 
s 881(a)(6).  Both parties concede that the money at Banco 
Espanol was earned through illegal narcotics activity, and--if 
a United States court can order its forfeiture--then the 
money must be forfeit.  Vasquez claims that long-standing 
precedent requires the district court to have possession of the 
res before it may exercise in rem jurisdiction.  For instance, 
The Brig Ann, 13 U.S. (9 Cranch) 289, 291 (1815) (Story, J.), 
an admiralty case, held that in "order to institute and perfect 
proceedings in rem, it is necessary that the thing should be 
actually or constructively within the reach of the Court."  
See, e.g., La Vengeance, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 297 (1796).

     The forfeiture provisions for drug proceeds adopt the tradi-
tional requirements "for violations of the customs laws" but 

only "insofar as applicable and not inconsistent" with the drug 
forfeiture laws.  21 U.S.C. s 881(d).  To the Second Circuit, 
the traditional requirement that the property be present 
within the court's territorial jurisdiction applies in drug forfei-
ture cases, but this may be satisfied through the court's 
"constructive possession" of the property whenever the gov-
ernment has "demonstrated cooperation" such that the orders 
of a United States court will be carried into effect by foreign 
government officials.  United States v. All Funds on Deposit 
in any Accounts Maintained in the Names of Heriberto 
Castro Meza, 63 F.3d 148, 153-54 (2d Cir. 1995).  Following 
the Second Circuit's approach, the district court found that 
the "history of cooperation between authorities in the United 
States and Spain" gave it jurisdiction.  141 F. Supp. 2d at 
552.

     The general statute governing forfeiture actions states that 
"[u]nless otherwise provided by Act of Congress ... in cases 
of seizures on land the forfeiture may be enforced by a 
proceeding in libel which shall conform as near as may be to 
proceedings in admiralty."  28 U.S.C. s 2461(b).  If this were 
the only statute providing jurisdiction, we too would have 
little doubt that traditional rules of in rem jurisdiction devel-
oped under admiralty law would apply.  But in 1992, Con-
gress provided that "[w]henever property subject to forfei-
ture under the laws of the United States is located in a 
foreign country, or has been detained or seized pursuant to 
legal process or competent authority of a foreign government, 
an action or proceeding for forfeiture may be brought ... in 
the United States District court for the District of Columbia."  
28 U.S.C. s 1355(b)(2).

     The claimant argues that this statute merely provides 
venue in the district court, rather than jurisdiction over 
foreign assets.  Subsection (d) of the same statute, however, 
specifically refers to "[a]ny court with jurisdiction over a 
forfeiture action pursuant to subsection (b)...."  28 U.S.C. 
s 1355(d).  It would make little sense for Congress to provide 
venue in a district court if there were no means for that court 
to exercise jurisdiction.  The claimant answers that a foreign 
country might transfer the property to the District of Colum-

bia.  But this does not explain the statute's reference to 
property "located in a foreign country."  28 U.S.C. s 1355(b) 
(emphasis added).

     Senator D'Amato introduced S.1665, the Money Launder-
ing Improvements Act, containing the language eventually 
enacted as 28 U.S.C. s 1355(b).  His explanatory statement 
indicates that he, at least, meant to give the district courts 
jurisdiction over the forfeiture of assets located in foreign 
countries:

     Subsection (b)(2) addresses a problem that arises when-
     ever property subject to forfeiture under the laws of the 
     United States is located in a foreign country.  As men-
     tioned, under current law, it is probably no longer neces-
     sary to base in rem jurisdiction on the location of the 
     property if there have been sufficient contacts with the 
     district in which the suit is filed.  See United States v. 
     $10,000 in U.S. Currency, [860 F.2d 1511 (9th Cir. 1988)].  
     No statute, however, says this, and the issue has to be 
     repeatedly litigated whenever a foreign government is 
     willing to give effect to a forfeiture order issued by a 
     United States court and turn over seized property to the 
     United States if only the United States is able to obtain 
     such an order.
     
     Subsection (b)(2) resolves this problem by providing for 
     jurisdiction over such property in the United States 
     District Court for the District of Columbia, in the district 
     court for the district in which any of the acts giving rise 
     to the forfeiture occurred, or in any other district where 
     venue would be appropriate under a venue-for-forfeiture 
     statute.
     
                             *  *  *

137 Cong. Rec. 21,995, 21,998 (1991).

     Although the Second Circuit in Meza, 63 F.3d at 152, held 
that jurisdiction was not available under 28 U.S.C. s 1355 and 
therefore applied the traditional rules of admiralty, a year 
later the Second Circuit concluded that the 1992 amendments 
"provide district courts with in rem jurisdiction over a res 

located in a foreign country."  United States v. Certain 
Funds Located at the Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking 
Corp., 96 F.3d 20, 22 (2d Cir. 1996) [hereinafter Hong Kong 
Banking].  The court of appeals went on to hold that the 
jurisdictional amendments could be applied retroactively to 
forfeiture actions begun before their enactment.  Id.

     We find ourselves in agreement with Hong Kong Banking.  
Congress intended the District Court for the District of 
Columbia, among others, to have jurisdiction to order the 
forfeiture of property located in foreign countries.  Unless 
the Constitution commands otherwise-and the claimant has 
raised no constitutional objections at all-the statute must be 
enforced.*  It may well be that a forfeiture order of a United 
States court will not have its full effect until the res--the 
money--is brought within the territory of the United States.  
Cf. R.M.S. Titanic, Inc. v. Haver, 171 F.3d 943, 964-66 (4th 
Cir. 1999).  Spain may be expected to live up to its treaty 
obligations, even if it would not otherwise be required to 
effectuate the judgments of United States courts.  But 
Spain's compliance and cooperation determines only the effec-
tiveness of the forfeiture orders of the district courts, not 
their jurisdiction to issue those orders.

     The remaining issue is whether the action was brought 
within the limitations period.  The general statute of limita-
tions for forfeiture actions in admiralty, 21 U.S.C. s 1621, 
applies to the forfeiture of drug proceeds.  See United States 
v. James Daniel Good Real Property, 510 U.S. 43, 63 (1993).  
Under that provision, the limitations period is five years from 
discovery of the offense.  The statute is tolled during "any 
concealment or absence of the property," id. We conclude 

__________
     * On appeal, Vasquez also argued that the district court lacked 
jurisdiction because Congress did not provide for service of process 
in foreign countries.  But the district court issued a warrant for 
arrest in rem, and a Spanish court restrained the funds pursuant to 
a request from the Spanish government.  And Vasquez had notice 
and an opportunity to be heard in this forfeiture proceeding, so we 
need not consider whether her status as a foreign national outside 
the United States precludes any constitutional claims.

that the statute of limitations had not run on any of the 
accounts in Spain, although for reasons different than those 
given by the district court.  The $4.6 million was outside the 
United States.  This action therefore commenced during the 
"absence of the property."  The claimant argues that proper-
ty cannot be absent unless it was first in this country and 
then removed.  There is no particular reason, at least none 
the claimant has offered, for stretching the word "absence" to 
mean something other than not present.  If Congress had 
meant what the claimant suggests, we would expect some 
reference in the statute to the act of removal, but there is 
none.  When we ask why Congress would have wanted to toll 
the limitations period for drug profits removed from this 
country but not for payments deposited directly in foreign 
accounts, no sensible answer comes to mind.  Nor do we 
believe property in a foreign country is no longer absent from 
the United States simply because a foreign government is 
willing to assist a forfeiture action seeking its return.  In 
short, when property is not here it is absent.  We recognize 
that our reading tolls the running of the limitations period 
indefinitely for bringing actions against drug proceeds located 
in foreign countries.  But given the uncertainties of foreign 
cooperation, Congress may not have wanted to force the 
government to bring forfeiture proceedings within five years 
to recover such property.  Because the limitations period was 
tolled on all three accounts in Spain, we do not reach the 
district court's holding that two of the accounts were also 
concealed.

                                                                 Affirmed.

                      