                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 20, 2000       Decided May 12, 2000 

                           No. 99-7169

                         Juanita White, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                Aetna Life Insurance Company and 
                      Aetna US Healthcare, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv02676)

     David R. Levinson argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Anthony W. Kraus argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellees.

     Before:  Sentelle, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Suffering from severe arthritis and 
unable to perform her job as a nurse, appellant applied for 
long-term disability benefits pursuant to a plan funded and 
administered by appellee Aetna Life Insurance Company.  
Through a computer-generated form letter, Aetna informed 
appellant that it had denied her claim because of a "lack of 
sufficient clinical information."  The denial notice also in-
formed appellant that she had to submit any appeal to Aetna 
within sixty days, but appellant's attorney filed her appeal 
three months late.  Citing this untimeliness, Aetna refused to 
consider the appeal and reaffirmed its denial of long-term 
disability benefits.  Because we find that Aetna violated the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act and its imple-
menting regulations by failing to inform appellant of an 
important reason for denying her claim, its denial notice did 
not trigger the sixty-day appeal deadline.  We therefore 
reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment for 
Aetna and remand with instructions to direct Aetna to consid-
er the merits of appellant's appeal.

                                I

     The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 
U.S.C. ss 1001-1461, prescribes requirements for the notice 
that insurers must give claimants when denying their claims:

     [E]very employee benefit plan shall--
     
     (1) provide adequate notice in writing to any participant 
     or beneficiary whose claims for benefits under the plan 
     has been denied, setting forth the specific reasons for 
     such denial, written in a manner calculated to be under-
     stood by the participant, and
     
     (2) afford a reasonable opportunity to any participant 
     whose claim for benefits has been denied for a full and 
     fair review by the appropriate named fiduciary of the 
     decision denying the claim.
     
Id. s 1133.  Department of Labor regulations elaborate on 
the information that insurance companies must provide:

     [The insurance company] shall provide to every claimant 
     who is denied a claim for benefits written notice setting 
     forth in a manner calculated to be understood by the 
     claimant:
     
     (1) The specific reason or reasons for the denial;
     
     (2) Specific reference to pertinent plan provisions on 
     which the denial is based;
     
     (3) A description of any additional material or informa-
     tion necessary for the claimant to perfect the claim and 
     an explanation of why such material or information is 
     necessary; and
     
     (4) Appropriate information as to the steps to be taken if 
     the participant or beneficiary wishes to submit his or her 
     claim for review.
     
29 C.F.R. s 2560.503-1(f).

     Along with our sister circuits, we have adopted the "sub-
stantial compliance" test to determine whether denial notices 
comply with section 1133 and the regulation.  See Heller v. 
Fortis Benefits Ins. Co., 142 F.3d 487, 493 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  
Technical noncompliance will be excused as long as the notice 
substantially complies with the statute and regulation.  See 
id.  In assessing whether a notice substantially complies, we 
consider not just the notice itself, but all communications 
between the insurance company and the claimant.  See id.  
Courts make the substantial compliance determination on a 
case by case basis, assessing the information provided by the 
insurer in the context of the beneficiary's claim.  See, e.g., 
Kinkead v. Southwestern Bell Corp., 111 F.3d 67, 69 (8th Cir. 
1997);  Donato v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 19 F.3d 375, 382 
(7th Cir. 1992).  Heller is typical:

     [A]lthough the initial letter from [the insurer] informing 
     [the claimant] of the denial of her disability benefits did 
     not conform to the requirements of the regulations, "the 
     procedures, when viewed in light of the myriad communi-
     
     cations between claimant, her counsel and the insurer, 
     [appear] sufficient to meet the purposes of Section 1133 
     in insuring that the claimant understood the reasons for 
     the denial of [her benefits] as well as her right to review 
     of the decision."
     
142 F.3d at 493 (quoting Kent v. United Omaha Life Ins. Co., 
96 F.3d 803, 807 (6th Cir. 1996)).

     With this background in mind, we turn to the facts of this 
case.  A registered nurse, appellant Juanita White worked for 
the Washington Hospital Center for twenty-two years.  Se-
vere pain in the right hip and knees caused by worsening 
arthritis forced her to stop working in June 1996.

     White applied for short-term disability benefits under 
Washington Hospital Center's Group Benefits Plan.  Funded 
by the hospital center, the short-term disability plan was 
administered by appellee Aetna Life Insurance Company.  
Aetna certified White as disabled, and White received short-
term disability benefits through December 1996.

     Aetna based its short-term disability certification on a 
report by a physician in the office of Dr. C. Anderson Engh, 
an orthopedic surgeon.  According to that report, a physical 
examination of White conducted in August 1996 indicated 
end-stage degenerative osteoarthritis of the right hip and 
knees.  The examining physician concluded that White was 
"unable to do a job that required standing at this time" and 
recommended hip replacement surgery.

     Informed in December 1996 that her short-term disability 
benefits would run out at the end of the month, White applied 
for long-term benefits under a Washington Hospital Center 
plan both administered and funded by Aetna.  White submit-
ted a leave of absence certificate from Dr. Engh in support of 
her application.  In a section of the form titled "Serious 
Health Condition," Dr. Engh checked "chronic condition re-
quiring treatments."  In a handwritten comment, he de-
scribed his diagnosis as "osteoarthritis," adding that White 
would require hip replacement surgery.  In a section titled 
"Work Schedule," Dr. Engh checked "Intermittent/Reduced 
Schedule."

     On January 8, 1997, Aetna claims representative Donna 
Hucks informed White that her claim had been denied.  Ac-
cording to White, Hucks gave three reasons for the denial:  
Hucks "had not been able to contact White's orthopedic 
surgeon over a three day period, [ ] White's internist had 
refused to confirm that White was disabled to work, and [ ] 
White should have already undergone hip replacement sur-
gery."  White asked Hucks for written confirmation of the 
denial, but received none.

     By letter dated February 26, 1997, White's attorney ad-
vised Aetna that the hip replacement surgery was scheduled 
for April 1 and asked that her claim be reconsidered.  The 
attorney attached two documents:  a copy of Dr. Engh's 
certificate and the more detailed report that Dr. Engh's office 
had prepared in August.

     Aetna sent White a written denial dated March 13, 1997.  A 
computer-generated form, the denial stated:  "Your request 
for an extension of your period of disability has been re-
viewed by an Aetna medical director.  Due to the lack of 
sufficient clinical information to support your request, your 
period of disability could not be recertified."  The back of the 
form described the procedure for appealing the denial:

     You are entitled to a review of this Certification Decision 
     if you do not agree.  To obtain a review, you or your 
     representative should submit a written request.  Your 
     written request should include the Sponsor (e.g., Em-
     ployer), your name, Social Security Number and other 
     identifying information shown on the front of this notice, 
     and the issue, comments or additional medical informa-
     tion you would like to have considered.  You may also 
     ask for copies of documents pertinent to your request.
     
     The written request must contain the information de-
     scribed above and must be mailed for delivery within 60 
     days following receipt of this notice.
     
     At about the same time Aetna sent the notice, Hucks called 
White's attorney to advise him of the written denial.  She 
explained that one of the reasons for the denial was the lapse 

in time between the August physical examination and the 
April surgery.  The attorney asked her to send him a copy of 
the notice, but she refused.  White recalls receiving the 
notice and forwarding a copy to the attorney before her April 
1 surgery.  The attorney recalls receiving the notice in early 
May, attributing the delay to the fact that he had moved his 
office.

     Almost three months after the sixty-day appeal deadline, 
White's attorney formally appealed the denial of benefits in a 
letter addressed to Hucks dated August 12, 1997.  The letter 
stated:  "I apologize for my delay in providing this material, 
but Aetna's failure to send a copy of its last determination to 
me caused a significant delay to my handling of this matter."  
As to the merits of White's claim, the letter explained:  "You 
had advised me in a telephone conversation that you were 
concerned about the lapse of time between Dr. Engh's August 
28, 1996 exam leading to his recommendation for hip surgery 
and the actual surgery on April 1, 1997.  I asked Dr. Costecu 
[White's internist] to address the medical reasons for the 
timing of the operation."  Attached was a letter from Dr. 
Costecu explaining that White's "blood pressure was not 
sufficiently under control to clear her for surgery" before 
April.  Dr. Costecu added that in her opinion, White was 
disabled.  Also attached was an updated medical report from 
Dr. Engh:  "The severity of her arthritis is such that she is 
completely disabled and unable to perform her normal work.  
I do not feel that she will be at any point in the future ever 
able to perform her work as an RN on a Geriatric Inpatient 
Ward of an acute care hospital."  Aetna denied White's 
request for review, explaining that "the request is well be-
yond the 60 day appeal period."

     White filed suit in the United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia, challenging Aetna's refusal to consider 
her appeal and claiming that Aetna's initial denial notice 
failed to comply substantially with ERISA and its regulations.  
Granting summary judgment for Aetna, the district court 
found that Aetna's March 13 denial notice, together with 
Hucks' oral communications with White and her attorney, 
substantially complied with ERISA and its regulations.  

White v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., No. 97-2676, Mem. Op. (D.D.C. 
Aug. 10, 1999).  The district court thus found no basis for 
excusing White's late appeal.  We review the district court's 
order de novo.  See, e.g., Cones v. Shalala, 199 F.3d 512, 516 
(D.C. Cir. 2000).

                                II

     If this case turned on whether White's lawyer had a 
legitimate reason for failing to file the appeal on time, Aetna 
would win easily.  The lawyer blames the delay on Hucks for 
failing to send him a copy of the March 13 denial notice (the 
regulations do not require her to have done so), on Aetna for 
sending the notice to White just before she went into the 
hospital, and on the post office for forwarding the notice too 
slowly.  Yet notwithstanding these problems, the record 
shows that Hucks told the lawyer that she was sending the 
notice to White and that White forwarded it to him before her 
surgery.  The lawyer, moreover, never claims that he did not 
receive the notice until after the appeal deadline.  Instead, he 
tells us that he would have filed earlier than August 12 if only 
Aetna had given more specific reasons for denying the claim.  
Perhaps.  But nothing prevented the lawyer from either 
filing a cautionary notice of appeal or seeking an extension of 
time from Aetna.

     From these facts, we can draw but one conclusion:  the 
attorney failed to perform a primary obligation to his client--
filing a timely notice of appeal.  Fortunately for White, this 
case is not so simple.  If Aetna's March 13 denial notice, 
supplemented by Hucks' conversations with White and the 
lawyer, failed to comply substantially with section 1133 and 
its implementing regulations, then the sixty-day appeal period 
would not have begun to run, and the lawyer's failure to file a 
timely appeal could not have served as a legitimate basis for 
Aetna's refusal to consider the claim.  See Counts v. Ameri-
can General Life and Accident Ins. Co., 111 F.3d 105, 108 
(11th Cir. 1997) ("The consequence of an inadequate benefits 
termination letter is that the normal time limits for adminis-
trative appeal may not be enforced against the claimant.").  

We therefore turn to the question of Aetna's substantial 
compliance.

     The March 13 notice and Hucks' various conversations with 
White and the attorney identified three reasons for denying 
White's claim:  Hucks could not reach Dr. Engh (January 8 
phone call with White);  White failed to provide "sufficient 
clinical information" (March 13 denial notice);  and White had 
offered no reason for the lapse in time between the August 
1996 examination and the April 1997 surgery (January 8 
phone call with White and March phone call with White's 
attorney).  White's complaint alleges that Hucks gave a 
fourth reason:  that Dr. Costecu, White's internist, declined to 
certify her as disabled.  But because Aetna's answer denies 
that particular allegation and because neither party presses it 
here, we need not consider it.

     Aetna claims that the three reasons given in the March 13 
notice and in Hucks' various conversations satisfied its obli-
gation to provide "[t]he specific reason or reasons for the 
denial."  29 C.F.R. s 2560.503-1(f)(1).  White argues that we 
can only consider the particular reason that Aetna communi-
cated in writing--that she failed to provide "sufficient clinical 
information"--but Heller holds that oral communications 
must also be considered in determining substantial compli-
ance.  Heller, 142 F.3d at 493.

     Had the three reasons been the only basis for denying 
White's claim, we think Aetna probably would have substan-
tially complied with both ERISA and the underlying regula-
tion.  Even if, as White argues, "lack of sufficient clinical 
information" is too general to be considered "specific" within 
the meaning of the statute, the third reason--the lapse of 
time between diagnosis and surgery--is not only specific, but 
according to Aetna's brief, the primary reason for having 
denied the claim.  To be sure, Aetna failed to provide a 
"[s]pecific reference to pertinent plan provisions on which the 
denial is based," as required by subparagraph two of the 
regulation, and "[a] description of any additional material or 
information necessary for the claimant to perfect the claim 

and an explanation of why such material or information is 
necessary," as required by subparagraph three 29 C.F.R. 
s 2560.503-1(f)(2), (3).  But where, as here, the reason for 
denial has no connection to any particular plan provision, 
failure to reference a specific provision seems just the type of 
technical noncompliance that the substantial compliance test 
excuses.  While failure to describe additional material needed 
to perfect the claim might otherwise have represented a 
significant omission, in this case Aetna's stated reason for 
denial made clear precisely the information White needed to 
provide:  an explanation of the delay between the August 
examination and the April surgery.  We thus think that were 
this the entire story, Aetna's communications would have 
substantially complied with ERISA and the regulation.  The 
communications were " 'sufficient to meet the purposes of 
Section 1133 in insuring that the claimant understood the 
reasons for the denial of [her benefits].' "  Heller, 142 F.3d at 
493 (quoting Kent, 96 F.3d at 807).

     There is more to this case, however.  In addition to the 
three reasons mentioned in the March 13 denial notice and 
Hucks' phone calls, the record reveals that Aetna's denial 
rested on a fourth reason.  Aetna's statement of material 
facts as to which there is no genuine issue says this:  "Aetna's 
concern was compounded by the fact ... that Dr. Engh had 
refused to certify White as disabled...."  Scouring the rec-
ord, we can find no evidence that Aetna ever communicated 
this reason to either White or her lawyer.  At oral argument, 
Aetna's counsel conceded that he too knew of no such evi-
dence.

     Aetna argues that, even given its failure to communicate its 
fourth reason, its notice and Hucks' communications with 
White and her lawyer substantially complied with the regula-
tions.  We disagree.  Not telling White that her claim had 
been denied in part because Dr. Engh had failed to certify 
her as disabled amounts to a major omission.  Based on the 
information Aetna conveyed through the March 13 notice and 
Hucks' phone calls, neither White nor her attorney had any 
way of knowing that to perfect the claim, White needed to get 
Dr. Engh to certify her as disabled.  Indeed, Aetna's counsel 
conceded at oral argument that even if White had submitted 

documentation responding to Aetna's stated reasons for deny-
ing her claim, Aetna likely would not have approved the claim 
absent a disability certification by Dr. Engh.  Put simply, 
Aetna failed to give White a "specific reason" for denying her 
claim and failed to tell her the "additional material or infor-
mation necessary ... to perfect the claim," hardly substantial 
compliance with the statute and regulation.  29 U.S.C. 
s 1133(1);  29 C.F.R. s 2560.503-1(f)(1), (3).

     Urging yet another justification for its refusal to consider 
White's claim, Aetna argues that White failed to show that 
she was prejudiced by the notice's deficiencies, i.e., that the 
deficiencies caused her to file an untimely appeal.  Aetna 
wants not just one, but two escape hatches from ERISA's 
requirements:  one for insubstantial omissions and another for 
omissions that are not prejudicial.  We think one is enough.

     To begin with, we are not at all sure how Aetna's prejudice 
defense can be reconciled with Heller.  Indeed, under Aetna's 
theory, we would have no need at all for a substantial 
compliance test because no deficiency--substantial or other-
wise--would relieve a claimant of the obligation to appeal 
within sixty days unless the deficiency actually caused the 
claimant to miss the deadline.  The following notice would 
probably be acceptable:  "Please be advised that your claim 
for disability benefits is denied.  You have sixty days to 
appeal."  Insurers would not have to include any specific 
reason for the rejection (subparagraph one of the regulation), 
nor give citations to relevant plan provisions (subparagraph 
two), nor describe additional information needed to perfect 
the claim (subparagraph three).  As we understand Aetna's 
argument, as long as the notice describes how and when to 
appeal (subparagraph four), the absence of other information 
required by the regulation likely would not prejudice a claim-
ant's ability to file a timely appeal.  No doubt this would have 
been one way to run a claims procedure.  But Congress and 
the Labor Department chose a different procedure, one that 
requires insurance companies to give claimants specific rea-
sons for denying benefits, to cite relevant plan provisions, to 
specify additional information needed, and to describe how to 

appeal.  Heller, moreover, requires substantial compliance 
with these obligations.

     The cases Aetna relies on to support its prejudice test, see, 
e.g., Ellis v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 126 F.3d 228, 238 (4th 
Cir. 1997);  Recupero v. New England Tel. and Tel. Co., 118 
F.3d 820, 840 (1st Cir. 1997), differ from this case in a critical 
respect.  All involved challenges to initial denial notices 
where insurers thereafter had evaluated claimants' appeals on 
the merits;  here Aetna failed even to consider the merits of 
White's appeal.  Where claimants receive "a full and fair 
review ... of the decision denying the claim," 29 U.S.C. 
s 1133(2), perhaps it does make sense to require them to 
show that they were in fact prejudiced by deficiencies in the 
initial denial notice before restarting the review process.  
Otherwise, as the Sixth Circuit pointed out, "remand ... 
would represent a useless formality."  Kent, 96 F.3d at 807.  
Not so here.  White's claim may well have merit:  both Dr. 
Engh and White's internist found her to be totally disabled.  
Under these circumstances, remand would hardly be a use-
less formality.

     Aetna's remaining arguments require little discussion.  Cit-
ing Kinkead v. Southwestern Bell Corp., 111 F.3d 67 (8th Cir. 
1997), Aetna claims that an initial denial notice "need only 
state a general reason for the claim denial and explain the 
procedure for appeal to trigger the requirements of proper 
exhaustion of the appeals process";  only final denial notices, 
Aetna argues, need be specific.  Aetna's reliance on Kinkead 
is misplaced.  Kinkead considered whether a notice informing 
the claimant that "medical evidence does not substantiate you 
were disabled" satisfied the insurance company's obligation 
under the regulation to provide the "specific reason."  Id. at 
69.  In this case, Aetna failed entirely to communicate to 
White an important reason for denying her claim.  So even if 
correct, Kinkead has nothing at all to do with this case.

     Aetna argues that failure to communicate an important 
reason for denying a claim has no consequence beyond estop-
ping the insurer from relying on that reason in considering a 
claimant's appeal.  Because Aetna did not raise this claim 

until oral argument, however, we need not address it.  See, 
e.g., Galvan v. Federal Prison Industries, Inc., 199 F.3d 461, 
468 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     We conclude with a final observation.  As this case well 
demonstrates, although insurance companies are protected by 
Heller's substantial compliance test, they could avoid expen-
sive litigation for themselves and claimants and conserve 
judicial resources by strictly complying with the Labor De-
partment's regulations.  In view of Heller and the decision we 
reach today, it would be in the best interest of all concerned 
for insurers to disclose in writing all information required by 
the regulations.

                               III

     For all of these reasons, Aetna's March 13 notice, together 
with Hucks' conversations with both White and her attorney, 
did not substantially comply with ERISA and its regulations.  
Because the sixty-day appeal deadline thus never began to 
run, we reverse the district court's grant of summary judg-
ment and remand with instructions to direct Aetna to consid-
er the merits of White's appeal.

                                                      So ordered.

                            