                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 9, 2002    Decided January 17, 2003 

                           No. 01-1407

                Exxon Mobil Corporation, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

     Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                             01-1415

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Thomas J. Eastment argued the cause for petitioners 
Exxon Mobil Corporation, et al.  With him on the briefs were 

Douglas W. Rasch, Bruce A. Connell, Joseph E. Mixon and 
Charles J. McClees, Jr.  Linda L. Geoghegan entered an 
appearance.

     Gregory Grady argued the cause for petitioner Transconti-
nental Gas Pipe Line Corporation.  With him on the briefs 
were Michael J. Thompson and David A. Glenn.

     Timm L. Abendroth, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Kenneth T. Maloney argued the cause for intervenors 
KeySpan, et al.  With him on the brief were James H. Byrd 
and Steven J. Kalish.  Edward B. Myers entered an appear-
ance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Rogers and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line 
Corporation has tried for nearly ten years to convince the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to allow it to adopt a 
pricing system called "firm to the wellhead" that many of its 
competitors employ.  In this case, Transco and a group of 
natural gas producers that use its pipeline petition for review 
of FERC's latest rejection of Transco's firm transportation 
proposals.  Because the Commission failed to reconcile its 
decision here with an earlier opinion on a related matter, we 
grant the petition and remand for further proceedings.

                                I.

     Like so much of this circuit's FERC business, this case has 
its roots in the Commission's 1992 restructuring of the natu-
ral gas industry under its landmark Order No. 636 to create a 
"national gas market" with "head-to-head, gas-on-gas compe-
tition."  Pipeline Service Obligations and Revisions to Regu-

lations Governing Self-Implementing Transportation;  and 
Regulation of Natural Gas Pipelines After Partial Wellhead 
Decontrol, [Regs. Preambles 1991-1996] FERC Stats. & 
Regs. (CCH) p 30,939, at 30,434 (1992), on reh'g, Order No. 
636-A, [Regs. Preambles 1991-1996] FERC Stats. & Regs. 
(CCH) p 30,950 (1992), on reh'g, Order No. 636-B, 61 
F.E.R.C. p 61,272 (1992), reh'g denied, 62 F.E.R.C. p 61,007 
(1993), aff'd in part, United Distrib. Cos. v. FERC, 88 F.3d 
1105 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Order No. 636 made three changes 
relevant here.  First, it required interstate pipelines to pro-
vide local gas distributors that had contracts to purchase gas 
in downstream areas an opportunity to convert those entitle-
ments into rights to "firm transportation" (FT) service that 
could be used to deliver gas purchased from a variety of 
producers upstream.  Second, the order changed traditional 
FT pricing--which requires customers to pay both a reserva-
tion charge to preserve their priority capacity and a separate 
usage charge based on volumes actually shipped--by mandat-
ing that pipelines allocate all fixed costs to the reservation 
charge.  According to FERC, this "straight fixed variable" 
system would make pricing more transparent.  Finally, be-
cause most pipelines base their rates on a zone system, Order 
No. 636 increased transportation flexibility by requiring that 
where FT customers pay reservation charges to secure capac-
ity in any part of a zone, they must be given secondary rights 
to receive or deliver gas at other points within that zone, even 
if the locations are not specified in their contracts.

     Most interstate pipelines responded to Order No. 636 by 
offering their converting customers rights to firm transporta-
tion from producers' gathering facilities downstream to the 
delivery points specified in the customers' contracts.  This is 
called "firm-to-the-wellhead" (FTW) service, although techni-
cally it does not extend to individual wellheads.

     Transco chose not to adopt FTW service when it voluntari-
ly unbundled its sales and transportation service about a year 
before Order No. 636 was issued.  The company, which 
operates a pipeline running northeast from the Gulf of Mexico 
to New York City, carried unbundling one step further by 

breaking its transportation service into two distinct compo-
nents.  First, Transco's 1991 settlements with its local gas 
distributors, known as "FT conversion shippers," gave the 
shippers firm transportation rights from "pooling points" at 
certain compressor stations on Transco's main pipeline down-
stream to their designated delivery points.  Second, the 
agreements left service above the pooling points and on 
supply laterals to be contracted for separately under Tran-
sco's "interruptible transportation" (IT) service tariff.  Sub-
ject to a one-part volumetric price that includes both variable 
and fixed costs, IT service must give way to higher priority 
deliveries.  Because the FT conversion shippers and FERC 
were concerned about potential upstream disruptions, howev-
er, Transco specified that "IT feeder" shipments for delivery 
to FT conversion shippers would have higher priority than 
normal IT transmissions.  Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line 
Corp., 55 F.E.R.C. p 61,446 (1991), on reh'g, 57 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,345 (1991), on reh'g, 59 F.E.R.C. p 61,279 (1992), aff'd in 
part and remanded sub nom. Elizabethtown Gas Co. v. 
FERC, 10 F.3d 866 (D.C. Cir. 1993).

     Although the parties appear to have assumed during the 
negotiations that FT conversion shippers would contract sep-
arately with Transco for IT feeder service, the settlement 
agreements did not actually require them to do so.  In 
practice, producers such as Petitioners Exxon and the other 
so-called Indicated Shippers have contracted with Transco for 
IT feeder service to move their supplies to the pooling points.  
Thus, while local gas distributors pay nearly all fixed costs on 
competitor pipelines under FTW pricing systems, producers 
linked to Transco pay about $50 million per year in fixed costs 
under Transco's IT feeder rates.  By raising their commodity 
prices downstream, producers could pass those costs onto FT 
conversion shippers and other local gas distributors, but 
Transco and the Indicated Shippers assert that they are often 
forced to absorb the expense instead to ensure that their 
prices appear competitive with producers on other pipelines.  
According to Transco, this puts it at a competitive disadvan-
tage and, over the long term, may prompt producers to avoid 
connecting to its pipeline.

     FERC, however, has repeatedly rejected Transco's at-
tempts to adopt FTW pricing.  In 1993, it ruled that Order 
No. 636 did not require FTW pricing and declined to exercise 
its authority under section 5 of the Natural Gas Act (NGA), 
15 U.S.C. s 717d, to mandate such service.  Transcontinental 
Gas Pipe Line Corp., 63 F.E.R.C. p 61,194 (1993), on reh'g, 65 
F.E.R.C. p 61,023 (1993).  Transco then proposed a change to 
its tariff under NGA section 4, 15 U.S.C. s 717c, that would 
eliminate IT feeder service, give FT conversion shippers 
secondary rights to service on supply laterals, and increase 
their rates to cover the additional $50 million in fixed costs 
that had previously been paid by producers ("FTW propos-
al").  The Commission rejected this plan as well, concluding 
that it would abrogate the conversion shippers' existing con-
tracts and have anticompetitive effects.  Transcontinental 
Gas Pipe Line Corp., 72 F.E.R.C. p 63,003 (1995), modified 76 
F.E.R.C. p 61,021 (1996), on reh'g, 77 F.E.R.C. p 61,270 
(1996), on reh'g, 79 F.E.R.C. p 61,205 (1997).  The Indicated 
Shippers filed a petition for review of that decision before this 
court.

     While that petition was pending, FERC rejected still an-
other Transco proposal to replace IT feeder service with new 
contracts for "firm transportation-supply lateral" service to 
be offered to FT conversion shippers and other interested 
parties ("FTSL proposal").  Although the Commission found 
that change forbidden by neither the 1991 settlements nor the 
FT conversion shippers' firm service contracts, Transconti-
nental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 85 F.E.R.C. p 61,357 (1998), 
reh'g denied, 88 F.E.R.C. p 61,135 (1999), it concluded that 
Transco's proposed terms would violate its flexible receipt 
and delivery point policy under Order No. 636, Transconti-
nental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 86 F.E.R.C. p 61,175 (1999), 
reh'g denied, 88 F.E.R.C. p 61,135 (1999).  Shortly thereafter, 
we acted on the Indicated Shippers' petition for review and 
remanded the Commission's FTW decision for further expla-
nation.  Exxon Corp. v. FERC, 206 F.3d 47, 52-54 (D.C. Cir. 
2000).

     On remand, in the order at issue in this case, FERC again 
rejected Transco's FTW proposal.  Transcontinental Gas 

Pipe Line Corp., 95 F.E.R.C. p 61,322 (2001), on reh'g, 96 
F.E.R.C. p 61,142 (2001).  This time the Commission focused 
on two facts:  that the 1991 settlements and the conversion 
shippers' FT contracts gave them service rights only on 
Transco's main pipeline and that conversion shippers had 
chosen not to contract separately with Transco for IT feeder 
service.  Although their agreements contain so-called Mem-
phis clauses that authorize Transco to make unilateral 
changes in rates, terms, and conditions of conversion ship-
pers' firm service, see United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. Mem-
phis Light, Gas & Water Div., 358 U.S. 103 (1958), the Com-
mission concluded that the proposed change exceeded the 
scope of those clauses because it would force the conversion 
shippers to take capacity for which they had not contracted 
and then increase their rates accordingly.  After rejecting 
Transco's proposal under NGA section 4 as not "just and 
reasonable," FERC again rejected the Indicated Shippers' 
argument that it should have exercised its NGA section 5 
authority to require Transco to use the two-part, straight 
fixed variable pricing structure favored in Order No. 636 
throughout its entire pipeline.

     Transco now petitions for review of the Commission's sec-
tion 4 decision, while Exxon and the other Indicated Shippers 
challenge both the section 4 and section 5 rulings.  A group of 
FT conversion shippers intervenes in support of FERC's 
decision.

                               II.

     Under NGA section 4(e), interstate pipelines bear the 
burden of proving that proposed rate changes are just, rea-
sonable, and not unduly discriminatory.  15 U.S.C. s 717c(a), 
(d), (e).  If a pipeline carries this burden, the Commission 
must approve the change even if other rates would also be 
just and reasonable.  Western Resources, Inc. v. FERC, 9 
F.3d 1568, 1578-79 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  Although our review of 
FERC decisions under the Administrative Procedure Act is 
quite deferential, see 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(C), we must reverse a 
decision that departs from established precedent without a 

reasoned explanation.  ANR Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 71 F.3d 
897, 901 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

     Because the Commission has already ruled that FTW 
service using two-part, straight fixed variable rates is gener-
ally permissible, see, e.g., Tex. E. Transmission Corp., 62 
F.E.R.C. p 61,015, at 61,094 (1993);  Transcontinental Gas 
Pipe Line Corp., 76 F.E.R.C. p 61,021, at 61,060, the validity 
of FERC's decision here hinges upon whether Transco's 
particular FTW proposal would involve a contract modifica-
tion not authorized by the Memphis clauses contained in the 
1991 settlement agreements and the conversion shippers' 
existing firm service contracts.  See Memphis Light, Gas & 
Water Div., 358 U.S. at 110-13;  United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. 
Mobile Gas Serv. Corp., 350 U.S. 332, 343 (1956).  At first 
glance, the Commission's conclusions that Transco's proposal 
would force conversion shippers to accept and pay for capaci-
ty in excess of their current contractual obligations and that 
such a change exceeds the scope of the Memphis clauses 
seem perfectly reasonable.  Although the Commission ruled 
in the FTSL case that the 1991 settlements and the conver-
sion shippers' firm service agreements did not prohibit Tran-
sco from replacing IT feeder service with some other rate 
structure, that case involved a proposal to create a new set of 
voluntary contracts rather than, as here, an attempt to force 
supply lateral service on conversion shippers involuntarily 
under their existing FT contracts.  Transcontinental Gas 
Pipe Line Corp., 85 F.E.R.C. at 62,388-91.  Petitioners, 
moreover, point to no case in which a Memphis clause has 
been used to force a pipeline customer to take additional 
service rather than to accept changes in the rates, terms, or 
conditions of service already agreed upon.  Indeed, before the 
Commission, petitioners conceded that requiring customers to 
accept greater volumes of gas deliveries than called for in 
their service contracts would not be authorized by a normal 
Memphis clause.  Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 95 
F.E.R.C. at 62,139-40.

     There is, however, a serious glitch:  The Commission failed 
to reconcile its decision at issue here with its previous opin-
ions concerning the complex ways in which the 1991 settle-

ments and firm service agreements, Transco's FT tariff, and 
the Commission's own flexible delivery and receipt point 
policy interact with each other to shape the FT conversion 
shippers' rights to service.

     In this case, FERC's characterization of Transco's FTW 
proposal as a contract modification rests largely on a 1995 
opinion in which the Commission found that Transco's FT 
conversion shippers have no rights to service on supply 
laterals unless they contract separately for IT feeder service.  
Although FERC's flexible receipt point policy would normally 
provide secondary rights to service at all points within any 
zone in which an FT shipper pays reservation charges, the 
Commission concluded that Transco FT shippers have sec-
ondary rights only on the main pipeline because "[i]n the 
production area, the reservation charge is for service on the 
mainline facilities.  A shipper pays a separate IT rate for 
service on supply laterals (IT-Feeders)."  Transcontinental 
Gas Pipe Line Corp., 73 F.E.R.C. p 61,361, at 62,128 (1995).  
Applying that ruling to this case, the Commission reasoned 
that because the FT conversion shippers have in fact chosen 
not to contract for IT feeder service, forcing supply lateral 
service on them would modify their FT contracts in a way 
unauthorized by their Memphis clauses.

     Disagreeing, petitioners point out that the Commission 
stated in its 1999 opinion rejecting the FTSL proposal that its 
flexible receipt point policy would automatically give Tran-
sco's FT customers secondary rights on supply laterals--
apparently without modifying their service contracts--if 
Transco eliminated its IT feeder service.  According to the 
opinion, the only reason that Transco's FT customers did not 
already have such rights as a benefit of paying zone reserva-
tion charges was that FERC had "made an exception to its 
general receipt and delivery point policy, because the IT-
Feeder service itself provided shippers with the flexibility to 
access receipt and delivery points throughout the production 
area."  Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 86 F.E.R.C. 
at 61,609.  If Transco eliminated the IT feeder service, 
however, there would no longer be "any basis for permitting 
Transco to deny shippers the receipt and delivery point 

flexibility attendant to firm service," id., despite Transco's 
protests that its firm zone rates did not include the costs 
allocated to service on the production area laterals.  The 
Commission stated that any cost allocation problems could be 
fixed by adjusting zone reservation charges in a separate 
filing and did not change the basic rule that shippers paying a 
reservation rate for capacity within a particular zone are 
entitled to access at any point within that zone on a secondary 
basis.  Id. at 61,610-11.  Applying the same logic to this case, 
petitioners argue that no contract modification is necessary to 
give the FT conversion shippers rights on the supply laterals 
since they will gain such rights automatically under the 
Commission's general policies and Transco's proposed tariff 
modifications and that Transco is entitled to adjust its zone 
reservation charges accordingly.

     The Commission may be able to reconcile the 1995 and 
1999 decisions, but its efforts so far have only added to the 
confusion.  When petitioners pointed out the conflict, the 
Commission flatly denied that the conversion shippers' cur-
rent lack of supply lateral rights is "the result of any exemp-
tion from any Commission policy" without acknowledging the 
directly contradictory language in its 1999 decision.  Trans-
continental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 96 F.E.R.C. at 61,609.  
Instead, the Commission simply dismissed that case, saying 
only that "adoption of FTW rates might also have an effect on 
flexible receipt and delivery points in Transco's production 
area, but that is a separate issue" from Transco's proposal 
forcing the conversion shippers to accept additional capacity 
in abrogation of their original contracts.  Id. at 61,610.  In 
our view, this explanation falls short because the 1999 opinion 
seems to indicate that the Commission's general policy would 
give FT conversion shippers secondary rights on the supply 
laterals without the need for a contract modification.  See 
also Regulation of Short-Term Natural Gas Transportation 
Services, and Regulation of Interstate Natural Gas Trans-
portation Services, 101 F.E.R.C. p 61,127 (2002) (rejecting an 
argument that Commission policies that increase firm ship-
pers' secondary rights modify individual service agreements).

     Because FERC failed to explain its conclusions here in 
light of its previous decisions, we remand the case for recon-
sideration consistent with this opinion.  Given Transco's as-
surance at oral argument that it will immediately implement 
its FTW proposal if the Commission approves the rate change 
under section 4, we think it unnecessary to address the 
Indicated Shippers' section 5 arguments.  See Exxon Corp., 
206 F.3d at 48-49.

                                                                 So ordered.

                        