
                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 12, 2002   Decided December 24, 2002

                           No. 01-3100

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                        Alhaji M. Sesay, 
                            Appellant

             Appeal from the United States District 
               Court for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 00cr00047-01)

                            ---------

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.  Neil H. Jaffee, Assistant 
Federal Public Defender, entered an appearance.

     Mary B. McCord, Assistant United States Attorney, ar-
gued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were 
Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., United States Attorney, and John R. 
Fisher, Elizabeth Trosman, and Darrell C. Valdez, Assistant 
United States Attorneys.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Edwards and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Appellant Alhaji M. Sesay was 
convicted of possession with intent to distribute cocaine base 
and possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.  Appellant's 
main argument on this appeal is that the District Court 
deprived him of his rights to confront witnesses and to 
present a defense when it excluded evidence that appellant 
had a pre-existing civilian complaint against the police officer 
who discovered the coat allegedly containing the gun and 
drugs that led to appellant's arrest.  The District Court's 
evidentiary rulings were reasonable when they were issued 
before trial, but evidence presented during the trial undercut 
the rationale supporting the evidentiary exclusions.  Howev-
er, the defense did not raise any new objections, offer any 
proffers of evidence, or ask the trial court to allow introduc-
tion of the civilian complaint as substantive evidence.  We are 
therefore constrained to review appellant's challenges to the 
evidentiary exclusions under the "plain error" standard.  See 
Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b).  Because appellant has not met the 
heavy burden of showing plain error, see United States v. 
Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993), we reject his challenges relating 
to the disputed civilian complaint.

     Appellant also challenges the District Court's exclusion of a 
disputed police report on hearsay grounds.  It is clear that 
the District Court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the 
report.  We therefore reject this claim.

                          I. Background

A.   January 9, 2000

     The Government and defense present a similar picture of 
the events leading to appellant's arrest on January 9, 2000.  
The main point of difference between the two sides is whether 
the gun and narcotics that the police found in a coat in a car 
at the scene of the arrest belonged to appellant, or were the 
result of a plant.

     Both sides agree that appellant and his friend, Jerrold 
Coates, were on the corner of 10th and M Streets, Northwest, 
in Washington, D.C., when Coates was shot in the back in a 
drive-by shooting.  Ms. D, who lived in an upper-story apart-
ment on that corner, heard the gunshots and looked out her 
window.  She would later testify that she saw a young man 
holding a handgun and standing over what she presumed to 
be a victim lying in the street.  Ms. D watched as a truck 
pulled up and the man with the gun dragged the victim 
toward it, put the victim in the front passenger seat, and got 
into the back seat himself.  The truck then drove away.  Ms. 
D immediately called 911 to report what she had seen.

     While the defense contends that appellant was not in fact 
holding a gun, both sides agree that Sesay's friend, Rashawn 
Fowler, arrived at the scene of the shooting in a Chevy Tahoe 
just as Ms. D described.  Both sides also agree that Sesay 
helped the injured Coates into the front seat of the Tahoe 
before climbing into the back.  Fowler then drove them to 
the Howard University Hospital, where Coates could receive 
the medical attention that he needed.

     Several Metropolitan Police Department officers heard the 
radio run that there had been a shooting at 10th and M 
Streets, and heard that the victim had been picked up in a 
blue sport utility vehicle.  Expecting that the victim might be 
taken to the nearest hospital, Officers Darris Larsen and 
Christopher Johnson went to Howard University Hospital.  
Once there, they saw a blue Chevy Tahoe parked in front.  
Officer Johnson saw the driver, Fowler, get out of the Tahoe 
and walk toward the hospital.  Fowler was wearing a coat.  
Officer Johnson asked Fowler if he had just brought someone 
to the hospital who had been shot, and Fowler responded that 
he had.

     Shortly thereafter, Officer Laurence Heinz and other police 
officers arrived at the hospital.  Officer Heinz searched the 
Chevy Tahoe, beginning with the front seat and moving to the 
back seat.  Evidence presented by the Government indicates 
that when Officer Heinz picked up a coat from the back 
passenger seat, a gun fell from it and hit the ground.  Officer 

Heinz left the gun on the ground until officers from the crime 
scene unit arrived.

     Heinz's search is the subject of controversy between the 
Government and the defense.  The defense argues that Offi-
cer Heinz held a grudge against appellant, because appellant 
had filed a complaint against him the previous year, after 
Officer Heinz arrested Sesay for reckless driving and driving 
without a permit.  The defense argues that Officer Heinz 
thus possessed both the motive and opportunity to plant the 
weapon and narcotics.  The Government replies, inter alia, 
that Officer Heinz did not know to whom the coat belonged 
when he searched it, because appellant was still in the 
hospital at the time of the search.

     Officers Ralph Nitz, John Spencer, and Adrian Lancaster, 
from the crime scene unit, came to the hospital to collect and 
process the evidence.  Officers Nitz and Lancaster recovered 
the gun and the coat from which it had fallen.  The officers 
found 17 zip-locks of crack cocaine inside the outer left breast 
pocket of the coat.  The coat was a size "large," and had some 
small rips and a small hole.  Officer Nitz asked Fowler to try 
on the coat, which was far too small on him;  the 275-pound 
Fowler wears a size "XXX."

     The crime scene unit officers also seized a coat from the 
floor of the trauma room where the victim was being treated.  
This coat was a green Eddie Bauer parka with a hole through 
the back, and wet blood on the inside around the hole.

     After the gun was found, appellant first appeared leaving 
the hospital and walking toward the Tahoe, before turning 
and walking away from it.  Although it was very cold and 
everyone else on the scene wore coats, Government witnesses 
testified that Sesay was not wearing a coat.  Officer Johnson 
stopped appellant and asked if he had brought someone to the 
hospital.  Appellant replied that he had, and that he had 
arrived in the Tahoe.  He explained that he had been on 10th 
Street when a friend was shot.  He stated that another friend 
passed by in the Tahoe and gave them a ride to the hospital.

     Fowler claimed that he was standing with his hands on the 
police car when the police began searching the Tahoe.  When 
Fowler saw the gun hit the ground, he recalled thinking, "I 
don't know where that came from.  It ain't my gun."  5/16/00 
Tr. 23.  Fowler was arrested, but was released after giving a 
videotaped statement to the police suggesting that the jacket 
in the back seat belonged to Sesay.  The police officers 
decided that the coat, firearm, and narcotics belonged to 
appellant.

B.   Procedural History and Evidentiary Rulings

     On February 8, 2000, a federal grand jury returned a 
three-count indictment charging appellant with one count of 
possession with intent to distribute cocaine base in violation 
of 21 U.S.C. ss 841(a)(1) and 841(b)(1)(C);  one count of 
possession of a firearm by a convicted felon, in violation of 18 
U.S.C. s 922(g)(1);  and one count of possession of a firearm 
during a drug trafficking offense, in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
s 924(c).

     At the pretrial motions hearing on April 11, 2000, defense 
counsel sought to question Detective Eduardo Voysest, who 
had spoken to witnesses on the night of the offense.  The 
defense wanted to inquire of Voysest as to whether he knew 
about Officer Heinz's previous contact with appellant.  The 
District Court sustained the Government's objection based on 
Officer Heinz's preliminary hearing testimony that he did not 
know about the complaint, as well as evidence that appellant 
was still inside the hospital when Officer Heinz found the gun, 
and evidence that Officer Heinz did not know to whom the 
gun or the coat belonged when he found them.  Defense 
counsel did not seek permission to explore the relationship 
between Detective Voysest and Officer Heinz to establish a 
foundation for asking Detective Voysest about Sesay's previ-
ous complaint against Heinz.

     Subsequently, before the pretrial conference, the Govern-
ment filed a "Motion to Exclude Evidence of Defendant's 
Complaint Against Officer."  The Government argued that 
the evidence was irrelevant because, at the time when Officer 
Heinz discovered the gun, he was unaware that the person 

who had been in the back seat of the Chevy Tahoe was Sesay.  
At the pretrial conference on May 4, 2000, defense counsel 
argued that the defense still had not received discovery 
regarding the complaint against Officer Heinz, and proffered 
that the defense had a witness who could show that Officer 
Heinz was lying when he testified at the preliminary hearing 
that he did not know that a complaint had been filed against 
him.  The Government responded that the complaint was not 
formal or written but was simply appellant's oral complaint 
made at the time of his arrest, which the police department 
was investigating.

     The District Court addressed the Government's "Motion to 
Exclude Evidence of Defendant's Complaint Against Officer" 
at the pretrial conference.  The court first stated that "there 
is absolutely not a shred of evidence anywhere that Officer 
H[einz] knew that Mr. Sesay was the person with whom the 
coat was associated and consequently with whom the gun was 
associated when he arrived on the scene...."  5/4/00 Tr. 47.  
However, the District Court recognized that a broader issue 
of Officer Heinz's credibility had been raised.  The District 
Court therefore left open the possibility of the defense revisit-
ing Sesay's complaint against Officer Heinz at some "appro-
priate juncture" during trial:

     So what the defense will be entitled to do is, at the 
     appropriate juncture, to ask the question or to raise 
     the point about Mr. Sesay having lodged a complaint 
     against Officer H[einz], and in that regard whether 
     or not Officer H[einz] spoke truthfully, if it can be 
     shown that he has said one thing in one instance and 
     another thing in another instance, and also with 
     regard to how it may have colored, if at all, the 
     testimony that he's offered in connection with the 
     facts of this case.
     
5/4/00 Tr. 48-49.

     During the pretrial conference, defense counsel also briefly 
mentioned that, in addition to cross-examining Officer Heinz 
regarding his potential bias based on the complaint, he would 
like to inquire of the "other officers" about their knowledge of 
Officer Heinz's prior contact with appellant.  Defense counsel 

did not name those "other officers" or provide any basis for 
his assertion "that the actions of the officers assisting Officer 
H[einz] at the time of Mr. Sesay's arrest, may in fact have 
been also impacted upon by the bias of Officer H[einz]."  
5/4/00 Tr. 38.  The District Court denied this request, be-
cause "[t]here [was] nothing to suggest that anyone else's 
thinking has been influenced by the conflict characterized as 
existing between Detective H[einz] and Mr. Sesay and any 
other officers."  5/4/00 Tr. 49.  Following this ruling, defense 
counsel did not ask permission to voir dire the "other offi-
cers" outside the jury's presence in order to establish a 
foundation for his proposed inquiry.

     On May 15, 2000, a jury trial commenced.  At trial, the 
Government indicated that Officer Heinz would not be called 
as a witness.  Defense counsel asked that he be made avail-
able for questioning by the defense.  The Government object-
ed, arguing that Officer Heinz could not be called by the 
defense as a witness solely to be impeached.  The trial judge 
ruled that the defense could not call Officer Heinz solely to 
impeach him, but stated that the defense could call Officer 
Heinz after making a proffer of his testimony.  The prosecu-
tion subsequently filed a memorandum arguing more fully 
that the only direct evidence to be offered by Officer Heinz 
would be adverse to the defendant and cumulative of other 
testimony, and that appellant should not be permitted to use 
impeachment evidence concerning the complaint as a subter-
fuge to get otherwise inadmissible evidence before the jury.  
The trial judge then indicated that his ruling had been made, 
and noted that both parties had received a transcript of the 
original ruling.  At the start of the defense case, as the 
examination of Officer Heinz began, the District Court "re-
mind[ed] everyone of the limitations that I have placed on 
inquiries to be made during the continuation of this trial, 
strict limitations."  5/17/00 Tr. 50.  The defense's questioning 
of Officer Heinz was then relatively limited and it did not 
cover Sesay's civilian complaint against Heinz.

     On May 18, 2000, after the close of the evidence, the 
District Court granted a motion for judgment of acquittal on 
count three (possession of a firearm during a drug trafficking 

offense).  On May 22, 2000, the jury returned guilty verdicts 
on the two remaining counts of possession with intent to 
distribute crack cocaine and possession of a firearm by a 
convicted felon.  On September 21, 2000, the trial judge 
sentenced appellant to 63 months' imprisonment on each 
count, to be served concurrently, a $1,000 fine, a $200 special 
assessment, and three years of supervised release.  No timely 
notice of appeal was filed.  However, on August 2, 2001, the 
District Court granted appellant's motion to reissue the judg-
ment, and the judgment was reissued and entered on August 
7, 2001.  A timely notice of appeal was thereafter filed on 
August 15, 2001.

                           II. Analysis

A.   Evidence of the Complaint

     Appellant first argues that the District Court erred in 
depriving him of his rights to confront witnesses and to 
present a defense when it excluded evidence that he had a 
pre-existing civilian complaint against Heinz.  He argues that 
the defense should have been permitted to cross-examine the 
police witnesses concerning their knowledge of appellant's 
complaint against Officer Heinz, and that the defense should 
have been allowed to introduce the complaint as substantive 
evidence of Officer Heinz's motive to plant contraband in the 
coat.  Appellant's arguments have some merit.  The objec-
tions ultimately fail, however, because appellant has not 
shown that the District Court's evidentiary exclusions result-
ed in "plain error."

     1. Examination of the Other Officers

     When the District Court issued its pretrial rulings, they 
had a legitimate basis.  There was no indication during any of 
the pretrial proceedings that any of the other testifying 
officers worked closely with Officer Heinz.  Therefore, there 
was no proper foundation for the line of inquiry that defense 
counsel sought to pursue.  However, during trial it became 
apparent that the police witnesses who testified against appel-
lant all worked on the same shift with Officer Heinz in the 
Third District.  Officer Taggart, for example, testified that he 

had been working with Officer Heinz on the midnight shift for 
three or four years.  5/16/00 Tr. 78.  Officer Heinz testified 
that he spoke with Officers Larsen and Johnson "every 
night."  5/17/00 Tr. 55.  This evidence indicated a close 
relationship between Officer Heinz and the testifying officers.  
Once this became clear, there was good reason to allow 
defense counsel to question the witnesses about their knowl-
edge of appellant's complaint against Officer Heinz.

     However, the defense did not renew its request to question 
the officers to determine whether, in light of the evidence 
indicating a close relationship between Heinz and the other 
officers, the District Court still meant to prevent defense 
counsel from questioning these other officers about their 
relationship with Officer Heinz and their knowledge of the 
civilian complaint that Sesay had filed against Officer Heinz.  
Thus, any error resulting from the exclusion of the evidence 
must be reviewed under the "plain error" standard.  See Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 52(b).  See also United States v. Arrington, 2002 
U.S. App. LEXIS 22993, at *18 (D.C. Cir. Nov. 5, 2002) 
("Because [the defendant] did not object to the court's in-
struction at trial, we review this complaint solely to determine 
whether the district court committed plain error.");  In re 
Sealed Case, 283 F.3d 349, 352 (D.C. Cir. 2002) ("If the 
defendant allows an alleged error to pass without objection 
... he then assumes the burden of meeting the more exacting 
plain error requirement of Rule 52(b)....").

     The Supreme Court has articulated the plain error require-
ments of Rule 52(b), as follows:

     There must be an "error" that is "plain" and that 
     "affect[s] substantial rights."  Moreover, Rule 52(b) 
     leaves the decision to correct the forfeited error 
     within the sound discretion of the court of appeals, 
     and the court should not exercise that discretion 
     unless the error "seriously affect[s] the fairness, 
     integrity or public reputation of judicial proceed-
     ings."
     
Olano, 507 U.S. at 732 (quoting United States v. Young, 470 
U.S. 1, 15 (1985));  see also Johnson v. United States, 520 U.S. 
461, 466-67 (1997) ("[B]efore an appellate court can correct an 

error not raised at trial, there must be (1) error, (2) that is 
plain, and (3) that affects substantial rights.") (internal quota-
tions omitted).  Olano further explained that, for the plain 
error standard to affect substantial rights,

     the error must have been prejudicial:  It must have 
     affected the outcome of the district court proceed-
     ings....  When the defendant has made a timely 
     objection to an error and Rule 52(a) applies, a court 
     of appeals normally engages in a specific analysis of 
     the district court record - a so-called "harmless 
     error" inquiry - to determine whether the error was 
     prejudicial.  Rule 52(b) normally requires the same 
     kind of inquiry, with one important difference:  It is 
     the defendant rather than the Government who 
     bears the burden of persuasion with respect to prej-
     udice.  In most cases, a court of appeals cannot 
     correct the forfeited error unless the defendant 
     shows that the error was prejudicial.
     
Olano, 507 U.S. at 734.

     On the record in this case, we cannot find "prejudice," nor 
can we find that the alleged errors "seriously affect the 
fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceed-
ings."  We simply cannot say that the alleged error "affected 
the outcome of the district court proceedings."  Olano, 507 
U.S. at 734.  Therefore, defendant has not carried the burden 
of persuasion necessary to prevail under Rule 52(b).

     Furthermore, lest there be any confusion on this point, 
defense counsel was not entirely foreclosed from advancing 
appellant's defense.  For example, counsel could have asked 
the officers about the timing of events at the hospital, includ-
ing when they first came to learn that the coat in the car 
belonged to appellant.  This would have made clear whether 
the officers had reason to know that the coat belonged to 
Sesay before they searched it, and possibly supported appel-
lant's view that the officers had time and knowledge sufficient 
to plant the gun so as to implicate Sesay.  Counsel also could 
have sought permission to conduct voir dire of the police 
witnesses outside the jury's presence, after Officer Taggart 
testified that he had worked on the midnight shift with 

Officer Heinz for three or four years, or after it became 
apparent that the Government was not going to call Officer 
Heinz as a witness.  We have no way of knowing whether 
defense counsel made strategic decisions not to pursue these 
lines of inquiry or mistakenly assumed that he could not 
renew his request to examine the officers in light of the newly 
uncovered facts about Heinz's relationship with the other 
officers.  In any event, there is no plain error.

     2. Substantive Evidence

     There may also have been error, albeit not "plain error," 
resulting from the exclusion of appellant's civilian complaint 
against Heinz as substantive evidence of bias.  There were 
grounds for admitting the evidence of the complaint substan-
tively, for it suggested animosity between appellant and 
Officer Heinz.  This animosity, in turn, might have given 
credence to appellant's claim that the police planted the gun 
and drugs to implicate him.  However, when the District 
Court ruled that the defense could not call Officer Heinz 
merely to impeach him, appellant never asked to use Officer 
Heinz to introduce the complaint as substantive evidence of 
bias.  Appellant claims that "[i]t was clear to all concerned 
below that this was one of the purposes for which defense 
counsel wanted to use the complaint," Appellant's Reply Br. 
at 9, but the record does not support this assertion.  Thus, we 
also review the exclusion of the complaint only for plain error.  
See Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b).  It is true that the civilian 
complaint raises a question of bias, but, following the stan-
dard enunciated in Olano, we cannot find that defendant has 
satisfied his burden of proving that the alleged error affected 
the outcome of the trial.  Therefore, appellant has not satis-
fied his burden of persuasion.

B.   Police Report Statements

     Appellant also argues that the District Court abused its 
discretion in excluding as hearsay a statement from a police 
report that witnesses at the scene of the shooting saw the 
victim, not appellant, with the gun.  The District Court 
properly excluded this evidence as hearsay.

     At the pretrial conference, defense counsel complained that 
the Government had not provided Brady information that had 
been requested regarding the identity of witnesses who had 
observed someone other than appellant with a gun.  See 
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963).  The request had 
been made on the basis of a police report that had been 
provided through discovery, which indicated that witnesses at 
the scene of the shooting had observed the gunshot victim 
holding a gun during or immediately following the shooting.  
The Government's counsel replied that, after speaking to each 
individual officer and all of the detectives, reviewing the 
paperwork, and speaking with Government witnesses, it ap-
peared that the statement had been only a rumor:  No 
witness had actually made this claim.  The defense counsel 
pointed out that the PD 163 written by Officer Heinz identi-
fied Defendant 1 as appellant and Defendant 2 as Coates, and 
that it stated that "witnesses at the scene of the shooting 
observed Def #2 with a gun in his hand during and/or just 
after the shooting."  The Government replied that it believed 
that Officer Heinz had simply gotten his numbers mixed up.  
The District Court denied the defense's request.

     At trial, defense counsel attempted to direct Officer Heinz's 
attention to the back of the PD 163, where it was written that 
"Def #2" had been observed with the gun.  The Government 
objected on the grounds that this issue was covered by the 
District Court's pretrial ruling.  When defense counsel 
brought up Officer Heinz's preliminary hearing testimony 
that he had received information from Detective Voysest that 
there was a witness to Coates possessing the firearm, the 
Government objected that the information was double hear-
say and, again, that the information had been determined to 
be incorrect.  The defense counsel replied that he was offer-
ing the statement not to prove its truth, but

     based upon the fact that this was the state of the 
     investigation at the time of the precipitation of this 
     document.  This was the information upon which the 
     Metropolitan Police Department acted, similar to the 
     
     Government's representations earlier on with re-
     spect to the radio run and why individuals go to a 
     certain scene.
     
5/17/00 Tr. 60.  The District Court sustained the Govern-
ment's objection, and the defense did not call Detective 
Voysest.

     Appellant now challenges these evidentiary rulings.  We 
review the District Court's evidentiary rulings for abuse of 
discretion, United States v. Warren, 42 F.3d 647, 655 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994), and conclude that the District Court did not abuse 
its discretion in this case.

     The Federal Rules of Evidence provide that "'[h]earsay' is 
a statement, other than one made by the declarant while 
testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove 
the truth of the matter asserted."  Fed. R. Evid. 801(c).  
Hearsay is generally inadmissible as evidence.  Fed. R. Evid. 
802.  However, "[a]n out-of court statement that is offered to 
show its effect on the hearer's state of mind is not hearsay 
under Rule 801(c)."  United States v. Thompson, 279 F.3d 
1043, 1047 (D.C. Cir. 2002);  see also United States v. Wright, 
783 F.2d 1091, 1098 (D.C. Cir. 1986).

     Appellant contends that the witness statements were not 
hearsay because they were offered to show the effect on the 
hearer's state of mind.  He argues that

     it was not the witnesses' statements that were rele-
     vant alone, but the disavowal of the statements that 
     made them relevant by showing that, in the face of 
     contrary information they had originally considered 
     reliable enough to act upon, the police took action 
     harmful to appellant by disavowing the statements 
     inculpating the co-defendant and dismissing the case 
     against him.  
Appellant's Reply Br. at 14.

     We rejected a similar claim in United States v. Evans, 216 
F.3d 80 (D.C. Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 531 U.S. 971 (2000).  
There, the trial court had permitted the Government to 
introduce the testimony of an FBI agent that the FBI "'had 
received ... information that [the defendant] was involved in 
drug trafficking."'  Id. at 85 (quoting agent's testimony;  

ellipsis in original).  This information had come from a gov-
ernment informant who was not a witness and would not be 
available for cross-examination.  The Government argued 
that the statement was not hearsay because it was not offered 
for its truth, but rather to establish why the FBI "did what 
they did."  Id.  The court rejected this contention:

     But if [the agent's] testimony about the FBI's "infor-
     mation" did not go to the truth of that assertion, to 
     what did it go?  The trial prosecutor said he offered 
     the testimony to establish "why they did what they 
     did with George Rose."  For testimony to be admis-
     sible for any purpose, however, it must be relevant.  
     See Fed. R. Evid. 402.  And to be relevant, it must 
     have a "tendency to make the existence of [a] fact 
     that is of consequence to the determination of the 
     action more probable or less probable than it would 
     be without the evidence."  Fed. R. Evid. 401.  How 
     was "why they did what they did with George Rose" 
     related to such a fact of consequence?
     
Id. at 85.  The court concluded that

     the admission of [the agent's] testimony was error 
     under the Federal Rules of Evidence:  under Rules 
     801 and 802 because the jury was effectively told 
     that the testimony could be used for its truth, and 
     under Rule 403 because the probative value of the 
     only relevant nonhearsay purpose--general back-
     ground--was substantially outweighed by the dan-
     ger of unfair prejudice.
     
Id. at 89.  Likewise, in this case, the statement in the PD 163 
that "witnesses at the scene of the shooting observed Def #2 
with a gun in his hand during and/or just after the shooting" 
is not relevant for anything other than its truth.  And if it has 
any relevance as "background," the probative value was sub-
stantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice.

     Appellant argues that the statement at issue here was 
offered to show the state of mind of the officers when they 
arrested Fowler, Coates, and appellant.  The "state of mind" 
to which appellant refers is "that the police understood there 
to be witnesses who saw the victim with the gun immediately 

after the shooting."  Appellant's Br. at 32.  However, this 
"state of mind," if not based on the truth of the statement, is 
not relevant to a fact of consequence in the trial.  The only 
real issue at trial was who possessed the gun and drugs.  The 
statement in the PD 163 was only relevant to this issue if it 
was accurate.  If, as the Government asserted, the statement 
reflected a mistaken rumor, then it would not have assisted 
the jury in determining who possessed the gun and drugs.  
To accept appellant's "state of mind" argument would be to 
permit a loophole in the hearsay rule large enough to swallow 
the rule itself.  See Evans, 216 F.3d at 86 ("If we were to 
accept the government's rationale here, then explaining why 
government agents 'did what they did' through reference to 
statements of absent informants would be acceptable in al-
most any case involving an undercover operation, and in 
many others as well.").

     Appellant also argues that the statement "was critical to 
the defense to persuade the jury that the police had lied and 
manipulated the evidence in a manner designed to strengthen 
the case against appellant."  Appellant's Br. at 32.  This 
argument clearly relies on the truth of the statement.  If the 
statement was not offered for its truth, it would not "per-
suade the jury that the police had lied and manipulated the 
evidence."

                         III. Conclusion

     The judgment of the District Court is hereby affirmed.

                                