                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued December 13, 2000   Decided December 26, 2000 

                           No. 00-1135

               Corrections Corporation of America, 
          d/b/a Servicios Correcionales de Puerto Rico, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Carlos A. Del Valle Cruz, pro hac vice, argued the cause 
for petitioner.  With him on the brief was Angel MuNoz 
Noya.

     David A. Seid, Attorney, National Labor Relations Board, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief were 
Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 

Deputy Associate General Counsel, and David Habenstreit, 
Supervisory Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges

     Opinion for the Court filed Per Curiam:  In this case, the 
National Labor Relations Board ("NLRB" or "Board") found 
that petitioner Corrections Corporation of America ("Compa-
ny") violated section 8(a)(1) and 8(a)(5) of the National Labor 
Relations Act ("Act"), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (5) (1994), when 
the Company refused to recognize and bargain with the 
Union General de Trabajadores de Puerto Rico ("Union"), 
and unilaterally changed the work schedules of its social 
penal workers.  The Company, in its petition for review, 
contends, first, that the Board lacks jurisdiction over private 
correctional institutions;  second, that the Board erred in 
disposing of the unfair labor practice complaint on summary 
judgement;  and, third, that persons employed as "social penal 
workers" are either guards or supervisors under the Act, and, 
therefore, should not have been included in the unit that was 
certified for bargaining.  The Company's arguments are mer-
itless.

     "Because of its expertise, the Board 'necessarily has a large 
measure of informed discretion,' and this court will sustain 
the Board's determination that an individual is an 'employee' 
and not a 'supervisor' if it is supported by substantial evi-
dence."  Passaic Daily News v. NLRB, 736 F.2d 1543, 1550 
(D.C. Cir. 1984) (quoting Amalgamated Clothing Workers of 
America v. NLRB, 420 F.2d 1296, 1300 (D.C. Cir. 1969)).  
"Substantial evidence means 'such relevant evidence as a 
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a 
conclusion.' "  MECO Corp. v. NLRB, 986 F.2d 1434, 1436 
(D.C. Cir. 1993) (quoting Richardson v. Perales, 402 U.S. 389, 
401 (1971)).  The Regional Director found, and the Board 
affirmed, that there was no evidence in the record that the 
alleged supervisory duties listed in the job description and job 
postings for social penal workers had actually been exercised 
by the employees assigned to the job.  The Board found no 
reliable evidence demonstrating that social penal workers had 

disciplined, recruited, transferred, laid off, or promoted any 
employees, and no reliable evidence that social penal supervi-
sors ever gave instructions to other employees.  And where 
there was any disagreement over these issues, the Regional 
Director discredited the Company's witnesses.  There is no 
doubt that, on the record at hand, the Board's decision is 
supported by substantial evidence.

     Likewise, the record clearly supports the Board's finding 
that social penal workers are not correctional guards.  
Though the record shows that social penal workers are 
trained in security functions, it is clear that enforcement is 
not essential to their main duties.  And while security func-
tions are included in the job descriptions of social penal 
workers, there is no substantial evidence that employees in 
this job actually perform security tasks.  Rather, as the 
NLRB found, it is the correctional officers, not the social 
penal workers, who have the primary responsibility of enforc-
ing prison protection rules.

     There is no merit whatsoever to the Company's claim that 
the Board erred in entering a summary judgment.  The 
Board routinely decides cases involving an alleged refusal to 
bargain after a Board certification, where the controlling 
issues have been, or could have been, litigated in the underly-
ing representation hearing.  See, e.g., Spectrum Healthcare 
Servs., Inc., 325 N.L.R.B. 1061 (1998) (granting General 
Counsel's motion for summary judgment where representa-
tion issues were or could have been litigated in prior repre-
sentation proceeding).  In such circumstances, the Board may 
rely on findings from the representation hearing in determin-
ing whether there has been a violation of section 8(a)(5) of the 
Act.  See, e.g., E.N. Bisso & Son, Inc., 84 F.3d 1443, 1444 n.1 
(D.C. Cir. 1996).  The Board's application of the summary 
judgment procedure was fully justified in this case.  The 
Company had a full and fair opportunity to litigate all issues 
during the representation hearing, the issues were fully and 
fairly considered by the Board, and the Company offered no 
new evidence at the unfair labor practice stage that warrant-
ed a second hearing on the disputed issues.

     Finally, we reject the Company's so-called "jurisdictional" 
issues.  At oral argument, counsel for the Company conceded 
that the Company had waived any claim resting on 29 U.S.C. 
s 164(c)(1) (1994) ("The Board, in its discretion, may ... 
decline to assert jurisdiction over any labor dispute involving 
any class or category of employers, where, in the opinion of 
the Board, the effect of such labor dispute on commerce is not 
sufficiently substantial to warrant the exercise of its jurisdic-
tion.").  Therefore, we offer no opinion on whether and under 
what circumstances the NLRB should, pursuant to this dis-
cretionary jurisdictional provision, decline to assert jurisdic-
tion over private venture correctional institutions.

     The Company asserts that, quite apart from the dictates of 
29 U.S.C. s 164(c)(1), the NLRB has no jurisdiction under 
the Act over any employees in any private correctional insti-
tution.  Actually, the Company's argument on this point has 
varied between a claim that the Board has no jurisdiction 
over any correctional institution and one that the Board has 
no jurisdiction over any maximum security correctional insti-
tution.  In either case, however, the Company can cite to no 
statutory support for its position (nor is there record evidence 
that a maximum security institution is at issue here).  It is 
clear that the Company is not excluded from the Act under 29 
U.S.C. s 152(2) (1994) ("The term 'employer' ... shall not 
include the United States or any wholly owned Government 
corporation, or any Federal Reserve Bank, or any State or 
political subdivision thereof.").  It is also clear that there is 
nothing in the Act that excludes privately run correctional 
institutions from coverage.  And since the employees at issue 
here are not correctional guards, the Company's argument 
that we should "imply" an exclusion for such workers from 
the term "employee" is irrelevant.  If good policy militates in 
favor of exclusion, that will be a matter for the NLRB 
(exercising its discretionary authority) or for Congress to 
decide, not this court.  In short, there is no basis on this 
record to overturn the decision of the NLRB for lack of 
jurisdiction.

     Accordingly, the petition for review is hereby denied, and 
the Board's cross-application for enforcement is granted.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                              