                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 21, 2002   Decided January 14, 2003 

                           No. 01-7195

                          Trifax Corp., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                  District of Columbia, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02824)

     Barbara E. Brown argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Edward E. Schwab, Assistant Corporation Counsel, Office 
of Corporation Counsel, argued the cause for appellee.  With 
him on the brief was Charles L. Reischel, Deputy Corporation 
Counsel.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  In this case, a government contrac-
tor claims that the District of Columbia Inspector General, by 
releasing an allegedly defamatory audit report, deprived it of 
liberty to engage in its chosen business in violation of the 
Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause.  Because the con-
tractor, though perhaps injured in some respects, cannot 
demonstrate broad preclusion from government contracting, 
as the law of this circuit requires, we affirm the district 
court's grant of summary judgment for the District of Colum-
bia.

                                I.

     Appellant Trifax Corporation supplies health care and 
nursing services to District and federal agencies.  In May 
1997, at the request of a D.C. Councilmember, the District of 
Columbia Office of Inspector General (OIG) opened an inqui-
ry into Trifax's performance of its contracts with District 
agencies.  After auditing two of Trifax's four contracts, the 
OIG released a highly critical report that was later described 
in a Washington Post article.  According to the OIG report, 
Trifax "consistently violated the requirements of the con-
tracts," as well as the federal Service Contract Act, 41 U.S.C. 
s 351 et seq., by both underpaying its employees and over-
charging the District.  See Review of the Department of 
Human Services and the District of Columbia General Hospi-
tal Contracts with the Trifax Corporation, OIG No. 9713-25 
at 3 (Nov. 20, 1997).  Although the report also found Trifax's 
misdeeds "sufficient to justify" a three-year debarment from 
bidding on District contracts, it recommended that the Dis-
trict defer formal action pending completion of a parallel 
investigation by the U.S. Department of Labor.  Id. at 11.

     For purposes of this case, the only important fact about the 
OIG's audit is that the OIG never offered Trifax an opportu-
nity to comment on the unfavorable report before making it 
public.  After the report's release, Trifax wrote two letters to 
the OIG calling the report factually inaccurate and requesting 
its withdrawal.  Based on "additional information" from Tri-

fax, the OIG released a revised report reaffirming that Trifax 
underpaid employees and overcharged the District, but lower-
ing the estimate of total financial irregularities from $43,288, 
as found in the initial report, to $28,104.  See Review of the 
Department of Human Services and the District of Columbia 
General Hospital Contracts with a Selected Vendor, No. OIG-
9713-25 (Revised), OIG-00-2-02MA at 1-2 (Sept. 15, 2000).  
Unlike the initial report, the revised report did not recom-
mend formal debarment.

     Trifax brought suit in the United States District Court for 
the District of Columbia against the District of Columbia, 
various agencies, and various District officials in both their 
official and individual capacities alleging (1) deprivation of due 
process under 42 U.S.C. s 1983 and (2) defamation and negli-
gence under D.C. law.  Acting pursuant to Federal Rule of 
Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), the district court dismissed the 
negligence and defamation counts, citing public duty and 
absolute immunity doctrine, as well as the constitutional claim 
as to D.C. officials sued in their individual capacities, citing 
qualified immunity doctrine.  Trifax Corp. v. Dist. of Colum-
bia, 53 F. Supp. 2d 20, 24-26, 28-31 (D.D.C. 1999) ("Trifax 
I").  The district court later granted summary judgment for 
the District of Columbia on the constitutional claim, finding 
Trifax unable to prove that District officials had deprived it of 
a liberty interest.  Trifax Corp. v. Dist. of Columbia, No. 
98-2824, mem. op. at 8-19 (D.D.C. Nov. 2, 2001) ("Trifax II").

     Trifax appeals.  Bearing in mind that "a complaint should 
not be dismissed for failure to state a claim unless it appears 
beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in 
support of his claim which would entitle him to relief," Conley 
v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 45-46 (1957), and that "summary 
judgment will not lie ... if the evidence is such that a 
reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving 
party," Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 
(1986), we review the district court's decisions de novo, see 
Weyrich v. New Republic, Inc., 235 F.3d 617, 623 (D.C. Cir. 
2001) (dismissal for failure to state a claim reviewed de novo);  
Troy Corp. v. Browner, 120 F.3d 277, 281 (D.C. Cir. 1997) 
(grant of summary judgment reviewed de novo).

                               II.

     We begin our analysis of the constitutional claim with two 
due process principles that fit together somewhat uneasily in 
the circumstances of this case.  First, a person's "right to ... 
follow a chosen profession free from unreasonable govern-
mental interference comes within the 'liberty' ... concept[ ] 
of the Fifth Amendment."  Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 
492 (1959);  see also Kartseva v. Dep't of State, 37 F.3d 1524, 
1529 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (acknowledging a "constitutionally pro-
tected 'right to follow a chosen trade or profession' " (quoting 
Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Local 473 v. McElroy, 367 
U.S. 886, 895-96 (1961))).  Because this "liberty concept" 
protects corporations as well as individuals, formally debar-
ring a corporation from government contract bidding consti-
tutes a deprivation of liberty that triggers the procedural 
guarantees of the Due Process Clause.  Old Dominion Dairy 
Prods., Inc. v. Sec'y of Defense, 631 F.2d 953, 961-62 (D.C. 
Cir. 1980).  Second, persons whose future employment pros-
pects have been impaired by government defamation "lack 
... any constitutional protection for the interest in reputa-
tion."  Siegert v. Gilley, 500 U.S. 226, 234 (1991).  This 
principle derives from Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693 (1976), 
which held that police distribution of a flyer labeling the 
plaintiff an "Active Shoplifter[ ]," though "seriously im-
pair[ing] his future employment opportunities," infringed no 
liberty interest because it harmed only the plaintiff's reputa-
tion.  Id. at 697, 711-12.  Reiterating this principle in Siegert 
v. Gilley, the Supreme Court held that a plaintiff whose 
former government employer sent an admittedly libelous 
letter of reference that "would undoubtedly ... impair his 
future employment prospects" stated no constitutional viola-
tion "so long as such damage flows from injury caused by the 
defendant to a plaintiff's reputation."  500 U.S. at 234.

     The case before us reveals the tension between these two 
lines of due process cases.  Had the District formally de-
barred Trifax from bidding on government contracts, that 
would have unquestionably constituted a deprivation of liber-
ty.  Conceding that it was not formally debarred, however, 

Trifax claims to have suffered "broad preclusion" from gov-
ernment contracting.  Appellant's Rep. Br. at 8-11.  In view 
of the fact that formal debarment would constitute a depriva-
tion of liberty, it would be odd if broad preclusion, equivalent 
in every practical sense to formal debarment, did not also 
constitute a deprivation simply because the harm was reputa-
tional.  For exactly this reason, and notwithstanding the 
strong language in Paul v. Davis and Siegert v. Gilley, we 
have held on several occasions that government stigmatiza-
tion that broadly precludes individuals or corporations from a 
chosen trade or business deprives them of liberty in violation 
of the Due Process Clause.

     For example, in Old Dominion Dairy Products, Inc. v. 
Secretary of Defense, a government contractor unfavorably 
audited by the government, though not formally debarred, 
was "effectively put ... out of business."  631 F.2d at 963.  
We held that "when the Government effectively bars a con-
tractor from virtually all Government work due to charges 
that the contractor lacks honesty or integrity, due process 
requires that the contractor be given notice of those charges 
as soon as possible and some opportunity to respond to the 
charges before adverse action is taken."  Id. at 955-56.  We 
reached a similar result in Kartseva v. Department of State, 
where a government contractor fired a Russian translator 
after the State Department informed the contractor that 
employing the translator raised " 'counterintelligence con-
cerns.' "  37 F.3d at 1525 (internal citation omitted).  We held 
that a liberty interest was implicated if the State Depart-
ment's action (1) "formally or automatically excludes Kartseva 
from work," or (2) "does not have this binding effect, but 
nevertheless has the broad effect of largely precluding Kart-
seva from pursuing her chosen career as a Russian transla-
tor."  Id. at 1528 (emphasis in original).  In still another due 
process employment case, Taylor v. Resolution Trust Corp., 
56 F.3d 1497 (D.C. Cir. 1995), we relied on Kartseva for the 
proposition that "government action precluding a litigant 
from future employment opportunities will infringe upon his 
constitutionally protected liberty interests ... when that 

preclusion is either sufficiently formal or sufficiently broad."  
Id. at 1505.

     These employment and government contracting due pro-
cess cases establish what we call a "reputation plus" require-
ment--plaintiffs must show not only that the government 
harmed their reputation, but also that the resulting stigma 
"altered [their] status in a tangible way."  Orange v. Dist. of 
Columbia, 59 F.3d 1267, 1274 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted) (alteration in original).  
This "change in status requirement," id. (internal quotation 
marks omitted), explains why Paul v. Davis and Siegert v. 
Gilley have no applicability to the claims here:  Both cases 
involve harms analogous to common-law defamation, while the 
"reputation plus" cases involve harms approaching, in terms 
of practical effect, formal exclusion from a chosen trade or 
profession, as in Old Dominion.  The key inquiry then is this:  
Has the government, by attacking personal or corporate 
reputation, achieved in substance an alteration of status that, 
if accomplished through formal means, would constitute a 
deprivation of liberty?  For this reason, plaintiffs claiming 
"broad preclusion" must show that "the government 'has 
seriously affected, if not destroyed, [their] ability to obtain 
employment [or contracts] in [their] field.' "  Taylor, 56 F.3d 
at 1506 (quoting Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. at 492).

     Turning to the facts of this case, we agree with the district 
court that Trifax failed to show anything remotely close to 
"broad preclusion."  As the district court found, the record 
demonstrates that Trifax " 'won some and lost some' in 
retaining and bidding on government contracts after the 
original OIG Report was released."  Trifax II, No. 98-2824 
mem. op. at 14.  To be sure, in the year following the release 
of the OIG report, the District declined to renew at least two 
contracts with Trifax.  Later that same year, however, the 
District of Columbia General Hospital--the contracting agen-
cy in one of the two OIG-audited contracts--actually awarded 
Trifax a new contract.  Id.;  cf. Advanced Mgmt. Tech., Inc. v. 
Fed. Aviation Admin., 211 F.3d 633, 636 (D.C. Cir. 2000) 
(holding that the " 'all is forgiven' message implicit" in the 

present award of a government contract "suggests the im-
probability of ... a [reputational] shadow" arising from past 
criticism by the same agency).  It is also true that Trifax 
later failed to win two federal contracts, but the district court 
concluded, correctly we believe, that neither of these unfavor-
able results is traceable to the OIG report.  Trifax II, No. 
98-2824 mem. op. at 16-17.  Indeed, in one of the bid 
processes, the United States Comptroller General formally 
prohibited the contracting agency from penalizing Trifax for 
the OIG report;  in the other, a District of Columbia agency 
sent a recommendation letter calling Trifax "a reliable, com-
petent ... company" and noting "no complaints or contract 
deficiencies" in Trifax's file.  Id. at 16, 17 & n.9.

     In sum, because these facts are more than sufficient to 
preclude a reasonable jury from finding Trifax broadly pre-
cluded from government contracting, we affirm the district 
court's grant of summary judgment for the District.  We thus 
have no need to address Trifax's claim that the authors of the 
OIG report enjoy no qualified immunity from constitutional 
torts committed in their individual capacities.

                               III.

     Trifax's challenge to the district court's dismissal of its 
defamation and negligence claims requires little discussion.  
As the district court's fine opinion explains, the defamation 
claim fails because the government officials acted " 'within the 
ambit of [their] discretion' " when they prepared the OIG 
report and are thus entitled to " 'absolute immunity for 
common law defamation.' "  Trifax I, 53 F. Supp. 2d at 29 
(quoting Sami v. United States, 617 F.2d 755, 768 (D.C. Cir. 
1979) (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks omitted)).  
The negligence claim fails, again as the district court's opinion 
demonstrates, because District officials had no "special rela-
tionship" with Trifax that would preclude application of the 
public duty doctrine.  Trifax I, 53 F. Supp. 2d at 31;  see also 
Powell v. Dist. of Columbia, 602 A.2d 1123, 1129-30 (D.C. 
1992).

                               IV.

     Because Trifax fails either to demonstrate broad preclusion 
from government contracting or to plead state law defamation 
or negligence claims, we affirm in all respects.

                                                                 So ordered.

                      