                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 4, 2002    Decided January 31, 2003 

                           No. 00-3121

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                        Steven A. Graham, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00355-14)

     A. J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender, argued the cause 
and filed the briefs for appellant.

     Roy W. McLeese III, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. 
Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, and Timothy J. 
Heaphy, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Steven Graham appeals his convic-
tion by a jury of conspiracy to distribute heroin or cocaine 
base, 21 U.S.C. s 846, and possession with intent to distribute 
heroin, 21 U.S.C. s 841 (a)(1) & (b)(1)(C).  Graham contends 
that:  (1) an FBI agent was improperly allowed to offer 
irrelevant hearsay evidence to Graham's prejudice, (2) the 
government improperly attempted to impeach his key wit-
ness, and (3) the district court essentially directed a verdict 
for the government with regard to the conspiracy count.  We 
conclude that Graham has failed to show that the hearsay 
evidence was prejudicial in light of other evidence from 
conspirators or to show plain error with regard to his two 
other contentions.  Regarding his sentence, Graham contends 
that the district court erred in:  (1) determining the quantity 
of drugs to be attributed to him, (2) denying a downward 
adjustment as a minor participant, and (3) imposing super-
vised release in excess of the amount allowed by statute.  
Although Graham's first two sentencing challenges are merit-
less, because the district court improperly sentenced Graham 
under s 841(b)(1)(A), we remand the case for resentencing 
under s 841(b)(1)(C).  Accordingly, we affirm the judgment 
of conviction except insofar as we remand the case to the 
district court to impose a term of supervised release under 
s 841(b)(1)(C).

                                I.

     Graham was arrested on May 26, 1999, at the Arthur 
Capers housing area in Southeast, Washington, D.C., by 
Metropolitan Police Department officers.  The officers' trial 
testimony revealed that one of them had observed Graham 
dropping an object resembling small bags of heroin on the 
ground as the police had approached him.  However, Graham 
was almost immediately released from custody and not rear-
rested until June 18, 1999, on a parole violator warrant.  The 
government thereafter indicted Graham for being part of a 

drug conspiracy led by Kevin Gray;  his indictment was 
severed from that of the other defendants and Graham went 
to trial alone.

     At trial, the government presented essentially three types 
of evidence:  (1) tape recordings of conversations obtained 
from wiretaps of Gray's cellular phone;  (2) testimony from 
admitted conspirators Maurice Andrews and Marvin Dixon, 
who provided explanations for the meaning of the words in 
the taped telephone conversations and described incidents 
they had observed or heard about regarding Graham's activi-
ties as part of the drug conspiracy;  and (3) testimony from 
the arresting officers.  In his defense, Graham showed that 
he was on supervised release or in prison during the time of 
the conspiracy except for approximately six weeks, from May 
4 to June 18, 1999.  Through the testimony of Dale Harris, 
Graham also disputed an officer's testimony that he dropped 
the bags later confirmed to contain heroin;  Harris testified 
that she did not see Graham drop anything on the ground 
when the police approached him on May 26, 1999.  The 
prosecutor attempted to impeach Harris by asking her about 
a number of prior convictions, which, except for one, she 
denied.  The jury found Graham guilty of conspiracy to 
distribute heroine or cocaine base, and possession with intent 
to distribute heroin.

     During sentencing, Graham objected to the draft pre-
sentence report on the ground that there was insufficient 
evidence to attribute to him two to four kilograms of cocaine 
and one to three kilograms of heroin;  he also contested 
factual conclusions in the report that connected Graham to 
the Gray conspiracy.  A revised report reduced the drug 
quantities attributable to Graham to not more than 150 grams 
of cocaine base and between one and three kilograms of 
heroin.  The government filed a memorandum in support of 
the reduced attributions.  At the sentencing hearing, Graham 
reiterated that there was insufficient and contradictory evi-
dence to attribute the full amount of the reduced quantity of 
drugs to him, and that the government had failed to establish 
the scope of the conspiracy Graham had entered.  The dis-
trict court rejected Graham's arguments, adopted the conclu-

sions of the presentence report, and sentenced Graham to the 
high end of the sentencing range (168-210 months) under the 
Sentencing Guidelines:  two concurrent 210-month sentences 
of imprisonment, followed by two concurrent sentences of five 
years and three years of supervised release.

                               II.

     On appeal, Graham's challenges a series of rulings by the 
district court at trial and sentencing.

                                A.

     Regarding his trial, Graham first contends that he was 
prejudiced as a result of the district court's error in allowing 
FBI Agent Fullmer to testify as to irrelevant and hearsay 
matters.  Our review of the admissibility of hearsay evidence 
is for abuse of discretion.  United States v. Evans, 216 F.3d 
80, 85 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied 531 U.S. 971 (2000).

     The government's case began with testimony from FBI 
Agent Fullmer about the wiretaps that had been placed on 
Kevin Gray's telephone.  The prosecutor asked the Agent:  
"What information specifically led the Safe Streets Task 
Force to focus on Mr. Gray as the subject of investigation?"  
Defense counsel objected to the question as calling for hear-
say.  The district court overruled that objection, and Agent 
Fullmer testified:

     We had received information from numerous sources 
     that Mr. Gray and his organization were involved in 
     trafficking in large amounts of narcotics, be it co-
     caine, heroin, marijuana, as well as being responsible 
     for numerous murders in the Washington, D.C. met-
     ropolitan area.
     
The prosecutor then elicited from the Agent a detailed expla-
nation of the FBI's investigation of the Gray organization, the 
legal process by which the FBI obtained a wiretap on Gray's 
telephone, how it recorded information from that telephone, 
and the process by which that information was analyzed and 
stored.  This included admission of the application for the 

wiretap and associated affidavits (some of which defense 
counsel consented to admission).

     Graham contends that the admission of the Agent's answer 
quoted above was error, and that all of the Agent's back-
ground testimony concerning the wiretap as well as the 
affidavits and the application for the wiretap were inadmissi-
ble hearsay and prejudicial.  Assuming that defense counsel's 
initial objection to the first question and the Agent's answer 
sufficed to preserve his objection to any later testimony that 
might have been hearsay, and that the first question and 
answer were inadmissible hearsay, see Evans, 216 F.3d at 84-
89, Graham's claim fails.  First, most of the testimony by the 
Agent was not hearsay, and, contrary to Graham's conten-
tions, was relevant to the reliability of the wiretap evidence.  
Second, Graham waived any claim as to the admissibility of a 
number of documents when defense counsel consented to 
their introduction as evidence.  Third, with respect to the 
limited testimony that is arguably hearsay, Graham fails to 
show how he was prejudiced.  The Agent's "background" 
testimony about the Gray conspiracy was duplicated by prop-
erly admitted evidence from two admitted conspirators, An-
drews and Dixon.  United States v. Lampkin, 159 F.3d 607, 
615 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

                                B.

     Graham's challenge to the prosecutor's cross-examination 
of the key defense witness would be more problematic had 
defense counsel made a contemporaneous objection.  Howev-
er, absent such objection, our review is confined to whether 
there was plain error, see United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 
725, 731-37 (1993), and we find none.

     The prosecutor asked Dale Harris about a series of previ-
ous convictions:  for marijuana possession in Maryland, for 
escape, for theft, for bail violations, for assault and battery, 
for possession of a controlled substance with intent to distrib-
ute in Maryland, and for possession of cocaine and heroin in 
D.C.  Harris admitted the conviction for marijuana posses-
sion, but denied the other convictions, claiming that another 

person had been using her name and had been arrested and 
convicted.  The prosecutor also asked Harris whether she 
had been charged but not convicted of possession of heroin;  
Harris admitted she had.  At the close of the evidence, 
defense counsel requested that the jury be instructed that the 
government had failed to impeach Harris, except for the 
conviction she admitted, and also moved for a new trial when 
the district court declined to give the instruction.

     Graham contends that the cross-examination of Harris was 
improper because:  (1) evidence of the Maryland conviction 
was improperly admitted under Fed. R. Evid. 609(a) as the 
conviction is neither a felony nor a crime of dishonesty or 
false statement;  (2) the prosecutor improperly asked Harris 
whether she had been charged but not convicted of a crime 
and asked about other convictions that were not felonies;  (3) 
the prosecutor did not have a good-faith basis for the cross-
examination;  and (4) the district court never ruled in advance 
that the prior-conviction evidence was admissible as more 
probative than prejudicial under Fed. R. Evid. 403.  Assum-
ing the Maryland conviction is not punishable by more than 
one year's imprisonment, and therefore does not qualify as a 
felony for purposes of Rule 609(a), as appears to be the case, 
Md. Code Ann., Art. 27, s 287(e) (2000) (repealed 2002), and 
assuming further that the prosecutor's questions about 
whether Harris had ever been charged but not convicted of a 
drug crime and about whether she had ever been convicted of 
any crimes in general were improper, as they appear to be, 
Jordan v. Medley, 711 F.2d 211, 218 (D.C. Cir. 1983), Graham 
fails to show that the alleged error is "clear" or "obvious," 
and "prejudicial" because it "affected the outcome of the 
district court proceedings," and that the error "seriously 
affect[s] the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial 
proceedings."  Olano, 507 U.S. at 734, 736.

     The challenged cross-examination involved Harris, not the 
defendant, and hence any error is likely to have been less 
prejudicial.  United States v. Logan, 998 F.2d 1025, 1032 
(D.C. Cir. 1993).  Further, the prosecutor never directly 
discussed the convictions in his closing arguments to the jury, 
referring instead to the question of whether Harris had "any 

motive to say something that's not true after the police ran up 
in her apartment several times" in searches of her apartment 
by the FBI and local police.  See id. at 1032.  Although 
Harris provided key eyewitness testimony in Graham's de-
fense, and the evidence whether Graham had dropped the 
drugs at Arthur Capers was hardly overwhelming (as only 
one of the two police officers at the scene testified that he had 
seen Graham drop the bags of heroin), more telling is the 
government's evidence through co-conspirator Andrews that 
Graham himself told Gray that he had left the bags in the 
area at the time.  Overall, then, the circumstances fail to 
indicate an error sufficiently prejudicial to warrant a new 
trial;  whether Graham dropped the drugs at the site or not 
was only relevant for one of the two charges, and the error 
only involved one of the multiple grounds on which the 
prosecutor sought to impeach the defense witness.  Graham's 
contention that the prosecutor's other questions were improp-
er is without merit because he fails to show that the convic-
tions are not felonies.  Moreover, the district court instructed 
the jury that a lawyer's question is not evidence, and thereby 
mitigated prejudice that might arise from any juror confu-
sion.  See, e.g., United States v. Clarke, 24 F.3d 257, 270 
(D.C. Cir. 1994).

     Graham's other contentions challenging Harris's cross ex-
amination also fail.  First, Graham fails to show that the 
prosecutor did not have a good-faith basis for the cross-
examination of Harris.  The prosecutor stated in advance that 
the government had a criminal history record for Dale Harris 
that it intended to rely upon.  Even assuming it would be 
preferable for the prosecutor, prior to cross-examination of a 
key defense witness, to ascertain that the witness is the 
person named in the criminal history, Graham does not 
proffer evidence to suggest that, as a result of the FBI 
searches, the government should have known that Dale Har-
ris was not the person identified in much of the criminal 
history.  Second, there is no evidence that Graham ever 
sought a Rule 403 analysis by the district court.  Third, 
although defense counsel requested a special instruction that 
Harris had not been impeached except as to the conviction 

she admitted, the requested instruction is different from an 
instruction advising the jury how it could permissibly use the 
evidence of Harris' prior conviction;  the proposed instruction 
would not have cured any prejudice that resulted from the 
government's improper questioning about the prior non-
felony conviction.

                                C.

     Graham's further contends, for the first time on appeal, 
that the district court erroneously instructed the jury by 
"essentially directing a verdict for the government by telling 
the jury that [Graham] was involved in the conspiracy and 
what his role was."  Appellant's Br. 39.  The district court 
instructed the jury that:

          The government has presented evidence that De-
     fendant Graham was involved in the conspiracy for 
     several months in the spring and summer of 1999.  
     The government has also presented evidence that 
     Defendant Graham's role in the conspiracy involved 
     the purchasing of heroin and cocaine from Kevin L. 
     Gray, the alleged leader of the charged conspiracy, 
     and the redistribution of that heroin and cocaine to 
     various purchasers in and around Washington, D.C.
     
Whatever its defects, the instruction falls short of directing a 
verdict for the government on an element of the crime.  See 
United States v. Defries, 129 F.3d 1293, 1310-12 (D.C. Cir. 
1997).  The instruction only summarized the type of evidence 
presented by the government and was not "so restrictive as 
to remove from the jury any of its factfinding authority."  
United States v. Breedlove, 204 F.3d 267, 271 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  
This point was made clear to the jury by other instructions:  
one shortly after the instruction quoted above, that the 
government must "prove each of the following elements [of 
conspiracy] beyond a reasonable doubt," listing the elements 
of conspiracy, and one earlier instruction, that the jury should 
disregard any expression or opinion by the district court 
regarding the facts.  Under the circumstances, inasmuch as 

defense counsel did not object in the district court, we find no 
plain error.

                                D.

     Turning to Graham's sentencing challenges, Graham first 
contends that, in light of the near ten-fold increase in his 
sentence as a result of the quantity of attributed drugs, the 
government must prove the facts underlying the attribution 
by clear and convincing evidence.  Because Graham did not 
object in the district court to the standard of proof for 
attribution, our review is for plain error, and we find none.

     This circuit has never applied the "clear and convincing" 
standard at sentencing.  United States v. Jackson, 161 F.3d 
24, 26-27 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  United States v. Toms, 136 F.3d 
176, 186-87 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  United States v. Kwong-Wah, 
966 F.2d 682, 688 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  Other circuits have 
rejected a heightened burden of proof.  United States v. 
Thompson, 51 F.3d 122, 125 (8th Cir. 1995);  United States v. 
Johnson, 32 F.3d 265, 268 n.1 (7th Cir. 1994).  But see, e.g., 
United States v. Jordan, 256 F.3d 922, 927-29 (9th Cir. 2001);  
United States v. Hopper, 177 F.3d 824, 833 (9th Cir. 1999).  
The Third Circuit, which pioneered the heightened standard, 
see United States v. Kikumura, 918 F.2d 1084, 1098-102 (3d 
Cir. 1990), has refused to apply it in cases similar to Graham's 
case, see United States v. Paulino, 996 F.2d 1541, 1545 & n.4 
(3d Cir. 1993);  see also United States v. Mack, 229 F.3d 226, 
234 (3d Cir. 2000) (listing cases).  Indeed, where the in-
creased punishment is based solely on the charged and con-
victed conduct, such as in drug cases (like the instant case) 
where drug quantity determines the offense level and there-
fore the guidelines range, and where no upward departure 
from the guidelines range is contemplated, courts have been 
less likely to apply a heightened standard.  See, e.g., Toms, 
136 F.3d at 187;  Kwong-Wah, 966 F.2d at 688;  see also 
Jordan, 256 F.3d at 928;  United States v. Behler, 14 F.3d 
1264, 1272 (8th Cir. 1994);  Paulino, 996 F.2d at 1545 & n.4.  
Given the lack of clarity concerning the standard, even as-
suming error by the district court in applying the preponder-

ance of evidence standard, any error was neither a "clear" nor 
"obvious" error.

     Graham further contends that the district court failed to 
determine the scope of his involvement in the conspiracy.  
See United States v. Childress, 58 F.3d 693, 722 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).  Graham had argued that the evidence showed he was 
simply a small-time drug dealer who only had a direct rela-
tionship with Gray and was not part of the larger conspiracy:  
"[T]here is no indication that Mr. Graham assisted Mr. Gray 
in any way other than the distribution of these piddling 
amount of drugs;  that is, the 40 grams or so of heroin."  The 
district court ruled that even accepting Graham's argument 
that he should only be held responsible for the drugs that he 
personally distributed, Graham was nonetheless responsible 
for 62 grams of cocaine base and more than a kilogram of 
heroin.

     In so ruling, the district court rejected defense counsel's 
challenge to the factual conclusion in the presentence report 
regarding the amount of drugs that Graham personally dis-
tributed.  Moreover, contrary to Graham's position on appeal, 
the record shows that the district court understood that the 
attributable drugs had to be reasonably foreseeable to Gra-
ham and within the scope of his agreement to join the Gray 
conspiracy.  Cf. Childress, 58 F.3d at 723.  That the district 
court's analysis was sparse is not determinative;  the district 
court focused on Graham's arguments contesting factual con-
clusions and rejected them, and referred to the 62 grams of 
cocaine base that the evidence indicated was given to Gra-
ham.  The district court thus made more than a generalized 
or conclusory finding of Graham's involvement.  United 
States v. Badru, 97 F.3d 1471, 1478 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  see 
United States v. Thomas, 114 F.3d 228, 256-57, 259-61 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997).

     Graham's challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence for 
the drug quantities attributed to him fares no better.  The 
presentence report, in setting the quantity of attributable 
drugs, relied on:  (1) Andrews' testimony that Gray gave 
Graham thirty-one grams of cocaine base on two occasions;  

(2) the intercepted telephone conversations between Graham 
and Gray indicating that "Graham was involved in several 
transactions of reselling of heroin for Kevin Gray," and that 
after Graham was initially taken into custody on May 26, he 
requested help from Gray by telephone;  (3) Dixon's testimo-
ny that he observed Gray handing to Graham fourteen grams 
of heroin wrapped in tissue paper, that Graham had given 
Gray money for the heroin after Gray told Graham that 
$1,400 was owed, and that Graham regularly called Gray;  and 
(4) Andrews' testimony that Graham regularly asked Gray for 
heroin and cocaine to sell because Graham needed money, 
that Gray regularly gave Graham drugs to resell, involving 
sixty to seventy bags of pre-cut heroin initially, and later un-
cut heroin, and that Graham sold drugs regularly at Arthur 
Capers.  As noted, the final presentence report concluded 
that the proper amount of drugs attributable to Graham was 
one to three kilograms of heroin, and 50 to 150 grams of 
cocaine base.

     Graham challenged whether there were any telephone con-
versations that supported the report's conclusion that he was 
involved in reselling heroin on a daily basis, as well as Dixon's 
testimony regarding the heroin transferred to Graham, noting 
that Dixon had only testified that he saw Gray hand some-
thing wrapped in tissue paper to Graham and that it was 
unclear from the testimony how many times Gray gave heroin 
to Graham.  Graham also challenged whether the testimony 
supported the conclusion that Gray gave Graham thirty-one 
grams of cocaine base on two occasions;  on appeal, Graham 
points to the contrary trial testimony that there was no 
cocaine available in the District of Columbia at the relevant 
time.  Finally, Graham questioned how the report had devel-
oped its final drug amounts.  In response, the government 
pointed to Andrews' testimony on the amount of cocaine base 
that Gray had given Graham and testimony from Andrews 
and Dixon regarding transfers of heroin to Graham.  The 
district court adopted the drug quantity conclusions in the 
presentence report, specifically referring to sixty-two grams 
of cocaine base.

     Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 32 requires that when 
a defendant alleges any factual inaccuracy in the presentence 
report, the district court should either make a finding resolv-
ing the controverted matter or determine that it will not 
consider the controverted matter in sentencing the defendant.  
United States v. Graham, 83 F.3d 1466, 1477 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  
While the government maintains that Graham waived any 
claim of error because he never asked the district court to 
make specific findings, referencing waivers under Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 12, see United States v. Caballero, 936 F.2d 1292, 
1296 (D.C. Cir. 1991), and under 18 U.S.C. s 3553(c), see 
United States v. McCabe, 270 F.3d 588, 590 (8th Cir. 2001), 
cert. denied 122 S. Ct. 1588 (2002), it is unnecessary to decide 
whether Graham made sufficient objection to the specificity of 
the district court's factual findings on the sufficiency and 
quality of the evidence supporting drug quantity.  Compare 
United States v. Edmond, 52 F.3d 1080, 1103-04 (D.C. Cir. 
1995) with United States v. Yeh, 278 F.3d 9, 14 (D.C. Cir. 
2002);  In re Sealed Case, 246 F.3d 696, 702 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  
United States v. Sobin, 56 F.3d 1423, 1428 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  
Assuming no waiver, the record shows that the district court 
sufficiently addressed Graham's challenges to the factual 
basis for the conclusions in the presentence report.  Although 
the evidence as to the amount of heroin is sparse, Andrews' 
testimony that Gray gave Graham cocaine base on at least 
two occasions was specific as to quantity, and that amount, 
from sixty-two to ninety-three grams, was sufficient to justify 
the offense level of thirty-two, U.S. Sentencing Guidelines 
s 2D1.1(c) (1998), at which Graham was sentenced.  With 
respect to the contrary testimony regarding the availability of 
cocaine base in the District during the summer of 1999, the 
district court referred Andrews' testimony in making its 
ruling, implicitly indicating that it was crediting Andrews' 
testimony.  Moreover, the record allowed the district court to 
resolve any contradiction in a number of alternative ways, by 
concluding, for example, that the contrary testimony was 
limited in either geographic or temporal scope.  Inasmuch as 
Graham never objected in the district court on the basis of 
the contrary trial testimony, the district court's factual find-

ings were sufficient.  Cf. United States v. Pinnick, 47 F.3d 
434, 437-38 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

                                E.

     Graham also contends that the district court erred by 
denying his request for a downward adjustment.  Section 
3B1.2 of the Sentencing Guidelines provides for a two-level 
adjustment if "the defendant was a minor participant in any 
criminal activity."  The corresponding application note states 
that this adjustment is appropriate for "any participant who 
is less culpable than most other participants, but whose role 
could not be described as minimal."  U.S. Sentencing Guide-
lines Manual s 3B1.2, cmt. 3 (1998).

     Our review of the district court's application of the Sentenc-
ing Guidelines to the facts of the case is for clear error, 
United States v. Washington, 106 F.3d 983, 1015 (D.C. Cir. 
1997), according "due deference to the district court's applica-
tion of the guidelines to the facts," United States v. Edwards, 
98 F.3d 1364, 1371 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (quotation omitted).  In 
applying the minor offender provision of the Guidelines, the 
court has pointed out that:

     Before it may find that a defendant was a minor 
     participant in the offense, however, the evidence 
     available to the [district] court at sentencing must, 
     at a minimum, show (i) that the "relevant conduct" 
     for which defendant would, within the meaning of 
     section 1B1.3(a)(1), be otherwise accountable in-
     volved more than one participant ... and (ii) that 
     the defendant's culpability for such conduct was 
     relatively minor compared to that of the other par-
     ticipant(s).
     
Caballero, 936 F.2d at 1299.  The district court may not rely 
solely on the "status" of a defendant within a criminal organi-
zation, such as a courier or a salesman.  Caballero, 936 F.2d 
at 1299;  see also Edwards, 98 F.3d at 1370.  It is clear error 
for a district court not to consider a downward adjustment 
where the district court has found that the defendant had a 

lower level of culpability than other participants in the con-
spiracy.  United States v. Mitchell, 49 F.3d 769, 784-85 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995).  On appeal this court looks at the entire record.  
Edwards, 98 F.3d at 1370-71.  In determining whether there 
is error, the court examines the defendant's culpability rela-
tive to others in the context of the relevant conduct that is 
being considered for sentencing purposes.  United States v. 
Olibrices, 979 F.2d 1557, 1560-61 (D.C. Cir. 1992).

     The determination of whether a defendant is eligible for a 
downward adjustment under Section 3B1.2 depends in large 
part on a determination of the amount of relevant conduct for 
which the defendant is being held responsible;  this relevant 
conduct is the denominator for purposes of the Section 3B1.2 
analysis.  To the extent that Graham contends that this 
denominator should be the totality of the conspiracy and not 
his particular activity, as is reflected in Graham's position 
that he was merely a low-level drug dealer and therefore 
should be eligible for this downward adjustment, he makes a 
flawed assumption about the proper denominator.  As Gra-
ham would have it, his culpability for purposes of Section 
3B1.2 would not depend on the relevant conduct for which he 
is being held responsible, but on the unrelated conduct of 
others in the conspiracy.  Graham's interpretation of the 
appropriate denominator is not reflected in the Sentencing 
Guidelines or the application notes, and he cites no source of 
authority to support his interpretation.  Thus, while the 
district court acknowledged that Graham "might have been a 
lesser participant in the overarching conspiracy," it conclud-
ed, with respect to the relevant conduct for which Graham 
was held responsible, that in view of "the kilo of heroin and 
the 62 grams of crack, [Graham] didn't have a minor or 
minimal role."

     Graham faces an uphill battle challenging the deference 
that this court owes to the district court's findings of fact.  To 
the extent that Graham's challenge attacks the district court's 
conclusion that he was not a minor participant with respect to 
the relevant conduct for which he was held responsible, 
contrary to Graham's view, there is evidence that he was an 
integral part of the Gray drug conspiracy.  The wiretaps 

revealed that he regularly sold drugs for Gray during a six-
week period in the summer of 1999.  There was evidence that 
Graham visited locations where Gray stored drugs, and that 
Graham asked Gray for protection from another individual 
who threatened him when they were competing for drug 
sales.  This evidence supports the district court's conclusion 
that Graham was not less culpable than other individuals who 
worked as retail drug salesmen for the Gray organization.  
Contrary to Graham's view, it would not be inconsistent for 
the district court to view the evidence, as does the govern-
ment, as showing that Graham is not a minor figure with 
respect to his relevant conduct in the Gray conspiracy but 
also showing increased attributed drug quantities with regard 
to the scope of the conspiracy that Graham entered.  The 
district court could properly conclude from the evidence, 
summarized above, that Graham was a significant cog in the 
Gray machine, and not a minor participant, even taking into 
account the substantial scope of the conspiracy in which he 
was involved.  To the extent that Graham contends that 
"[t]he problem with the district court's reasoning ... is that 
[he] was held responsible for far more drugs than the conduct 
in which he participated," Appellant's Br. at 54, he is again 
raising an unavailing challenge to the sufficiency of the 
evidence for drug quantity attribution.

                                F.

     Finally, Graham contends that the district court improperly 
sentenced him under s 841(b)(1)(A) contrary to the holding of 
the Supreme Court's decision in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 
U.S. 466 (2000).  Because the presentence report referred to 
his maximum sentence under s 841(b)(1)(A), and the district 
court stated that it was adopting the recommendations of the 
presentence report, Graham maintains that "in sentencing 
[him] to the top of the [Guideline] range of 168-210 months, 
the district court may well have been influenced by the wrong 
belief that [he] faced a life maximum sentence" pursuant to 
s 841(b)(1)(A).  Appellant's Br. at 43.  Graham further main-
tains, in light of his sentence to a five-year period of super-
vised release, that this portion of his sentence was based on 

the mandatory minimum sentence under s 841(b)(1)(A), and 
that he could not have been convicted of that offense because 
the question of drug quantity was never submitted to the jury 
as required by Apprendi.  Because Graham's only claims in 
the district court of sentencing error were a request for a 
new trial and an objection to the term of imprisonment on the 
ground that drug quantity had to be submitted to the jury 
under Apprendi, our review of his challenge to the period of 
supervised release is for plain error.  See United States v. 
Saro, 24 F.3d 283, 286-88 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

     Under s 841(b)(1)(C), a defendant faces a maximum prison 
sentence of twenty years and a mandatory minimum super-
vised release sentence of three years.  By contrast, 
s 841(b)(1)(A) sets a maximum term of imprisonment of life 
and a mandatory minimum term of supervised release of five 
years.  Drug quantity amounts determine which of the two 
provisions apply.  The issue of drug quantity was not submit-
ted to the jury at Graham's trial, despite Graham's arguments 
that Apprendi required it, because the district court agreed 
with the government that drug quantity under s 841(b) 
should only be a jury question where the government is 
seeking a prison sentence of more than twenty years.

     With respect to Graham's challenge to his term of impris-
onment, the district court sentenced Graham to less than the 
maximum term of imprisonment allowable under 
s 841(b)(1)(C).  Hence, Graham cannot show Apprendi error, 
for, in this circuit, "where the defendant was charged with 
and convicted of ... an unspecified s 841(b) offense" without 
a jury determination of drug quantity, as occurred in Gra-
ham's case, it "seems appropriate" that "because the defen-
dant was sentenced below (C)'s maximum, there was no 
'Apprendi error' at all."  United States v. Webb, 255 F.3d 890, 
898 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  see also United States v. Fields, 251 
F.3d 1041, 1043-44 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  In re Sealed Case, 246 
F.3d at 698-99.  Moreover, assuming Apprendi error, the 
fact that Graham's sentence was less than the twenty years' 
maximum under s 841(b)(1)(C) eliminates prejudice from the 
error.  See United States v. Samuel, 296 F.3d 1169, 1176 
(D.C. Cir. 2002);  Webb, 255 F.3d at 898.

     With respect to Graham's supervised release sentence, this 
circuit, in light of McMillian v. Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79 
(1986), has held that Apprendi does not apply to mandatory 
minimum sentencing.  United States v. Agramonte, 276 F.3d 
594, 597-98 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  Graham has not claimed that 
there is any inconsistency between the sentencing provisions 
of s 841(a)(1)(C) and the Sentencing Guidelines s 5D1.2, 
which, given the classification of the drug offense as a Class C 
felony, 18 U.S.C. s 3559(a), requires a supervised release 
sentence between two and three years, 18 U.S.C. s 3559(a).  
The question, therefore, is whether Graham's supervised re-
lease sentence was proper under s 841.  However, because 
neither the government nor the district court was specific 
about the provision of s 841 under which Graham was con-
victed, the question becomes whether drug quantity is an 
element of the offense defined in s 841, such that it must be 
submitted to the jury to be determined beyond a reasonable 
doubt, and a defendant must be convicted of violating a 
particular subparagraph of s 841, as argued by Graham.  
The alternative position, adopted by the government at sen-
tencing and on appeal, see Appellee's Br. at 48-51, is that 
drug quantity is merely a sentencing factor, to be determined 
by the district court at sentencing based on a preponderance 
of the evidence, and that a defendant need only be convicted 
of distributing some indeterminate amount of drugs under 
s 841.

     Prior to Apprendi, the circuit courts, including this circuit, 
held that the various provisions of s 841(b) established sen-
tencing factors based on drug quantity.  See Kwong-Wah, 
966 F.2d at 685.  After Apprendi, and after Graham was 
sentenced, this court interpreted s 841 as a tripartite statute 
establishing three separate offenses, with different maximum 
sentences based on drug quantity, and not a unitary statute 
with drug quantity as a sentencing factor.  Webb, 255 F.3d at 
895-96 (citing Fields, 242 F.3d at 396);  accord In re Sealed 
Case, 246 F.3d at 699.  The defendant in Webb, a career 
offender whose sentence had been enhanced on recidivism 
grounds, had challenged his thirty-year sentence under s 841 
on the grounds that drug quantity and the question of his 

prior conviction had not been submitted to the jury.  Webb, 
255 F.3d at 893.  In the course of rejecting defendant's 
Apprendi challenge, the court also had to address the role of 
a Sentencing Guidelines provision whose application depended 
on whether the defendant had been convicted of 
s 841(b)(1)(A), (B), or (C).  Id. at 899.  In addressing that 
question, the court read this circuit's opinion in Fields as 
having implicitly treated s 841 as a tripartite statute in light 
of the government's concession in Fields that the issue of 
drug quantity had to be submitted to the jury in order to 
increase the maximum sentence that could be imposed under 
s 841.  Id. at 896.  The court concluded in Webb that the 
district court erred in ruling that Webb could be guilty of a 
violation of s 841(b)(1)(A) and (B) when the issue of drug 
quantity had not been decided by the jury.  Id. at 900.  "[A] 
conviction for the (A) or (B) offense is not proper unless the 
relevant drug threshold has been stated in the indictment, 
submitted to the jury, and proven beyond a reasonable 
doubt."  Id.

     Consequently, in light of Webb, and perhaps even in light of 
Fields, the district court, in sentencing Graham, could not 
treat subparagraphs (A) and (C) of s 841 as mere sentencing 
factors, and to the extent it did it erred.  The question 
remains whether the error was "plain."  As noted, prior to 
Webb and Fields, "well-established precedent in this circuit 
held that" s 841 was a unitary statute, Webb, 255 F.3d at 894, 
and therefore the government did not need to prove drug 
quantity in order to establish a conviction with a maximum 
prison sentence of life.  See Kwong-Wah, 966 F.2d at 685.  
Apprendi itself, while decided prior to Graham's trial and 
prompting Graham to raise objections to the failure to submit 
drug quantity to the jury, "did not address the interpretation 
or constitutionality of s 841" nor predetermine whether s 841 
was a unitary or tripartite statute.  See Webb, 255 F.3d at 
895-96.  "In evaluating whether an error is 'plain,' ... where 
the law has changed since the time of trial, 'it is enough that 
an error be "plain" at the time of appellate consideration.' "  
Webb, 255 F.3d at 897 (quoting Johnson v. United States, 520 
U.S. 461, 468 (1997)).  Thus, even though Webb and Fields 

were decided after Graham's sentencing, the error of law is 
plain.

     Under the circumstances, we conclude that Graham's sub-
stantial rights were affected and a remand is required.  It is 
true that even if Graham had been convicted only of violations 
of s 841(b)(1)(C), the five-year supervised release sentence 
could have been imposed, because (C) only sets a three-year 
mandatory minimum requirement for supervised release.  
However, the presentence report and the district court judg-
ment indicate that Graham was to receive a five-year super-
vised release sentence under Count 1 of the indictment, under 
which Graham was to be sentenced pursuant to 
s 841(b)(1)(A), and a three-year supervised release under 
Count 14 of the indictment, under which Graham was to be 
sentenced pursuant to s 841(b)(1)(C).  In other words, the 
district court in sentencing Graham appears to have tracked 
the mandatory minimum sentencing provisions of s 841, and 
thus may have applied s 841(b)(1)(A), which increased Gra-
ham's supervised release period by two years.  In such a 
situation, "we will not permit our result to be guided by idle 
speculation as to the sentence that might be imposed by the 
district court on remand."  Fields, 251 F.3d at 1046 (quoting 
United States v. Jones, 235 F.3d 1231, 1238 (10th Cir. 2000)).  
Consequently, a remand is appropriate for resentencing of 
the term of supervised release under s 841(b)(1)(C).  See 
Saro, 24 F.3d at 288, 291-92.

     Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of conviction except 
we remand the case for resentencing under s 841(b)(1)(C) 
with respect to the term of Graham's supervised release.

                                                                             