                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 5, 2002   Decided December 24, 2002 

                           No. 02-5110

      Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

         Tommy G. Thompson, in his official capacity as, 
          Secretary, United States Department of Health 
                   and Human Services, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 01cv01453)

     John G. Roberts, Jr. argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were Jeffrey Pariser and Darrel J. Grin-
stead.

     Daniel J. Popeo and Richard A. Samp were on the brief 
for amici curiae Washington Legal Foundation, et al., in 
support of appellant.

     Sushma Soni, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause for federal appellees.  With her on the brief 
were Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and Scott R. 
McIntosh, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice.

     John R. Brautigam, Assistant Attorney General, State of 
Maine, argued the cause for intervenor Kevin W. Concannon 
in his capacity as Commissioner of the Maine Department of 
Human Services.  With him on the brief were G. Steven 
Rowe, Attorney General, and Paul Stern, Deputy Attorney 
General.

     Sarah Lenz Lock, Dorothy Siemon, Bruce Vignery, and 
Michael Schuster were on the brief for amicus curiae Ameri-
can Association of Retired Persons, in support of appellee.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson, and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Appellant Pharmaceutical Re-
search and Manufacturers of America ("PhRMA"), an associa-
tion of drug manufacturing and research firms, challenges a 
Medicaid demonstration project administered by the State of 
Maine under the auspices of the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services ("Secretary" or "HHS").  Maine's program 
offers low-income citizens a discount on prescription drugs, 
which is funded in part by manufacturer rebates and in part 
by a 2% state subsidy.  PhRMA claims that the Maine 
program mirrors a demonstration project that was imple-
mented by the State of Vermont, approved by HHS, but then 
declared unlawful under the Social Security Act ("Act") by 
this court in Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of 
America v. Thompson, 251 F.3d 219 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
("PhRMA I").  The District Court rejected PhRMA's chal-
lenge and granted summary judgment for the Secretary.  See 

Pharm. Research and Mfrs. of Am. v. Thompson, 191 
F. Supp. 2d 48 (D.D.C. 2002) (Mem. Op.) ("PhRMA II").

     The record shows that Maine's initial version of the disput-
ed demonstration program was explicitly patterned after Ver-
mont's program.  Eugene Gessow Deposition ("Gessow 
Dep.") at 8, reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 58.  After 
the decision in PhRMA I, officials in Maine decided to modify 
that state's program, adding a 2% state contribution to the 
manufacturer rebates to avoid the fate of Vermont's program.  
However, this modification was never approved by the Secre-
tary.  Therefore, to the extent that the modified Maine 
program purports to be different from the flawed Vermont 
program, it has yet to be considered or approved by the 
federal government.  The only program from Maine that the 
Secretary has endorsed is one identical to the Vermont 
program that was found unlawful by the court in PhRMA I. 
We therefore reverse the judgment of the District Court and 
enter judgment for PhRMA.

     We have no need to consider questions about the extent to 
which the Secretary has authority to "regard" a state pay-
ment as a Medicaid payment;  whether the 2% subsidy is 
sufficient to trigger the rebate obligations under the Act;  or 
whether the Act requires that all Medicaid "payments" in-
clude federal matching funds.  Until the Secretary has made 
clear his views on these questions, we decline to address 
these matters.

                          I. Background

     Under the Social Security Act, states can develop Medicaid 
"pilot" or "demonstration" projects that experiment with new 
methods of providing health care to low-income citizens.  The 
Secretary may approve such projects if they will "assist in 
promoting the objectives" of the Medicaid system.  42 U.S.C. 
s 1315(a) (2000).  Upon granting such approval, the Secre-
tary can waive certain federal requirements that would nor-
mally apply to traditional Medicaid programs.  Id. 
s 1315(a)(1).  The Secretary also has authority to "regard" 

costs for a demonstration project as an "expenditure" pursu-
ant to that state's Medicaid plan.  Id. s 1315(a)(2).

     In January 2001, the State of Maine received the Secre-
tary's authorization to create a demonstration project for a 
prescription drug benefit.  See Secretary's Approval Letter 
to Maine Department of Human Services (Jan. 18, 2001) 
("HHS Letter"), reprinted in J.A. 101-03;  Health Care Fi-
nancing Administration Special Terms & Conditions ("Terms 
and Conditions"), reprinted in J.A. 105-21.  Through its 
Prescription Drug Discount Program ("PDDP"), Maine gives 
a discount on drug purchases to a specified category of people 
who are not otherwise eligible for Medicaid assistance.  HHS 
Letter at 1, J.A. 101.  The State's administrators expressly 
patterned this demonstration project after one administered 
by the State of Vermont.  See Maine Department of Human 
Services Proposal Letter to HHS (Jan. 5, 2001) ("Maine 
Proposal"), reprinted in J.A. 75-104 at 76;  Gessow Dep. at 8, 
J.A. 58.  A central goal of Maine's project design was to 
provide a prescription drug benefit without creating net costs 
for the State.  Gessow Dep. at 8, J.A. 58;  Maine Proposal, 
J.A. 76-77, 98.  Maine thus proposed that the funding for 
PDDP would come from special rebates paid by drug compa-
nies.  See Healthy Maine Prescriptions Operational Protocol 
("Operational Protocol"), reprinted in J.A. 125-60.  As a 
condition of participating in Medicaid, the drug companies 
have a duty under the Social Security Act to offer rebates so 
that state purchasers pay the best available rates for pharma-
ceutical products.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1396r-8(b)(1)(A).  Maine 
sought to piggyback on this requirement to fund its PDDP.  
Operational Protocol at 126.

     On June 8, 2001, soon after Maine implemented PDDP, this 
court issued PhRMA I.  The court held that Vermont's 
program was impermissible under the Act, because there was 
no "net expenditure of funds for Medicaid purposes in an 
amount determined independently of the amount of the re-
bates."  PhRMA I, 251 F.3d at 225.  The court found that 
the State merely acted as a "conduit" in the discount pro-

gram, recouping all of its spending from drug company 
rebates.  See id. at 223.

     Maine reacted to PhRMA I by adopting several revisions 
to PDDP (renamed the Healthy Maine Prescription Pro-
gram).  Eugene Gessow Declaration at 4-5, J.A. 68-69.  The 
change most relevant to this appeal is the State's decision to 
contribute 2% of the annual costs of PDDP.  Gessow Dep. at 
41, J.A. 63.  Maine's so-called "two-percent solution" comes 
from state appropriations that are not matched by federal 
dollars.  The contribution is not mandated by state law and 
the amount and frequency of state contributions are not 
otherwise guaranteed.  And, most significantly, Maine's re-
vised program was never submitted to the Secretary for 
consideration or approval.  See id. at 59-60.

     PhRMA filed suit in the District Court, charging that 
Maine's program was illegal under the Social Security Act 
and, consequently, the Secretary's approval of the program 
was unreasonable under the Administrative Procedure Act 
("APA").  See PhRMA II, 191 F. Supp. 2d at 51-52.  Appel-
lant first argued that because the Secretary had never ap-
proved the "two-percent solution," Maine's program was iden-
tical to the rebate scheme rejected in PhRMA I.  Second, 
PhRMA claimed that even if the revisions had been autho-
rized, the State expenditure did not qualify as a Medicaid 
"payment," because the amount was de minimis and the 
money was not matched by federal funding.  Third, appellant 
claimed that the program exceeded the Social Security Act's 
"nominal" limits for all co-payments in state Medicaid pro-
grams.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1396o(b)(3).  Finally, PhRMA 
claimed that, by allowing an illegal demonstration program to 
proceed, the Secretary violated the terms of the APA.

     On cross-motions for summary judgment, the District 
Court ruled against PhRMA on all counts and granted sum-
mary judgment for appellees.  PhRMA II, 191 F. Supp. 2d at 
51.  The court rejected each of appellant's claims that PDDP 
was impermissible.  The judge found PhRMA I distinguish-
able because of Maine's 2% contribution toward the prescrip-
tion discount costs.  Id. at 63.  The court also determined 
that the Secretary had reasonably exercised his authority to 
approve Maine's payments "as Medicaid expenditures," which 
were also sufficient to trigger the manufacturer rebate re-

quirement in the statute.  Id. at 64-66.  Finally, the court 
found that PhRMA did not have standing to assert claims 
that the co-payments in Maine's program exceed the "nomi-
nal" limits set forth in the Social Security Act.  Id. at 59-61.

     PhRMA appeals the decision below and renews each of 
these claims.

                           II. Analysis

     We limit our discussion to PhRMA's first argument - that 
the demonstration project is illegal under the Social Security 
Act in light of PhRMA I.  This issue is dispositive, so we 
reach no other.

     The District Court's decision hinges on its finding that a 
2% subsidy is a part of Maine's demonstration project.  This 
finding cannot carry the day.  Under the original proposal 
that the Secretary approved in January 2001, the single 
source of revenue for the program was to be the rebate from 
drug companies.  As PhRMA I holds, Maine cannot impose a 
rebate obligation on drug companies where neither the State 
nor the federal government makes a Medicaid "payment."  
251 F.3d at 224-25.

     Maine insists that the revised program cures the flaws 
uncovered in the Vermont program.  This is far from clear on 
the record before us.  Under the revised program, although 
Maine presently has volunteered to contribute 2% of the 
project's costs, this contribution is not guaranteed by state 
law.  In other words, it is not an official component of PDDP.  
The amount can be changed and the contribution can be 
discontinued at any time.  This does not appear to be mean-
ingfully different from the Vermont program.

     We need not reach this issue, however.  The Social Securi-
ty Act requires HHS to approve all Medicaid demonstration 
projects, see 42 U.S.C. s 1315(a).  However, all parties agree 
that the Secretary has never formally considered or endorsed 
Maine's revised program that includes the 2% contribution.  
Therefore, the revised program is not properly before this 
court for review.

     Appellees nonetheless claim that the "two percent solution" 
is consistent with the original terms that the Secretary did 

approve.  But the record simply does not support this argu-
ment.  In reviewing Maine's program, the Secretary merely 
indicated that the State could not look to the federal govern-
ment to cover funding shortfalls:

          If, in any quarter, the State believes subsidies are 
     likely to exceed rebates collected, the State will not 
     request [federal money] for the estimated difference 
     between subsidies paid and anticipated rebates col-
     lected.  The state will perform an annual reconcilia-
     tion of subsidies paid and rebates received 180 days 
     after the end of each demonstration year.  The state 
     will return to [HHS] the Federal share of any 
     subsidies claimed in excess of applicable rebates.  
     Rebates collected in excess of subsidies paid to 
     pharmacies in any given year will be considered in 
     the calculation of the pharmacy subsidy percentage 
     for the next demonstration year.
     
Terms and Conditions at 11, J.A. 115.  This language, which 
is repeated in the State's Operational Protocol, see Operation-
al Protocol at 10, J.A. 134, merely affirms Maine's duty to 
reconcile any budgetary shortfalls if they occur in PDDP.  
There is nothing in the record to indicate that HHS consid-
ered and approved Maine's revised program which is founded 
on an unguaranteed 2% contribution.

     Appellees also suggest that federal approval is implied in a 
June 1 letter from the Secretary that acknowledges a modifi-
cation to PDDP.  But the only programmatic change dis-
cussed in that document pertains to the project's scope and 
not its source of funding.  See HHS Letter to Maine Dep't of 
Human Services (June 1, 2001), reprinted in J.A. 299-300 
(approving a modification "to include coverage for all individ-
uals under 300 percent of the [poverty line] - rather than for 
adults only - as was inadvertently approved.").  This commu-
nication occurred before PhRMA I and Maine's revisions, and 
its language does not endorse a limited state contribution to 
assist in the funding of PDDP.

     Maine's only federally approved version of PDDP mirrors 
Vermont's legally flawed program, i.e., one in which all costs 

are covered by drug discount rebates, with no required state 
or federal "payments" under Medicaid.  This approach is 
clearly forbidden under the Social Security Act for the rea-
sons stated in PhRMA I.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the aforementioned reasons, the judgment of the Dis-
trict Court is hereby reversed and summary judgment is 
entered for appellant.

     