                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 10, 2002    Decided January 17, 2003 

                           No. 01-1373

        Department of the Air Force, 436th Airlift Wing, 
                      Dover Air Force Base, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Federal Labor Relations Authority, 
                            Respondent

    American Federation of Government Employees, Local 1709, 
                    Intervenor for Respondent

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority

     Sandra Wien Simon, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for petitioner.  With her on the briefs 
was William Kanter, Deputy Director.

     David M. Smith, Solicitor, Federal Labor Relations Au-
thority, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were William R. Tobey, Deputy Solicitor, and James F. 
Blandford, Attorney.

     Kevin M. Grile argued the cause for intervenor.  With him 
on the brief were Mark D. Roth and Charles A. Hobbie.

     Before:  Sentelle, Rogers and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  The Department of the Air 
Force, 436th Airlift Wing, Dover Air Force Base ("Air 
Force") petitions for review of an order from the Federal 
Labor Relations Authority ("FLRA") concluding that the Air 
Force committed an unfair labor practice by conducting a 
formal discussion with a bargaining unit employee concerning 
the mediation of a formal Equal Employment Opportunity 
("EEO") grievance without affording the labor union of which 
the employee is a member notice and an opportunity to be 
present pursuant to 5 U.S.C. s 7114(a)(2)(A) (2000).  The 
FLRA seeks enforcement of its order.  The Air Force argues 
that an EEO complaint is not a "grievance" under section 
7103(a)(9) and, thus, that it does not trigger the Union's 
formal discussion rights under section 7114(a)(2)(A).  The Air 
Force also argues that the FLRA's interpretation of section 
7114(a)(2)(A) is impermissible, urging us to adopt the reason-
ing of the Ninth Circuit in IRS, Fresno Service Center, 
Fresno, Calif. v. FLRA, 706 F.2d 1019 (9th Cir. 1983).  Be-
cause we agree with the FLRA that its interpretation is 
permissible, we deny the Air Force's petition for review and 
grant the FLRA's cross-application for enforcement of its 
order.

                                I

     The 1972 amendments to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
extend coverage of the Act to include the employment prac-
tices of the federal government.  Pub. L. No. 92-261, s 11, 86 
Stat. 111 (1972) (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. s 2000e-16 
(2000)).  The authority for enforcing the Civil Rights Act 

resides with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
("EEOC").  42 U.S.C. s 2000e-4 (2000).

     Under EEOC regulations, an employee is required to at-
tempt to resolve his complaint on an informal basis (e.g., pre-
complaint counseling) before filing a formal complaint.  Pur-
suant to the federal sector EEO program, agencies are 
responsible for investigating complaints filed against them by 
their employees.  29 C.F.R. s 1614.108(a) (2002).  Mediation 
is often available in appropriate cases to assist the parties in 
resolving their disputes.  In this case, the Air Force had a 
contract with Resolution Group to provide mediation services.  
The contract provides that Resolution Group will provide its 
services pursuant to the Alternative Dispute Resolution Act, 5 
U.S.C. s 571 et seq. (2000) ("ADR Act").

     EEOC regulations encourage agencies to settle EEO cases.  
They are encouraged to "incorporate alternative dispute reso-
lution [ADR] techniques into their investigative efforts" in 
order to promote early resolution of disputes.  29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.108(b).  They are instructed to make "reasonable ef-
forts" to voluntarily settle disputes as early as possible.  29 
C.F.R. s 1614.603.

     EEOC regulations provide that when a complaint of dis-
crimination is covered by a collective-bargaining agreement 
("CBA") that permits such complaints to be raised in a 
negotiated grievance procedure, the person filing the com-
plaint "must elect to raise the matter under either part 1614 
or the negotiated grievance procedure, but not both."  29 
C.F.R. s 1614.301(a).  On the other hand, "[w]hen a person is 
not covered by a [CBA] that permits allegations of discrimi-
nation to be raised in a negotiated grievance procedure, 
allegations of discrimination shall be processed as complaints 
under [EEOC regulations part 1614]."  29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.301(b).

     Section 1614.109(e) provides that attendance at hearings is 
limited to those with direct knowledge relating to the com-
plaint.  Furthermore, "[h]earings are part of the investigative 
process and are thus closed to the public."  29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.109(e).

     EEOC Management Directive 110 ("MD 110") is a docu-
ment issued by the EEOC to provide federal agencies with 
EEOC policies, procedures, and guidance relating to the 
processing of employment discrimination complaints governed 
by part 1614 of EEOC regulations.  EEOC regulations and 
MD 110 require that all agencies establish an ADR program 
to be utilized during the pre-complaint process as well as 
during the formal complaint process.  29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.102(b)(2);  MD 110, Ch. 3, s I.

     MD 110 also provides that agencies must be mindful of the 
information disclosure prohibitions imposed by the Privacy 
Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552a (2000).  Pre- and post-complaint infor-
mation is contained in a system of records that are subject to 
the Privacy Act.  This information "cannot be disclosed to a 
union unless the complaining party elects union representa-
tion or gives his/her written consent."  MD 110, Ch. 3, 
s II(A)(6).

     Confidentiality is an essential component to the success of 
agency ADR proceedings.  MD 110, Ch. 3, s VII(A)(3).

     Parties who know that their ADR statements and infor-
     mation are kept confidential will feel free to be frank and 
     forthcoming during the proceeding, without fear that 
     such information may later be used against them.  To 
     maintain that degree of confidentiality, there must be 
     explicit limits placed on the dissemination of ADR infor-
     mation.
     
Id.  Agencies are encouraged to issue their own written 
policies to protect the confidentiality of ADR proceedings.  
Id.

     The Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Act, 5 
U.S.C. s 7101 et seq. (the "Act"), provides a general frame-
work for regulating labor-management relations for the fed-
eral government.  The Act provides that CBAs shall contain 
procedures for the settlement of grievances.  5 U.S.C. 
s 7121(a)(1).  However, the parties to a CBA can exclude any 
subject from the coverage of the CBA and its grievance 
procedures.  Id.

     The Act regulates the manner in which CBAs are negotiat-
ed as well as the manner in which a bargaining unit employee 
may challenge adverse personnel actions.  Section 7114 of the 
Act defines the right of representation of the employees in 
the grievance process.  It provides that

     [a]n exclusive representative of an appropriate unit in an 
     agency shall be given the opportunity to be represented 
     at -
     
     any formal discussion between one or more representa-
     tives of the agency and one or more employees in the 
     unit or their representatives concerning any grievance or 
     any personnel policy or practices or other general condi-
     tion of employment.   
5 U.S.C. s 7114(a)(2).  Section 7103(a)(9) defines what consti-
tutes a "grievance."

     "[G]rievance" means any complaint -
     
     (A) by any employee concerning any matter relating to 
     the employment of the employee;
     
     (B) by any labor organization concerning any matter 
     relating to the employment of any employee;  or
     
     (C) by an employee, labor organization, or agency con-
     cerning -
     
          (i) the effect or interpretation, or a claim of breach, of 
          a [CBA];  or
          
          (ii) any claimed violation, misinterpretation, or misap-
          plication of any law, rule, or regulation affecting condi-
          tions of employment.       
5 U.S.C. s 7103(a)(9).

     The matters to be processed under the CBA's grievance 
procedures are expressly limited by section 7121(d) of the 
Act, which preserves the employee's right to proceed with a 
discrimination claim through existing statutory schemes.  
Section 7121(d), similarly to part 1614 of EEOC regulations, 
provides for the aggrieved employee to elect his means of 
seeking relief.  If an "aggrieved employee" is affected by a 
prohibited personnel practice under 5 U.S.C. s 2302(b)(1) 

(2000) (incorporating the Civil Rights Act) that also falls 
within the coverage of the negotiated grievance procedure, 
the employee "may raise the matter under a statutory proce-
dure or the negotiated procedure, but not both."  5 U.S.C. 
s 7121(d).  Section 7121(d) notes that selection of the negoti-
ated grievance procedure does not preclude the aggrieved 
employee from requesting EEOC review of a final decision in 
a matter "involving a complaint of discrimination of the type 
prohibited by any law administered by the [EEOC]."  5 
U.S.C. s 7121(d).  Thus, section 7121(d) provides for alterna-
tive avenues of relief, and the EEOC has final review authori-
ty over any decision resulting from the grievance procedure 
involving discrimination within the EEOC's jurisdiction.

     Elizey Jones, Jr., a member of the bargaining unit of 
employees at Dover AFB, filed a formal EEO complaint of 
discrimination pursuant to part 1614 of the EEOC regulations 
in November of 1999 in connection with a suspension that had 
been imposed upon him.  Jones did not file a complaint 
pursuant to the CBA grievance procedure because the CBA 
explicitly excludes claims of discrimination from the grievance 
procedure.  Labor-Management Contract between Dover Air 
Force Base, Delaware and Local 1709, AFGE at Art. 22, s 3 
("The negotiated Grievance procedures will not cover/pertain 
to grievances or appeals concerning ... EEO complaints.").

     Jones requested that the Air Force initiate mediation of his 
complaint pursuant to EEOC regulations.  The Air Force 
referred this request to the Resolution Group.  Kathy Frag-
noli, owner of the Resolution Group, was assigned to mediate 
the dispute.

     Prior to the mediation, Jones and the agency representa-
tive, Captain Rockenbach, signed a confidentiality agreement 
in order to preserve the confidentiality of the mediation.  On 
January 18, 2000, mediator Fragnoli, Jones, and Rockenbach 
participated in a mediation proceeding for approximately six 
hours.  About 20% of the time was spent in joint sessions, the 
rest in individual caucuses.  The parties failed to reach a 
settlement.  Jones' union, Local 1709 of the American Feder-

ation of Government Employees, was neither notified of, nor 
given the opportunity to attend, the mediation.

     Local 1709 filed an unfair labor practice complaint with the 
FLRA, and a hearing was held before Administrative Law 
Judge Garvin Lee Oliver (the "ALJ").  The ALJ concluded 
that the mediation proceedings constituted a formal discus-
sion within the meaning of section 7114(a)(2)(A) of the Act 
and that the Air Force violated that section by failing to 
provide Local 1709 notice and an opportunity to be represent-
ed at the mediation.  The ALJ found that the mediation 
concerned a grievance within the meaning of section 
7114(a)(2)(A), relying on an FLRA decision that formal EEO 
complaints are grievances within section 7114(a)(2)(A) not-
withstanding a negotiated grievance procedure that excludes 
discrimination complaints.  See Luke Air Force Base, Ariz., 
54 F.L.R.A. 716 (1998), rev'd, 208 F.3d 221 (9th Cir. 1999) 
(Table).  The ALJ also concluded that the presence of a union 
representative at the mediation of an EEO complaint would 
not conflict with EEOC regulations or the ADR Act.

     The Air Force filed exceptions to the decision of the ALJ.  
The FLRA agreed with the ALJ that the Air Force violated 
the Act by failing to provide Local 1709 with notice and an 
opportunity to be heard.  The FLRA found that the media-
tion concerned a grievance.  In doing so, the FLRA focused 
on the language of section 7103(a)(9) which states that a 
grievance is "any complaint ... by any employee concerning 
any matter relating to the employment of the employee."  5 
U.S.C. s 7103(a)(9) (emphasis added).  The FLRA found that 
this broad definition included any employment-related com-
plaint, regardless of the forum chosen.

     The FLRA rejected the Ninth Circuit's determination that 
the formal discussion right does not apply during EEOC 
proceedings because those complaints are "discrete and sepa-
rate from the grievance process to which 5 U.S.C. ss 7103 
and 7114 are directed."  IRS Fresno, 706 F.2d at 1024.  The 
FLRA also rejected the Air Force's argument that section 
7121 provides a basis for limiting the definition of grievance.  
The FLRA relied on this Court's decision in National Trea-

sury Employees Union v. FLRA, 774 F.2d 1181 (D.C. Cir. 
1985) ("NTEU"), in which this Court held that section 7121 
provides that a grievance includes both those complaints filed 
pursuant to a negotiated grievance procedure and those filed 
pursuant to alternative statutory procedures.  Id. at 1187.  
The FLRA, after reviewing the legislative history of the Act, 
concluded that the term grievance should not be limited to 
matters covered by a negotiated grievance procedure.  More-
over, the FLRA held that to the extent the legislative history 
supports a narrower definition of grievance, it does so only 
with respect to section 7121, not the formal discussion right 
provisions of section 7114.

     The FLRA rejected the Air Force's arguments that unions 
have no institutional interest in the processing of EEO com-
plaints.  The FLRA stated that unions have an interest in 
how such complaints are resolved and that their interest does 
not depend on the forum in which the employee files his 
complaint.  The FLRA, citing Department of Veterans Af-
fairs v. FLRA, 3 F.3d 1386, 1390 (10th Cir. 1993), noted that 
the resolution of one individual complaint may bear on the 
rights of other bargaining unit employees.

     The FLRA also rejected the Air Force's argument that the 
exclusion of EEO disputes from the negotiated grievance 
procedure amounts to a waiver of any rights Local 1709 has 
with respect to such matters.  The FLRA remarked that 
Local 1709 may have excluded these matters simply to avoid 
some of the expenses related to processing EEO grievances.

     The FLRA found no conflict between Local 1709's formal 
discussion right and EEOC regulations or the ADR Act.  The 
FLRA found no EEOC regulation precluding union attend-
ance.  With respect to the ADR Act, the FLRA found that 
Local 1709 was a party under the ADR Act because it was 
"entitled as of right to be admitted," 5 U.S.C. s 551(3), 
pursuant to its formal discussion rights under section 
7114(a)(2)(A) of the Act.  In the alternative, the FLRA ruled 
that the ADR Act contemplates the attendance and partic-
ipation of "nonparty participants."  5 U.S.C. s 574(a)(1), (e).  
Lastly, the FLRA dismissed the Air Force's remaining argu-

ments as conjectural.  The Air Force had cited potential 
problems with the FLRA's rule that the FLRA thought 
purely hypothetical in the present case.

     The Air Force petitioned for review here.

                                II

     Section 7103(a)(9) defines "grievance" as "any complaint 
... by any employee concerning any matter relating to the 
employment of the employee."  5 U.S.C. s 7103(a)(9).  Al-
though the Air Force contends that the EEO proceeding 
initiated by Jones is not a grievance within the meaning of 
section 7103(a)(9), our decision in NTEU demonstrates other-
wise.  See 774 F.2d at 1186-87 (holding that a grievance 
includes both those complaints filed pursuant to a negotiated 
grievance procedure and those filed pursuant to alternative 
statutory procedures).  The Air Force suggests that NTEU is 
distinguishable because it involved a Merit Systems Protec-
tion Board ("MSPB") proceeding rather than an EEO pro-
ceeding;  however, our analysis in NTEU relied upon the text, 
structure, and legislative history of the Act and did not rest 
on the type of grievance in question.  See 774 F.2d at 1185-
88.  We find no reason to distinguish NTEU;  accordingly, we 
will read the term "grievance" as we did in that case.

     Because the present case involves a "grievance" as defined 
in section 7103, Local 1709's section 7114 formal discussion 
rights are triggered, and we turn to the issue of whether the 
FLRA's construction of section 7114(a)(2)(A) passes Chevron 
muster.  In interpreting an agency's enabling or organic 
statute, we "employ[ ] traditional tools of statutory construc-
tion" to determine "whether Congress has directly spoken to 
the precise question at issue."  Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natu-
ral Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837, 843 n.9, 842 (1984).  We 
"must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of 
Congress;"  if the statute is unambiguous on the question at 
issue, our inquiry ends there.  Id. at 842-43 (Chevron step 
one).  Where "the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect 
to the specific issue, the question for the court is whether the 
agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the 

statute."  Id. at 843 (Chevron step two).  The Supreme Court 
has stated that the FLRA is entitled to "considerable defer-
ence when it exercises its special function of applying the 
general provisions of the [Act] to the complexities of federal 
labor relations."  National Fed'n of Fed. Employees, Local 
1309 v. Dep't of the Interior, 526 U.S. 86, 99 (1999) (quotation 
omitted).

     Section 7114(a)(2)(A) provides that a union has a right to be 
represented at "any formal discussion between one or more 
representatives of the agency and one or more employees in 
the unit or their representatives concerning any grievance or 
any personnel policy or practices or other general condition of 
employment."  5 U.S.C. s 7114(a)(2)(A).  The FLRA has 
construed this language as providing Local 1709 the right to 
have a union representative present at the mediation of a 
formal EEO complaint filed by Jones, one of Local 1709's 
members.

     The language of section 7114(a)(2)(A) is quite broad.  Be-
cause it does not yield a clear and unambiguous interpreta-
tion, we move past step one to step two of the Chevron 
inquiry.  The FLRA's construction is a natural reading of the 
broad statutory language.  In addition, the FLRA's construc-
tion is supported by our decision in NTEU.  774 F.2d at 1189 
(holding that section 7114(a)(2)(A) provides "that an exclusive 
representative has the right to be present at any formal 
discussion of a grievance between management and a bar-
gaining unit employee").  Nevertheless, the Air Force argues 
that the FLRA's construction is impermissible, urging the 
Court to follow the Ninth Circuit's reading of section 
7114(a)(2)(A) in IRS Fresno, 706 F.2d 1019.  In that case, the 
Ninth Circuit held that a pre-complaint conciliation confer-
ence was not a grievance, explaining that EEOC procedures 
"are not controlled by [section] 7114(a)(2)(A) because they are 
discrete and separate from the grievance process to which 
[sections] 7103 and 7114 are directed."  IRS Fresno, 706 F.2d 
at 1024.  The problem with this argument is that we previ-
ously disagreed with the Ninth Circuit's narrow reading of 
section 7114(a)(2)(A).  NTEU, 774 F.2d at 1188.  Further-
more, as we pointed out in NTEU, IRS Fresno appears "to be 

based primarily on its conclusion that the precomplaint con-
ference did not constitute a 'formal' discussion" rather than 
on its brief analysis of the grievance issue.  Id.

     As it did with the grievance issue, the Air Force attempts 
to distinguish NTEU on the grounds that EEO proceedings 
utilized by Jones here are a different vehicle than MSPB 
proceedings utilized in NTEU.  The Air Force notes that the 
Ninth Circuit has treated EEO proceedings and MSPB pro-
ceedings differently.  Compare IRS Fresno, 706 F.2d 1019 
(finding no formal discussion right in EEO proceeding) with 
Dep't of Veterans Affairs Med. Ctr. v. FLRA, 16 F.3d 1526 
(9th Cir. 1994) (finding a formal discussion right in MSPB 
proceeding).  However, the Ninth Circuit itself has noted that 
our reasoning in NTEU, rejecting the IRS Fresno analysis, is 
more persuasive than that court's own reasoning in IRS 
Fresno.  Veterans Affairs Med. Ctr., 16 F.3d at 1534 n.4.

     The Air Force also attempts to evade NTEU by emphasiz-
ing the primacy of an aggrieved employee's rights in the 
context of a discrimination claim.  The Air Force notes that 
in NTEU we acknowledged in a footnote that "in the case of 
grievances arising out of alleged discrimination ..., Congress 
has explicitly decided that a conflict between the rights of 
identifiable victims of discrimination and the interests of the 
bargaining unit must be resolved in favor of the former."  774 
F.2d at 1189 n.12.  However, the point we made in footnote 
12 of NTEU is that "a direct conflict between the rights of an 
exclusive representative under s 7114(a)(2)(A) and the rights 
of an employee victim of discrimination should ... presum-
ably be resolved in favor of the latter."  Id.  Such a direct 
conflict is not present here.

     The Air Force argues that there is a conflict between the 
FLRA's construction of section 7114(a)(2)(A) and the confi-
dentiality protections of both sections of the ADR Act (5 
U.S.C. s 574(a) & (b)) and the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552a.  
This argument fails because neither of the statutes cited by 
the Air Force prohibits union attendance at ADR proceed-
ings.  The provisions of the ADR Act cited by the Air Force 
concern only the confidentiality of communications made at 

an ADR proceeding and do not address what persons or 
parties may attend an ADR proceeding.  5 U.S.C. s 574.1  
Similarly, the Privacy Act concerns the confidentiality of 
records rather than what parties may attend an ADR pro-
ceeding, 5 U.S.C. s 552a, and this case does not present a 
situation where the presence of a union representative in an 
ADR proceeding would result in the revelation of confidential 
information in violation of the Privacy Act.  In other words, 
neither the ADR Act nor the Privacy Act creates a conflict 
(much less a direct conflict) with section 7114(a)(2)(A).

     The Air Force also argues that the FLRA's construction of 
section 7114(a)(2)(A) is impermissible because of EEOC regu-
lation 29 C.F.R. s 1614.109(e), which provides that attendance 
at agency hearings is "limited to persons determined by the 
administrative judge to have direct knowledge relating to the 
complaint."  However, as the Air Force acknowledged at oral 
argument, this regulation says nothing about what happens at 
ADR proceedings.

     Left without a statute or regulation as a hook, the Air 
Force attempts to hang its hat on an agency manual, MD 110.  
Section VII of Chapter 3 of MD 110 addresses what it refers 
to as ADR "core principles."  It states:  "Confidentiality must 
be maintained by the parties, by any agency employees 
involved in the ADR proceeding and in the implementation of 
an ADR resolution...."  MD 110, Ch. 3, s VII(A)(3).  The 
Air Force contends that union presence at ADR proceedings 
would undermine the confidentiality of the process.  This 
argument amounts to nothing more than the Air Force's 
doubt that union representatives can keep confidential mat-
ters confidential.  Union representatives are often in the 
position of having to maintain confidentiality.  More impor-
tantly, even assuming that an inconsistency between an agen-
cy manual and a statute constitutes a conflict, the Air Force 

__________
     1 It is not entirely clear whether the ADR Act is applicable in this 
case.  The ADR Act by its terms is voluntary and merely supple-
ments, rather than limits, other available ADR techniques.  5 
U.S.C. s 572(c).

again fails to show a conflict with the FLRA's construction of 
section 7114(a)(2)(A).

     It is important to note one other reason why there is no 
direct conflict in this case.  As the Air Force conceded, there 
is no evidence that Jones (the employee) objected to union 
presence at the mediation proceeding.  We do not foreclose 
the possibility that an employee's objection to union presence 
could create a "direct" conflict that should be resolved in 
favor of the employee as described in footnote 12 of NTEU.  
774 F.2d at 1189 n.12.  As there is no conflict present in the 
case before us, the FLRA's construction is permissible.  Ac-
cordingly, the Air Force committed an unfair labor practice in 
failing to give Local 1709 notice of and the opportunity to be 
present at the mediation.

                               III

     With support from our precedent in NTEU, 774 F.2d at 
1186-87, we read section 7103(a)(9)'s broad definition of 
"grievance" as encompassing both those complaints filed pur-
suant to a negotiated grievance procedure and those filed 
pursuant to alternative statutory procedures.  In addition, we 
find permissible the FLRA's construction of section 
7114(a)(2)(A) that provides Local 1709 the right to have a 
union representative present at the mediation of a formal 
EEO complaint filed by a bargaining unit employee.  For 
these reasons, we deny the Air Force's petition for review 
and grant the FLRA's cross-application for enforcement of its 
order.

                                            