                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 24, 2000    Decided August 22, 2000 

                           No. 99-5166

        Transitional Hospitals Corporation of Louisiana, 
                          Incorporated, 
                               and 
   Transitional Hospitals Corporation of Texas, Incorporated, 
                            Appellees

                                v.

                  Donna E. Shalala, Secretary, 
            Department of Health and Human Services, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv01351)

     Anne M. Murphy, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellant. With her on the brief were 
David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Antho-

ny J. Steinmeyer, Assistant Director, and Wilma A. Lewis, 
U.S. Attorney.

     Eugene Tillman argued the cause for appellees.  With him 
on the brief was Tamara V. Scoville.

     Before:  Williams, Rogers, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  The Medicare program reim-
burses certain categories of hospitals on a "reasonable cost" 
basis, rather than under the generally applicable, and less 
remunerative, "Prospective Payment System."  Long-term 
care hospitals are one such category.  Plaintiffs own two new 
facilities for which they sought classification as long-term care 
hospitals before they began admitting patients.  The Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services (HHS) rejected plain-
tiffs' request, citing regulations that require new hospitals to 
have six months of experience before they can qualify as 
"long-term."  In enacting those regulations, the Secretary of 
HHS took the position that an initial data-collection period is 
statutorily required.  Plaintiffs, challenging the regulations in 
the district court, took the opposite position:  that the Medi-
care statute does not mandate an initial data-collection period 
and in fact manifestly requires HHS to reimburse them as 
long-term hospitals from the first day of operation.  The 
district court agreed with plaintiffs and declared HHS' regu-
lations invalid.

     We do not find the statute as clear as either side suggests, 
but rather conclude that Congress intended the Secretary to 
exercise discretion in determining the manner in which a 
hospital qualifies as a long-term care facility.  We therefore 
reverse the decision of the district court.  However, because 
the Secretary mistakenly believed that she lacked such dis-
cretion, we remand the case to permit her to determine 
whether she wishes to retain the existing regulations knowing 
that other options are permissible.

                                I

     Medicare is a federal health insurance program for the 
aged and disabled that is administered by the Health Care 

Financing Administration (HCFA) of HHS.  See 42 U.S.C. 
ss 1395 et seq.  Under Medicare Part A, institutional health 
care providers are reimbursed for their services to eligible 
patients.  See id. ss 1395c to 1395i-5.  From its inception 
until 1983, Medicare reimbursed hospitals for the "reasonable 
cost" of providing inpatient care, subject to certain limita-
tions.  Id. s 1395f(b) (1982);  see also id. s 1395x(v).

     By 1983, Congress had become concerned that hospitals 
reimbursed on a reasonable cost basis lacked incentives to 
operate efficiently.  This concern led to the revision of the 
Medicare payment system in that year.  See Social Security 
Amendments of 1983, Pub. L. No. 98-21, s 601, 97 Stat. 65, 
149.  See generally County of Los Angeles v. Shalala, 192 
F.3d 1005, 1008-09 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  In place of the reason-
able cost method, Congress enacted the Prospective Payment 
System (PPS) as the principal method of compensating hospi-
tals for inpatient care provided to eligible patients.  Under 
PPS, hospitals are reimbursed according to flat rates estab-
lished in advance for the various categories of patient diag-
noses (known as "diagnosis-related groups" or "DRGs").  42 
U.S.C. s 1395ww(d).  The rates reflect the average cost 
associated with treating a patient for a specific condition, and 
encourage hospitals to keep costs within the anticipated reim-
bursement levels.  For the care of patients whose hospitaliza-
tions are extraordinarily costly or lengthy, the statute autho-
rizes the Secretary to make "outlier payments" to supplement 
the standard PPS disbursement.  Id. s 1395ww(d)(5)(A)(i)-
(vi);  see County of Los Angeles, 192 F.3d at 1009.

     Because PPS was "developed for short-term acute care 
general hospitals," Congress acknowledged that it did not 
"adequately take into account special circumstances of diag-
noses requiring long stays."  S. Rep. No. 98-23, at 54 (1983).  
Thus, Congress altogether excluded from PPS certain types 
of hospitals that treat atypical patient populations.  These 
hospitals instead receive reimbursement for inpatient care 
under the reasonable cost system.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 1395ww(d)(1)(B).  One type of hospital subject to the statu-
tory exclusion is a long-term care hospital, which the statute 

describes as "a hospital which has an average inpatient length 
of stay (as determined by the Secretary) of greater than 25 
days."  Id. s 1395ww(d)(1)(B)(iv)(I).1 The availability of this 
exclusion is the central issue in the case before us.

                                A

     HHS implemented the new PPS reimbursement scheme by 
enacting regulations in 1984.  In issuing its final rule, al-
though not in the rule itself, HHS announced that it intended 
to apply the statutory exclusions prospectively only:  any 
change in a hospital's status (i.e., whether it was subject to or 
excluded from PPS) that occurred during one cost reporting 
period would generally take effect only at the start of the 
next period, with each period typically lasting one year.  See 
Medicare Program;  Prospective Payment for Medicare In-
patient Hospital Services, 49 Fed. Reg. 234, 243 (1984).  
Thus, a new hospital would not qualify for the exclusion at 
least until the initial reporting period was over.  To accom-
modate new hospitals, HHS permitted an abbreviated initial 
cost reporting period of six months, rather than the usual one 
year.  See 42 C.F.R. s 405.471(c)(5)(i), (c)(5)(ii)(B) (1983), 
__________
     1 The statute lists the following types of excluded hospitals:

          (i) a psychiatric hospital (as defined in section 1395x(f) of 
     this title),
     
          (ii) a rehabilitation hospital (as defined by the Secretary),
     
          (iii) a hospital whose inpatients are predominantly individu-
     als under 18 years of age,
     
          (iv)(I) a hospital which has an average inpatient length 
     of stay (as determined by the Secretary) of greater than 25 
     days ...
     
           ... 
     
          (v)(I) a hospital that the Secretary has classified ... for 
     purposes of applying exceptions and adjustments to payment 
     amounts under this subsection, as a hospital involved extensive-
     ly in treatment for or research on cancer....
     
42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(d)(1)(B).

now codified at 42 C.F.R. s 412.23(e)(1), (e)(3)(ii).2

     In 1992, HHS formalized its prospective approach to exclu-
sions by proposing and then adopting the following rule:

     For purposes of exclusion from the prospective payment 
     systems ..., the status of each currently participating 
     hospital ... is determined at the beginning of each cost 
     reporting period and is effective for the entire cost 
     reporting period.  Any changes in the status of the 
     hospital are made only at the start of a cost reporting 
     period.
     
42 C.F.R. s 412.22(d).  Thus, a hospital that qualifies for the 
exclusion in the middle of a reporting period will not benefit 
until the next reporting period.  By the same token, a 
hospital that ceases to qualify in the midst of a cost reporting 
period will nevertheless be compensated as though it were 
exempt for the entire period.  See Medicare Program;  
Changes to the Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Sys-
tems and Fiscal Year 1993 Rates, 57 Fed. Reg. 23,618, 23,657 
(1992).  For a new hospital, HHS' rule confirmed that the 
exclusion does not begin until the first six months of data 
collection have passed.

     In response to the notice of proposed rulemaking, the 
National Association of Long Term Hospitals (NALTH) sug-
gested that HHS permit new long-term care hospitals to self-
certify their average length of stay from the start.  See 
Letter from NALTH to HCFA at 2 (July 31, 1992) (J.A. at 

__________
     2  The regulations permit hospitals that experience a change in 
their average length of stay to establish exclusion eligibility by 
having an average length of stay greater than 25 days for the 
immediately preceding six month period.  See 42 C.F.R. 
s 405.471(c)(5)(i), (c)(5)(ii)(B) (1983), now codified at 42 C.F.R. 
s 412.23(e)(1), (e)(3)(ii).  According to HHS, a new hospital that 
treats patients with an average length of stay greater than 25 days 
"will always experience [a] change in length of stay because its 
initial length of stay is zero inpatient days."  HHS Br. at 9 n.5.

53) [hereinafter NALTH Ltr.].3  HHS, however, concluded 
that it did not have the discretion to permit self-certification 
by long-term care hospitals.  "We do not believe that the 
statute permits us," the Department said, "to extend the 
exclusion for long-term care hospitals to a hospital which has 
not demonstrated actual compliance with the statutory re-
quirement."  Medicare Program;  Changes to the Hospital 
Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems and Fiscal Year 
1993 Rates, 57 Fed. Reg. 39,746, 39,800-01 (1992) [hereinafter 
Final Rule].  The "criterion for exclusion as a long-term care 
hospital (average inpatient length of stay greater than 25 
days) can be assessed only over a period of time.  Thus, a 
hospital cannot qualify as a long-term care hospital until it 
has been in operation for some period of time."  Id. at 38,801.

 

                                B

     Plaintiffs Transitional Hospitals Corporation of Louisiana 
and Transitional Hospitals Corporation of Texas (hereinafter 
"the THC plaintiffs") opened two new hospitals at the end of 
1992.  Both were intended to treat patients with medically 
complex conditions requiring extended inpatient stays, there-
by qualifying for the long-term care hospital exclusion from 
PPS.  Before commencing operations, the THC plaintiffs 
wrote HCFA stating that they "only expect to admit patients 
whose medical conditions will result in lengths of stay in 
excess of 25 days."  Letter from Counsel for THC to HCFA 
at 2 (Nov. 12, 1992) (J.A. at 57) [hereinafter THC Ltr.].  They 
asked HCFA to exclude them from PPS from the starting 
date of their Medicare provider agreements, rather than 
reimburse them under PPS during their first six months of 
operation.  See id. at 4 (J.A. at 59).

     Kathleen Buto, the Director of HCFA's Bureau of Policy 
Development, wrote back denying plaintiffs' request.  Buto 
said that the statute mandates exclusion only for "a hospital 

__________
     3  NALTH noted that HHS permits new rehabilitation hospitals 
to self-certify that their inpatient populations meet the exclusion 
criteria for that category.  See NALTH Ltr. at 1-2 (J.A. at 52-53);  
discussion infra Part III.

which has [emphasis added] an average length of stay (as 
determined by the Secretary) of greater than 25 days."  
Letter from HCFA to Counsel for THC at 2 (Dec. 24, 1992) 
(J.A. at 63) (alteration and emphasis in original) [hereinafter 
Buto Ltr.].  Noting that HHS regulations implement that 
mandate by "examining [a hospital's] actual operating experi-
ence in a past period, rather than by relying on its admission 
criteria or other formalized statements of how the hospital is 
intended or expected to operate," Buto concluded that the 
THC plaintiffs could not qualify for the exclusion in advance.  
Id. at 2-3 (J.A. at 63-64).

     Having had their request turned down, the THC plaintiffs 
proceeded with the six-month cost reporting period.  During 
that time, they were reimbursed under PPS, supplemented by 
outlier payments.  At the end of the six-month period, both 
hospitals demonstrated average inpatient lengths of stay ex-
ceeding 25 days, thereby qualifying for exclusion from PPS--
and entitling them to payment for "reasonable costs"--during 
the next cost reporting period.  See Linville Aff. pp 7, 8, 13 
(J.A. at 35, 37).  Plaintiffs estimate that their PPS reimburse-
ment during the initial six-month period was approximately 
$1.2 million per hospital less than it would have been under 
the reasonable cost standard.  See id. pp 11, 12 (J.A. at 36).

     The THC plaintiffs requested a hearing before the Provider 
Reimbursement Review Board, which is authorized by statute 
to hear the complaints of providers dissatisfied with the 
compensation they have received.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(a), 
(d).  Plaintiffs challenged the validity of the regulations that 
denied them compensation for reasonable costs during their 
first months of operation.  The Board, however, concluded 
that it lacked authority to determine the validity of HHS 
regulations.

     Plaintiffs then brought suit in the United States District 
Court for the District of Columbia.  Ruling on the parties' 
cross motions for summary judgment, the court concluded 
that the Medicare statute was neither silent nor ambiguous 
on the question.  Rather, the court concluded that the statute 
unambiguously requires HHS to provide a PPS exclusion 
from the beginning of a new long-term care hospital's partic-
ipation in the Medicare program.  The court further held that 
even if the statute were ambiguous, the Secretary's regula-

tions did not constitute a permissible interpretation of the 
legislative language.  The court therefore declared the regu-
lations invalid insofar as they preclude new long-term care 
hospitals from securing immediate exclusion from PPS.  See 
Transitional Hosps. Corp. v. Shalala, 40 F. Supp. 2d 6, 15 
(D.D.C. 1999).  This appeal by the Secretary followed.

                                II

     We review de novo the district court's ruling on the mo-
tions for summary judgment.  See United Seniors Ass'n v. 
Shalala, 182 F.3d 965, 969 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  In judging the 
validity of the Secretary's regulations, we apply the familiar 
two-step framework of Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984).  
We first ask "whether Congress has directly spoken to the 
precise question at issue," in which case we "must give effect 
to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress."  Id.  If 
the "statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific 
issue," we move to the second step and defer to the agency's 
interpretation as long as it is "based on a permissible con-
struction of the statute."  Id. at 843.  However, deference is 
"only appropriate when the agency has exercised its own 
judgment."  Phillips Petroleum Co. v. FERC, 792 F.2d 1165, 
1169 (D.C. Cir. 1986).  "When, instead, the agency's decision 
is based on an erroneous view of the law, its decision cannot 
stand."  Id.

                                A

     We begin with Chevron step one, and with the Secretary's 
contention that Congress unambiguously expressed its intent 
to bar the relief plaintiffs request.

     The statutory provision at issue is quite brief.  It excludes 
from PPS any "hospital which has an average inpatient length 
of stay (as determined by the Secretary) of greater than 25 
days."  42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(d)(1)(B)(iv).4  When the Secre-

__________
     4  Neither side makes an argument based on legislative history.  
The PPS exclusion was passed as part of a large bill enacting 

tary adopted her implementing regulations, she took the 
position that the statute does not permit her to certify a 
hospital as long-term in advance because the criterion for 
exclusion, an average inpatient length of stay greater than 25 
days, "can be assessed only over a period of time."  Final 
Rule, 57 Fed. Reg. at 39,801.  "Thus," she said, "a hospital 
cannot qualify as a long-term care hospital until it has been in 
operation for some period of time."  Id.  Similarly, when 
HCFA turned down plaintiffs' request for self-certification, it 
stressed that, because under the statute only a hospital that 
"has" the requisite length of stay is eligible, a hospital cannot 
qualify until it makes the requisite showing that it "has" that 
average length of stay.  See Buto Ltr. at 2 (J.A. at 63).

     The statute seems neither so clear, nor so dictatorial, to us.  
Although it does establish a criterion based on average length 
of stay, the statute is silent as to how and when that length 
should be calculated.  Nothing in the language precludes the 
Secretary from determining length of stay based on a predic-
tion drawn, as plaintiffs suggest here, from a hospital's policy 
of admitting only "patients whose medical conditions will 
result in lengths of stay in excess of 25 days."  THC Ltr. at 2 
(J.A. at 57);  cf. County of Los Angeles, 192 F.2d at 1013-15 
(affirming HHS' use of predictions to determine statutorily-
mandated range of outlier payments).

     Nor does the statute's use of the present tense verb "has" 
definitively resolve the question.  Although to qualify it must 
be true that a hospital "has" the requisite length of stay, that 
word does not tell us how to determine whether that state of 
being exists.  The agency has implicitly recognized as much 
by adopting a policy of determining a hospital's status at the 
beginning of a cost reporting period, and then permitting it to 
retain that status for the entire period--even if conditions 
change in the interim.  See 42 C.F.R. s 412.22(d).  Under 

__________
wholesale changes in the Medicare program, and specific references 
to the long-term care exclusion occur only in general passages 
explaining the need for a reasonable costs alternative to PPS for 
certain types of hospitals.  See, e.g., H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 98-47, at 
192-93 (1983);  S. Rep. No. 98-23, at 53-55 (1983);  H.R. Rep. No. 
98-25, at 8-9, 141-42 (1983).

this policy, HHS excludes a hospital for the next period based 
on data derived from the prior period, regardless of whether 
the hospital actually "has" the requisite average on each day 
of the next period.  See id.

     Moreover, nothing in the statutory language precludes an 
alternative form of relief requested by plaintiffs:  retroactive 
reimbursement for reasonable costs incurred during the first 
six months if, at the end of that period, the hospital shows 
that it had a 25-day average during that period.  Again, the 
word "has" does not unambiguously decide this question.  
Each of plaintiffs' hospitals could have accurately said on its 
six-month anniversary that today it "has" a greater than 25-
day average--referring to the entire period from day one 
through and including day 180.  It would therefore have been 
consistent with the literal language to reimburse the hospital 
on that day for all of its reasonable costs incurred to date.

     Finally, and perhaps most important, this is not a statute 
as to which we can only infer, from Congress' silence, an 
implicit intent to delegate to the Secretary the authority to 
reasonably interpret the statutory terms.  See Chevron, 467 
U.S. at 844.  Rather, in this case the statute excludes a 
hospital that has an average length of stay of greater than 25 
days, "as determined by the Secretary."  42 U.S.C. 
s 1395ww(d)(1)(B)(iv).  Thus, Congress has provided "an ex-
press delegation of authority to the agency to elucidate a 
specific provision of the statute by regulation."  Chevron, 467 
U.S. at 843-44;  see also 42 U.S.C. ss 1302(a), 1395hh(a) 
(granting HHS authority to issue regulations to administer 
Medicare program).  This means that the Secretary has 
discretion to determine how to calculate the qualifying length 
of stay, and that we are bound to uphold her determination as 
long as she exercises that discretion in a reasonable way.  See 
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44.

                                B

     The THC plaintiffs also see the statute as clear and unam-
biguous--although in precisely the opposite way as that per-
ceived by HHS.  In their view, and in the view of the district 
court, the use of the present tense "has" requires that if 

during any given period the hospital "has" a 25-day average, 
it must be considered exempt for the entire period.  See THC 
Br. at 22-23.  The use of the present tense, plaintiffs contend, 
requires that the exclusion "be applied on a current basis," 
and "allows no alternative temporal reading."  Id.  Or, as the 
district court put it, "the plain language of the statute indi-
cates that a long-term care hospital may obtain an exemption 
from the Prospective Payment System whenever it 'has' an 
average inpatient length of stay greater than 25 days."  
Transitional Hosps., 40 F. Supp. 2d at 10.5

     Again we disagree, this time for the mirror image of our 
reasoning with respect to HHS' interpretation.  Because the 
statute does not tell us how to determine whether a hospital 
"has" the required average length of stay, it cannot be read 
as requiring the agency to make that determination constant-
ly and instantaneously--any more than it can be read (as 
HHS would have it) as requiring the agency to make that 
determination prospectively only.  In Methodist Hospital v. 
Shalala, 38 F.3d 1225 (D.C. Cir. 1994), we considered a 
similar argument regarding the wage index used to determine 
reimbursement rates under PPS.  In that case, the plaintiff 
hospitals contended that the Medicare statute required retro-
active application of corrections made to the index to ensure 
that the Secretary was not employing an incorrect index in 
the period prior to the next correction.  We rejected that 
claim, noting that it "would require the Secretary to make 
virtually continuous adjustments in the wage index."  Id. at 
1230.  "The statute," we said, "does not specify how the 
Secretary should construct the index, nor how often she must 
revise it....  Congress through its silence delegated these 
decisions to the Secretary."  Id.  The same is true here.

__________
     5  Plaintiffs also proffer an argument they describe as based on 
statutory purpose, contending that they are entitled to an exemp-
tion from their first day of operation because Congress' exclusion of 
long-term care hospitals from PPS demonstrates its recognition 
that PPS is an inadequate method for reimbursing such hospitals.  
But this simply begs the question discussed in the text:  were 
plaintiffs' hospitals "long-term," within the meaning of the statute, 
from that first day?

     But, plaintiffs argue, if Congress had intended the exclu-
sion to apply prospectively, it could have drafted the statute 
to provide a PPS exclusion for a hospital that "had" an 
average inpatient length of stay greater than 25 days "during 
its most recent cost reporting period."  Transitional Hosps., 
40 F. Supp. 2d at 11 (quoting Pls.' Mot. for Summ. J. at 15) 
(emphasis omitted).  Frankly, we do not see such a revised 
statute as particularly less ambiguous.  Indeed, we do not see 
why HHS could not have proffered the same editorial sugges-
tion and then made the opposite argument:  If Congress had 
intended hospitals to receive retroactive reimbursement as 
plaintiffs contend, wouldn't it have defined the exclusion as 
covering hospitals that "had" the requisite average during 
their "most recent cost reporting period"?  In any event, 
while positing a "clearer" way to write a statute may suggest 
that an existing statute is ambiguous, it surely does not 
establish that it is unambiguous.  And if the statute is not 
unambiguous, Chevron requires us to defer to a reasonable 
reading by the Secretary.

     We also must take care to read the word "has" in the 
context of the entire phrase of which it is a part.  Two 
elements of that context are important here.  First, the 
statutory exclusion is for a hospital that has "an average" 
inpatient length of stay of greater than 25 days.  The criteri-
on of "an average" strongly militates against plaintiffs' view 
that a hospital's status must be measured at every moment in 
time.  As HHS correctly points out, an average is a criterion 
that can only be assessed over a period of time.  Moreover, 
the statute refers not to an average "over" a period of 25 
days, but to an average "of" 25 days--necessarily indicating 
that the period of measurement must be more than 25 days in 
order reasonably to determine whether the "average" during 
that period was at least 25 days.  Hence, the use of the word 
"has" in conjunction with the word "average" would not 
preclude waiting until six months have passed to determine 
whether, at that point, the hospital "has" an average of 25 
days over a 180-day period.

     Indeed, were we to read the statute as literally as plaintiffs 
and the district court suggest, plaintiffs' own contention--that 

they "met the 25-day requirement at all times during their 
operation" and so were entitled to payment from the first 
day--would be plainly incorrect.  THC Br. at 4.  On day one, 
the hospitals could not have had a 25-day average because 25 
days had not yet passed.  If a hospital must be, and may only 
be, paid for days on which it "has" a 25-day average, plain-
tiffs could not have qualified earlier than the 25th day.  Even 
then, they could have done so only if every patient present on 
day one were still at the hospital 25 days later.

     The second element of context that is important here is the 
statute's parenthetical phrase, "as determined by the Secre-
tary."  As we have discussed above, by employing this phrase 
Congress has made "an express delegation of authority to the 
agency to elucidate [the] specific provision of the statute by 
regulation."  Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44.  This further takes 
the case out of the realm of Chevron step one's de novo 
review, and into the realm of Chevron step two--which asks 
only whether the agency's interpretation is reasonable.  See 
id.  And that gives the agency considerable leeway to deter-
mine how "has" is to be defined, and whether to require 
prospective, contemporaneous, or retrospective evaluation 
and payment.  See San Bernardino Mountains Community 
Hosp. Dist. v. Secretary of Health & Human Servs., 63 F.3d 
882, 886-87 (9th Cir. 1995) (holding that inclusion of phrase 
"as determined by the Secretary" in Medicare Act's definition 
of "sole community hospital" "make[s] clear that Congress 
intended to delegate to the Secretary the task of outlining 
and defining the criteria for attaining sole community hospital 
status").

     Plaintiffs resist the conclusion that Congress has delegated 
definitional authority to HHS.  They argue that the fact that 
the parenthetical "as determined by the Secretary" follows 
the phrase "an average inpatient length of stay," means that 
Congress has only given the agency "discretion to determine 
how the average length of stay will be calculated"--and not 
whether the hospital "has" that average.  THC Br. at 26.  
This is far too sophistic a reading.  First, the concession that 
the agency has discretion to determine how to calculate the 

average necessarily means it has discretion to determine 
whether a hospital "has" that average--since a hospital can-
not have a qualifying average unless it satisfies the agency's 
calculation methodology.  Second, even if word placement 
were decisive, it is as true that the delegating parenthetical 
follows the phrase "has an average inpatient length of stay" 
as that it follows the phrase "an average inpatient length of 
stay."  At most this renders the scope of Congress' delega-
tion ambiguous, which again moves us to Chevron's second 
step.  See Chevron, 467 U.S. at 844.6

                                C

     In reaching the conclusion that the statute unambiguously 
requires retroactive reimbursement for the hospitals' initial 

__________
     6  Plaintiffs assert that Congress confirmed their reading of the 
long-term care exclusion in its 1997 amendments to the Medicare 
statute, which place payment limits on newly participating long-
term care hospitals.  Those amendments provide that:

     in the case of a hospital or unit that is within a class of hospital 
     described in subparagraph (B) which first receives payments 
     under this section on or after October 1, 1997--
     
          (i) for each of the first 2 cost reporting periods for which the 
          hospital has a settled cost report, the amount of the payment 
          with respect to operating costs ... [shall be] equal to the 
          lesser of ... [the amount of operating costs or a national 
          limit.]
          
42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(b)(7)(A).  Plaintiffs contend that this language 
indicates that Congress intended newly participating long-term care 
hospitals to receive reimbursement for reasonable costs from the 
date of their first reporting period.  But as the Secretary points 
out, this provision does not materially advance the analysis.  By its 
terms, it applies only to a "subparagraph (B)" hospital.  A subpara-
graph (B) hospital, in turn, is defined as including a hospital that 
comes within subsection (d)(1)(B)(iv)--the precise subsection that is 
in dispute in this case.  See id. s 1395ww(b)(7)(B);  cf. Methodist 
Hosp., 38 F.3d at 1231 (noting, in the context of the Medicare 
statute, that "the views of a subsequent Congress form a hazardous 
basis for inferring the intent of an earlier one") (internal quotation 
omitted).

cost reporting period, the district court relied on another 
district court opinion, County of Los Angeles v. Shalala, 992 
F. Supp. 26 (D.D.C. 1998), which held that a provision of the 
Medicare statute required HHS to make retroactive adjust-
ments to outlier payments.7  County of Los Angeles held that 
the provision, which set a range for the "total amount of the 
additional payments made," 42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(d)(5)(A)(iv) 
(emphasis added), unambiguously required the Secretary to 
adjust the additional payments retroactively to ensure that 
the total fell within the range.  See County of Los Angeles, 
992 F. Supp. at 36.  It thus rejected the Secretary's interpre-
tation of the provision as merely instructing her as to where 
to set outlier thresholds for the coming year.  The district 
court in the instant case followed that line of reasoning, and 
held that HHS could not use prior-period experience merely 
to determine how to reimburse the plaintiff hospitals in the 
future, but rather had to reimburse the hospitals for their 
reasonable costs from the first date of their operation.  See 
Transitional Hosps., 40 F. Supp. 2d at 12.

     Although the district court's reliance on the opinion in 
County of Los Angeles cannot be faulted, this court reversed 
that decision seven months later.  See County of Los Angeles 
v. Shalala, 192 F.3d 1005 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Rejecting an 
argument based on verb tense, we held that "instead of 
embodying a retrospective inquiry into the amount of outlier 
payments that have been made," "the phrase 'payments made 
under this subparagraph' might just as plausibly reflect a 
prospective command to the Secretary about how to structure 
outlier thresholds for payments to be made in advance of each 
fiscal year."  Id. at 1013.  In so holding, we cited the Su-
preme Court's decision in Regions Hospital v. Shalala, 118 
S. Ct. 909 (1998).  There, the Court held that the statutory 
phrase, "recognized as reasonable," "by itself[ ] does not tell 
us whether Congress means to refer the Secretary to action 
already taken or to give directions on actions about to be 

__________
     7  As discussed in Part I above, outlier payments are a supple-
ment to PPS reimbursement for hospitals with patients that stay 
for unusually long periods.  See 42 C.F.R. ss 412.80 et seq.

taken."  Id. at 916 (quoting Administrators of the Tulane 
Educ. Fund v. Shalala, 987 F.2d 790, 796 (D.C. Cir. 1993)).  
"In other words," the Court said, "the phrase 'recognized as 
reasonable' might mean costs the Secretary (1) has recog-
nized as reasonable for [prior reimbursement] purposes, or 
(2) will recognize as reasonable as a base for future ... 
calculations."  Id.  By the same token, we conclude that the 
phrase at issue here--"has an average inpatient length of 
stay (as determined by the Secretary) of greater than 25 
days"--is ambiguous and may refer to the hospital's status at 
the beginning of, during, or at the close of a cost reporting 
period.  Cf. United States Dep't of the Treasury v. FLRA, 960 
F.2d 1068, 1072 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (holding that statutory 
phrase "adversely affected" is ambiguous and permits "alter-
native temporal readings").

                               III

     Having concluded that the analysis of Chevron step one 
does not resolve the case, we would ordinarily move to step 
two and ask whether the Secretary's interpretation of the 
meaning of the statute is reasonable.  Plaintiffs argue that 
the Secretary's interpretation is not reasonable, contending 
that HHS has no justification for not permitting self-
certification, for not utilizing the alternative of retroactive 
reimbursement, and for denying both options to long-term 
care hospitals while making them available to another catego-
ry of PPS-excluded institutions:  rehabilitation hospitals.  See 
42 C.F.R. s 412.23(b)(8), (b)(9).

     HHS replies that it is perfectly reasonable to rely on actual 
data regarding length of stay rather than on a hospital's self-
interested prediction.  The Department explains that it per-
mits self-certification by rehabilitation hospitals because the 
criteria for qualification of such hospitals are based on the 
"characteristics of the patients and the types of services that 
the facility furnishes," Final Rule, 57 Fed. Reg. at 39,801,8 

__________
     8  The statute excludes from PPS "a rehabilitation hospital (as 
defined by the Secretary)."  42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(d)(1)(B)(ii).  The 
Secretary's implementing regulation defines such a hospital as one 

criteria which--unlike length of stay--a hospital can "virtual-
ly guarantee[ ]" from the first day of operations, HHS Reply 
Br. at 12.  With respect to the alternative of retroactive 
adjustment, HHS points out that no one suggested such an 
option until after the district court litigation began in this 
case.9  Moreover, HHS argues that retroactive adjustments 
are as likely to hurt hospitals that slip below the average 
during a period for which they have been prospectively 
qualified, as it is to help them by providing reimbursement 
for a prior period in which they became qualified along the 
way.  By setting reimbursement rates "that are not later 
subject to retroactive correction," HHS contends, "the Secre-
tary promotes certainty and predictability of payment for not 
only hospitals but the federal government."  HHS Br. at 41 
(quoting County of Los Angeles, 192 F.3d at 1019).

     Although we ordinarily would now proceed to evaluate 
these various arguments under the standards of Chevron's 
second step, we cannot do so in this case.  While the Secre-
tary has discretion to establish a reasonable mechanism for 
determining whether a hospital has the requisite average 
length of inpatient stay, that discretion must be exercised 
through the eyes of one who realizes she possesses it.  At 
several points, the Department's briefs suggest that the 
Secretary did realize that she had such discretion.10  At other 
points, the briefs suggest quite the opposite.11  Most relevant, 

__________
that, inter alia, serves an inpatient population of whom at least 75 
percent require intensive rehabilitative services for the treatment of 
specified conditions including stroke, spinal cord or brain injury, 
major multiple trauma, and amputation.  See 42 C.F.R. 
s 412.23(b)(2).

     9  Neither NALTH in its comments on the 1992 proposed rule, 
nor the THC plaintiffs themselves in their 1992 request to HCFA, 
proposed retroactive reimbursement.  See HHS Reply Br. at 14 n.7.

     10  See, e.g., HHS Br. at 25, 28.

     11  See, e.g., HHS Br. at 12 (stating that in promulgating 1992 
regulations, "HHS concluded that a self-certification procedure for 
long-term care hospitals would violate its statutory mandate");  id. 
at 15 (stating that in rejecting THC plaintiffs' request for self-

however, is that the notice issued at the time the final rule 
was promulgated makes it quite clear the Secretary did not 
believe that she had the discretion to do what the plaintiffs 
request.  See, e.g., Final Rule, 57 Fed. Reg. at 39,800-01 
("We do not believe that the statute permits us to extend the 
exclusion for long-term care hospitals to a hospital which has 
not demonstrated actual compliance with the statutory re-
quirement.") (emphasis added);  id. at 39,800 (declaring the 
Secretary's doubt that "the law would support such a policy");  
id. at 39,801 ("[T]he [statutory] criterion for exclusion ... can 
be assessed only over a period of time.  Thus, a hospital 
cannot qualify as a long-term care hospital until it has been 
in operation for some period of time.") (emphasis added).12

     As the Supreme Court has instructed, an agency "order 
may not stand if the agency has misconceived the law."  SEC 
v. Chenery Corp., 318 U.S. 80, 94 (1943);  see Phillips Petrole-
um, 792 F.2d at 1169-70.  Applying that principle, this court 
has held that "an agency regulation must be declared invalid, 
even though the agency might be able to adopt the regulation 
in the exercise of its discretion, if it was not based on the 
[agency's] own judgment but rather on the unjustified as-
sumption that it was Congress' judgment that such [a regula-
tion is] desirable" or required.  Prill v. NLRB, 755 F.2d 941, 
948 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (internal quotations omitted) (alterations 
in original).  Because the Secretary evaluated the various 
reimbursement alternatives on the assumption that "a hospi-
tal cannot qualify as a long-term care hospital until it has 
been in operation for some period of time," Final Rule, 57 
Fed. Reg. at 39,801, and because that assumption is incorrect, 

__________
certification, HCFA explained "that nothing in the statute or regu-
lations would allow it to grant the hospitals an immediate exclusion 
from the PPS").

     12  The Buto letter, although somewhat more equivocal, reflects 
a similar understanding.  See Buto Ltr. at 2 (J.A. at 63) (denying 
plaintiffs' request because statute mandates exclusion only for "a 
hospital which has [emphasis added] an average length of stay (as 
determined by the Secretary) of greater than 25 days") (alteration 
and emphasis in original).

the Secretary must make a fresh determination as to whether 
she wishes to adopt the self-certification or retroactive adjust-
ment options.

                                IV

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court is reversed.  The case is remanded to that court with 
instructions to remand it to HHS for further consideration 
consistent with this opinion.

                                          