                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                           
       Argued September 25, 2000   Decided January 5, 2001 

                           No. 99-5218

               Rockwell International Corporation, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                   U.S. Department of Justice, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv00761)

     John Townsend Rich argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were David B. Beers and Brita Dagmar 
Strandberg.

     Michael C. Johnson, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. 
Attorney.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Responding to congressional criti-
cism, the Department of Justice prepared an internal report 

defending its prosecution of appellant for environmental 
crimes allegedly committed at the Rocky Flats nuclear facili-
ty.  Although the Department released the text of the report 
to the public, it withheld a series of supporting documents, 
mostly inter- and intra-agency memoranda written by depart-
ment lawyers.  Relying on Exemption 5 of the Freedom of 
Information Act, which protects certain inter- and intra-
agency memoranda from disclosure, the Justice Department 
rejected appellant's request to release the attachments.  Ap-
pellant sued to compel disclosure, and the district court 
granted summary judgment for the Department.  We affirm.

                                I

     During the Cold War, the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons 
plant, located near Denver, Colorado, was responsible, along 
with other government facilities, for developing, producing, 
and testing America's nuclear weapons.  Rocky Flats' partic-
ular task was to manufacture plutonium triggers, or "pits."  
U.S. Dep't of Energy, Rocky Flats Closure Project Manage-
ment Plan 3 (1998).

     For almost 15 years, from 1975 until 1989, appellant Rock-
well International Corporation operated Rocky Flats under a 
contract with the Department of Energy.  In the late 1980s, 
the Justice Department began investigating Rockwell for 
possible criminal violations of environmental laws in connec-
tion with its activities at Rocky Flats.  The Denver U.S. 
Attorney conducted the investigation with oversight from 
"Main Justice" in Washington.  In 1992, after lengthy negoti-
ations, Rockwell pled guilty to several violations and paid an 
$18.5 million fine.  As part of the plea, the Justice Depart-
ment agreed not to prosecute Rockwell employees, and the 
EPA and Colorado Department of Health agreed not to seek 
additional penalties based on conduct known to the govern-
ment at the time of the plea.

     Later that year, responding to public criticism of the plea 
agreement, the Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee of 
the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, 
chaired by Representative Howard Wolpe, began an investi-

gation of the Rocky Flats prosecution.  Although the Depart-
ment initially refused to give the Subcommittee any materials 
relating to its internal deliberative processes, it eventually 
allowed it to examine privileged documents on the express 
condition that they not be made public.  In response to 
another committee request, four attorneys involved in the 
prosecution testified, but on instructions from the Justice 
Department refused to answer questions concerning the De-
partment's internal deliberations.  The Subcommittee threat-
ened contempt proceedings against the attorneys unless Pres-
ident Bush formally invoked executive privilege on their 
behalf.  Rather than ask the President to invoke the privi-
lege, the Department allowed the attorneys to testify in 
closed recorded sessions before Subcommittee staff.

     Following its investigation, the Subcommittee released a 
144-page report criticizing the Justice Department for its 
"extreme conservatism" in pursuing the Rocky Flats prosecu-
tion.  Known as the "Wolpe Report," it criticized the plea 
agreement for immunizing Rockwell employees from future 
prosecution, for the amount of the fine paid by Rockwell, and 
for the "global nature" of the settlement--the fact that the 
agreement prohibited both the Colorado Department of 
Health and the EPA from later prosecuting Rockwell.

     Taking sharp issue with the Wolpe Report, the Justice 
Department charged that it was "misleading, incomplete, and 
full of inaccuracies."  The Department also accused the Sub-
committee of violating the confidentiality agreement by quot-
ing extensively from the closed session interviews with de-
partment officials and from the internal memoranda the 
Department had furnished.  Claiming that the Subcommittee 
distorted the record by quoting selectively from and misquot-
ing these materials, the Department authorized full disclosure 
of the transcripts of the closed interviews "so that the ex-
cerpts selectively released by the Subcommittee can be put in 
context."  Letter from Kevin P. Holsclaw, Acting Assistant 
Attorney General, to Hon. George Brown, Jr., Chairman, 
House Committee on Science, Space and Technology (Jan. 7, 
1993).

     Also in response to the Wolpe Report, the Associate Attor-
ney General ordered an internal investigation of the Rocky 
Flats prosecution.  Completed in April of 1994, the investiga-
tors' report--we will refer to it throughout this opinion as the 
"Report"--systematically rebutted each charge leveled by the 
Wolpe Subcommittee, concluding that "no basis existed for 
[its] sweeping criticisms."  In a separate statement, the At-
torney General expressed her hope that the Report would 
"put this matter to rest."  Statement of the Attorney General 
Concerning the Internal Report on the Rocky Flats Prosecu-
tion (April 21, 1994).

     Planting the seeds of this litigation, the Report referred to, 
cited, and quoted from a set of attachments.  These included 
public documents relating to the plea negotiations;  formal 
and informal Justice Department memoranda--some circulat-
ed within the Denver U.S. Attorney's office and others sent 
between Denver and Main Justice--discussing and evaluating 
the strengths and weaknesses of possible plea negotiation 
strategies;  memoranda summarizing discussions within the 
Department and between Justice, EPA, and Rockwell;  draft 
letters from the Department to Rockwell regarding the nego-
tiations;  and formal and informal communications between 
the Department and EPA.  These attachments were excluded 
from the version of the Report released to the public.

     Rockwell filed a FOIA request for the attachments.  In 
response, the Justice Department released 226 pages of mate-
rials, but withheld an additional 386--mostly internal docu-
ments and inter-agency communications between Justice and 
EPA.  In doing so, the Department relied on FOIA Exemp-
tion 5, which provides that the statute "does not apply to ... 
inter-agency or intra-agency memorandums or letters which 
would not be available by law to a party other than an agency 
in litigation with the agency."  5 U.S.C. s 552(b)(5).  "Courts 
have construed this exemption to encompass the protections 
traditionally afforded certain documents pursuant to eviden-
tiary privileges in the civil discovery context, including mate-
rials which would be protected under the attorney-client 
privilege, the attorney work-product privilege, or the execu-
tive deliberative process privilege."  Formaldehyde Inst. v. 

Dep't of Health and Human Services, 889 F.2d 1118, 1121 
(D.C. Cir. 1989) (internal citations and quotations omitted).

     Seeking to compel the Justice Department to disclose the 
attachments, Rockwell filed suit in the United States District 
Court here, making three basic arguments:  (1) because the 
Department had extensively cited and quoted from the at-
tachments, it had incorporated them into the Report, and was 
thus required to disclose them along with the Report under 
FOIA section 552(a)(2)(A), which requires disclosure of agen-
cy final opinions;  (2) by disclosing the attachments to Con-
gress, the Department waived their Exemption 5 protection;  
(3) by quoting from the attachments, describing their con-
tents, and relying on them to vindicate its handling of the 
Rocky Flats prosecution, the Department waived its litigation 
privileges for the documents and thus their protection under 
Exemption 5.  The district court rejected all of Rockwell's 
arguments and entered summary judgment for the govern-
ment, finding (1) that because the Report could stand alone 
without its supporting documents, Justice had not incorporat-
ed the attachments into the Report;  (2) that disclosure to 
Congress did not waive Exemption 5 protection for the 
attachments;  and (3) that the Department did not waive the 
attorney-client, deliberative process, or work-product privi-
leges with respect to the attachments.  Re-asserting the same 
basic arguments, Rockwell now appeals.  Our review is de 
novo.  Nation Magazine v. United States Customs Serv., 71 
F.3d 885, 889 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

                                II

     In addition to its general requirement of disclosure, FOIA 
directs agencies to index and make available for inspection 
and copying "final opinions, including concurring and dissent-
ing opinions, as well as orders, made in the adjudication of 
cases...."  5 U.S.C. 552(a)(2)(A).  In NLRB v. Sears, Roe-
buck & Co., 421 U.S. 132, 148 (1975), the Supreme Court held 
that this provision trumps Exemption 5:  parties must disclose 
all documents that are agency final opinions, even if they are 
inter- or intra-agency memoranda.  The Court also held that 

"if an agency chooses expressly to adopt or incorporate by 
reference an intra-agency memorandum previously covered 
by Exemption 5 in what would otherwise be a final opinion, 
that memorandum may be withheld only on the ground that it 
falls within the coverage of some exemption other than Ex-
emption 5."  Id. at 161 (italics omitted).

     Relying on Sears, Rockwell argues that Exemption 5 does 
not protect the attachments because they were incorporated 
by reference into the Report, which, it claims, is an agency 
final opinion.  The Department responds that the Report is 
not a final opinion subject to disclosure under section 
552(a)(2)(A) and Sears.  Incorporation, it argues, is therefore 
irrelevant.

     Sears provides general principles for determining whether 
an agency document qualifies as a final opinion.  At issue in 
Sears were Advice and Appeals Memoranda that the NLRB 
General Counsel sent to regional directors explaining its 
decisions not to pursue particular unfair labor practice 
charges.  Id. at 135-36.  Pointing out that under the National 
Labor Relations Act only the General Counsel could file such 
complaints, and that the decision not to do so was unappeala-
ble, the Court stated:

     The decision to dismiss a charge is a decision in a "case" 
     and constitutes an "adjudication":  an "adjudication" is 
     defined under the Administrative Procedure Act, of 
     which [FOIA] is a part, as "agency process for the 
     formulation of an order";  an "order" is defined as "the 
     whole or part of a final disposition, whether affirmative 
     [or] negative ... of an agency in a matter";  and the 
     dismissal of a charge ... is a "final disposition."  Since 
     an Advice or Appeals Memorandum explains the reasons 
     for the "final disposition" it plainly qualifies as an "opin-
     ion";  and falls within 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(2)(A).
     
Id. at 158-59 (internal citations and emphasis omitted).  In-
terpreting this holding in Bristol-Meyers Co. v. FTC, 598 
F.2d 18 (D.C. Cir. 1978), we said:  "It appears to us that the 
Court meant in Sears to establish as a general principle that 
action taken by the responsible decisionmaker in an agency's 

decision-making process which has the practical effect of 
disposing of a matter before the agency is 'final' for purposes 
of FOIA.  If such action is accompanied by a written explana-
tion of the decisionmaker's reasoning, that explanation consti-
tutes a 'final opinion' and must be disclosed."  Id. at 25.

     Invoking Sears and Bristol-Meyers, Rockwell claims that 
the Report qualifies as a final opinion because it sets out the 
Justice Department's final assessment of the propriety of the 
Rocky Flats prosecution--i.e., its conclusion that the prosecu-
tors had not abused their discretion--and explains its decision 
to take no further action in regard to Rocky Flats.  Pointing 
out that the Attorney General has undisputed statutory au-
thority to discipline subordinates and to investigate the han-
dling of prosecutions by the Department, and quoting her 
statement that the Report should "put this matter to rest," 
Rockwell contends that the Report represents the final rea-
soning behind the Attorney General's "unreviewable rejection 
of the Wolpe Report's detailed charges of prosecutorial mis-
handling."  Appellant's Reply Br. at 4.

     We confronted a similar claim in Common Cause v. IRS, 
646 F.2d 656, 659-60 (D.C. Cir. 1981), where the appellant 
sought disclosure of an internal memorandum explaining the 
IRS's decision not to adopt a policy requiring public disclo-
sure of contacts between high-ranking federal officials and 
the IRS.  The memorandum, we decided, was not a final 
opinion because the case involved the "voluntary suggestion, 
evaluation, and rejection of a proposed policy by an agency, 
not the agency's final, unappealable decision not to pursue a 
judicial remedy in an adversarial dispute, as was present in 
Sears."  Id. at 659.

     The Report at issue in this case likewise sets forth the 
conclusions of a voluntarily undertaken internal agency inves-
tigation, not a conclusion about agency action (or inaction) in 
an adversarial dispute with another party.  To be sure, the 
Attorney General has statutory authority to investigate the 
official acts of U.S. Attorneys, but Rockwell nowhere suggests 
that the Attorney General had any statutory duty to respond 
to the charges in the Wolpe Report.  See 28 U.S.C. 

s 526(a)(1) (the Attorney General "may investigate the offi-
cial acts ... of the United States attorneys....") (emphasis 
added).  And far from explaining a decision not to pursue a 
judicial remedy, the Report simply rejects as a factual matter 
the Congressional charges of prosecutorial misconduct--
charges not put forward in any formal agency or judicial 
proceeding.  Of course, it is possible that had the Attorney 
General found evidence of abuse of prosecutorial discretion, 
she might have brought formal charges.  But the Report 
nowhere contemplated, evaluated, or rejected specific disci-
plinary action against any Justice Department employee.

     Acknowledging that there were "no formal agency adjudi-
catory proceedings on the handling of the Rocky Flats prose-
cution," Appellant's Reply Br. at 2, Rockwell claims that the 
same was true in Niemeier v. Watergate Special Prosecution 
Force, 565 F.2d 967 (7th Cir. 1977).  There the Seventh 
Circuit concluded that a final report issued by the Watergate 
Special Prosecutor explaining his decision not to prosecute 
former President Nixon was a final opinion for purposes of 
FOIA, even though the prosecutor had neither initiated a 
prosecution nor sought an indictment.  Id. at 971-72.  The 
special prosecutor, however, had a statutory duty to issue a 
final report.  In sharp contrast to this case, moreover, his 
decision amounted to a "final, unappealable decision not to 
pursue a judicial remedy in an adversarial dispute," Common 
Cause, 646 F.2d at 659-60--the dispute between the United 
States and the former president.

     Because the propriety of the Rocky Flats prosecution was 
the subject of neither a "case" nor an "adjudication," we 
conclude that the Report does not qualify as a final opinion 
that the Department must disclose under section 552(a)(2)(A) 
and Sears.  We thus agree with the Justice Department that 
we need not reach Rockwell's incorporation arguments.

                               III

     Rockwell next argues that the Justice Department waived 
Exemption 5 protection for all but three of the attachments 
by sending them to Congress.  In support of this argument, 
Rockwell relies on Dow Jones & Co. v. Dep't of Justice, 917 

F.2d 571, 573-75 (D.C. Cir. 1990), where we held that Exemp-
tion 5 did not protect a letter the Justice Department had 
sent to the House Ethics Committee.  The letter summarized 
the results of a Justice Department probe into alleged wrong-
doing by a member of Congress, explaining that while the 
Department would be unable to prosecute the representative 
for violating any criminal laws, the Committee might want to 
consider whether his behavior violated House standards of 
conduct.  Observing that Exemption 5 protects only inter- or 
intra-agency memoranda, and that Congress was not an 
"agency" within the meaning of the statute, id. at 574, we 
concluded that the letter was not covered by Exemption 5.  
In reaching this conclusion, we acknowledged that communi-
cations between an agency and Congress would receive pro-
tection as intra-agency memoranda if they were "part and 
parcel of the agency's deliberative process," as in the case of 
questionnaires sent from the Justice Department to members 
of the Senate.  Id. at 575 (emphasis omitted).  In Dow Jones, 
however, the Department sent the letter to Congress after 
concluding its own investigation;  in fact, it wrote the letter 
for the sole purpose of assisting the Committee with its 
deliberations.

     Rockwell argues that since the attachments to the Report 
were sent to assist the Wolpe Subcommittee in its delibera-
tions, they no longer enjoy Exemption 5 protection.  The 
district court rejected this argument, as do we.  Unlike the 
letter in Dow Jones, the attachments are not documents 
created specifically to assist Congress, but rather memoranda 
and correspondence created as part of the Justice Depart-
ment's deliberative processes--precisely the kind of inter- 
and intra-agency memoranda Exemption 5 protects.  This 
case is thus controlled not by Dow Jones, but by Murphy v. 
Dep't of the Army, 613 F.2d 1151, 1155-59 (D.C. Cir. 1979), 
where we held that the Army had not waived Exemption 5 
protection for an internal legal memorandum by sending it to 
a congressman along with a letter.  We relied mostly on 
FOIA section 552(d) (at the time codified at section 552(c)) 
which provides:  "This section is not authority to withhold 
information from Congress."  If "disclosure of information to 

Congress [were] disclosure to the whole world," we observed, 
it would be "inconsistent with the obvious purpose of the 
Congress [in 552(d)] to carve out for itself a special right of 
access to privileged information," and would "effectively 
transform section [552(d)] into a congressional declassification 
scheme, a result supported neither by the legislative history 
of the Act, nor by general legal principles or common sense."  
613 F.2d at 1155-56 (footnotes omitted).  As a policy matter, 
moreover, "since under such an interpretation every disclo-
sure to Congress would be tantamount to a waiver of all 
privileges and exemptions, executive agencies would inevita-
bly become more cautious in furnishing sensitive information 
to the legislative branch--a development at odds with public 
policy which encourages broad congressional access to gov-
ernmental information."  Id. at 1156 (footnote omitted).

     These considerations apply with even greater force in this 
case.  In Murphy, we granted Exemption 5 protection to the 
memorandum despite the fact that the Army had made "[n]o 
specific request" and the congressman no specific promise to 
keep the document confidential.  Id. at 1158-59.  Here, the 
Justice Department gave the documents to the Subcommittee 
only after the Subcommittee expressly agreed not to make 
them public.  Thus, far from intending to waive the attach-
ments' confidentiality, the Justice Department attempted to 
preserve it.  Under these circumstances, we find no Exemp-
tion 5 waiver.

                                IV

     This brings us to Rockwell's argument that by relying on 
and selectively quoting from several attachments, the Justice 
Department waived protection for all of them under the 
attorney work-product privilege, and thus under Exemption 
5.  The attorney work-product privilege protects "the files 
and the mental impressions of an attorney ... reflected, of 
course, in interviews, statements, memoranda, correspon-
dence, briefs ..., and countless other tangible and intangible 
ways."  Hickman v. Taylor, 329 U.S. 495, 510-11 (1947).  
"The purpose of the privilege, however, is not to protect any 
interest of the attorney ... but to protect the adversary trial 

process itself.  It is believed that the integrity of our system 
would suffer if adversaries were entitled to probe each other's 
thoughts and plans concerning the case."  Coastal State Gas 
Corp. v. Dep't of Energy, 617 F.2d 854, 864 (D.C. Cir. 1980).  
Here, the Department claims that the withheld attachments 
are just the kinds of "memoranda" and "correspondence" 
containing its "thoughts and plans" about the Rocky Flats 
prosecution that warrant work-product privilege protection.

     Rockwell does not dispute the Department's claim that the 
work-product privilege covers all withheld attachments.  In-
stead, it argues that the Justice Department waived the 
privilege in two ways.  First, it claims that the Department 
took "many actions inconsistent with maintaining the confi-
dentiality of its work-product," such as "provid[ing] its work-
product to Congress, request[ing] that the transcript of staff 
interviews before the Wolpe Subcommittee be made public, 
and publish[ing] portions of its work-product in its Report."  
Appellant's Reply Br. at 10 (internal citations omitted).  It is 
true that although "mere showing of a voluntary disclosure to 
a third person ... should not suffice in itself for waiver of the 
work-product privilege," disclosure of work-product materials 
can waive the privilege for those materials if "such disclosure, 
under the circumstances, is inconsistent with the maintenance 
of secrecy from the disclosing party's adversary."  United 
States v. American Tel. & Tel. Co., 642 F.2d 1285, 1299 (D.C. 
Cir. 1980) (internal citation, quotation, and emphasis omitted).  
In our view, however, none of the Department's actions was 
inconsistent with keeping the documents secret.  We have 
already explained that disclosure to Congress did not waive 
Exemption 5 protection.  As to the transcripts of the staff 
interviews, the Department requested that they be released 
only after the Wolpe Report quoted from them selectively.  
Nor do we see how quoting portions of some attachments is 
inconsistent with a desire to keep the rest secret, particularly 
in view of the steps the Department took to maintain their 
confidentiality, such as securing a promise of confidentiality 
from the Subcommittee and withholding the attachments 
when releasing the Report.  Cf. In re Sealed Case, 676 F.2d 
793, 818 (D.C. Cir. 1982) ("The purposes of the work product 

privilege are more complex, and they are not inconsistent 
with selective disclosure--even in some circumstances to an 
adversary.").

     Rockwell's second and primary argument is that by making 
"testimonial use" of the attachments--by relying on them in 
the Report to "put ... to rest" criticisms of the Rocky Flats 
prosecution--the Department "waive[d] the privilege with 
respect to work-product related to the same subject matter."  
Appellant's Reply Br. at 10;  see also Appellant's Br. at 29.  
For this proposition, the company cites three cases, the first 
being United States v. Nobles, 422 U.S. 225 (1975).  There, 
the defense sought to call an investigator to testify about 
interviews he had conducted with witnesses to a crime, but at 
the same time to withhold his written report of the interviews 
under the work-product privilege.  The Supreme Court 
agreed with the trial court that the defense could not invoke 
the privilege, and that in line with normal trial practice it 
would have to provide a copy of relevant portions of the 
report to the prosecution for use in cross-examining the 
investigator:  "[B]y electing to present the investigator as a 
witness," the Supreme Court held, the defense "waived the 
[work-product] privilege with respect to matters covered in 
his testimony."  Id. at 239.  Although attorneys do not waive 
the privilege by using their "notes, documents, and other 
internal materials" to present their case, or by relying on 
them to examine witnesses, where "counsel attempts to make 
a testimonial use of these materials the normal rules of 
evidence come into play with respect to cross-examination 
and production of documents."  Id. at 239 n.14.

     In the second case, In re Martin Marietta Corp., 856 F.2d 
619 (4th Cir. 1988), a criminal defendant and former employee 
of Martin subpoenaed certain company documents for use in 
his defense.  The Fourth Circuit refused to allow the compa-
ny to invoke the work-product privilege to resist the subpoe-
na, ruling that by having made testimonial use of the docu-
ments in a prior proceeding, it waived the privilege.  Though 
Martin Marietta had not actually disclosed all requested 
documents in the prior case, it had disclosed portions of some 
during settlement negotiations, expressly assuring its adver-

sary that it had disclosed all documents relevant to the 
settlement as part of a "direct attempt to settle active contro-
versies" between the two parties.  Id. at 625.  According to 
the Fourth Circuit, this constituted "testimonial use" "impli-
edly waiv[ing] the work-product privilege as to all non-opinion 
work-product on the same subject matter as that disclosed."  
Id.

     In Sealed Case, the third case Rockwell cites, we held that 
a company could not invoke the work-product privilege to 
avoid a grand jury subpoena of certain documents relating to 
alleged securities law violations.  676 F.2d at 818-25.  
Though the company had not previously disclosed the subpoe-
naed documents, it had disclosed related documents to the 
SEC as part of a "voluntary disclosure program," during 
which it gave the SEC a report discussing its own possible 
securities law violations, together with documents and notes 
of interviews upon which the report was based.  Id. at 818.  
By participating in the disclosure program, we concluded, the 
company had in effect agreed to disclose to the SEC all files 
relating to the subject matter of the investigation.  Id. at 
822-23.  But we also thought that because the grand jury had 
before it the report and attached documents, and because the 
withheld documents revealed a "highly embarrassing[ ] ver-
sion of events" at odds with the version described in the 
report, id. at 822, the situation was "analogous to the 'testi-
monial use' that the Supreme Court in Nobles held to imply a 
waiver":

     In the instant case the investigative counsel's final report 
     refers to files that were furnished to the lawyers prepar-
     ing the report, and it purports to reflect the relevant 
     material in those files.  Just as in a criminal trial the 
     government and the jury have a right to evaluate a 
     witness' account of his notes he had taken shortly after a 
     crime by evaluating those notes ... the grand jury [has] 
     a right to evaluate Company's report by examining the 
     documents it purports to reflect.
     
Id. at 822 n.124 (internal citations omitted).

     We disagree with Rockwell that these three cases require 
disclosure of the attachments.  "The test under Exemption 5 

is whether the documents would be 'routinely' or 'normally' 
disclosed upon a showing of relevance" by a party in litigation 
with the agency.  FTC v. Grolier Inc., 462 U.S. 19, 26 (1983) 
(quoting Sears, 421 U.S. at 148-49).  Just because the courts 
required disclosure in Nobles, Martin Marietta, and Sealed 
Case does not mean that the documents in those cases were 
"'routinely' or 'normally' disclos[able] upon a showing of 
relevance."  To the contrary, all three cases required disclo-
sure at least in part because their particular circumstances 
made doing so necessary to protect the adversary system.  In 
Nobles, the defense attempted to invoke work-product privi-
lege in a way that would have threatened the prosecution's 
ability to engage in effective cross-examination.  In Martin 
Marietta, the company attempted to invoke work-product 
privilege in a way that would have threatened an accused's 
right to secure evidence in his favor.  See 856 F.2d at 621 
(discussing the "Sixth Amendment guarantee that an accused 
have compulsory process to secure evidence in his favor").  In 
Sealed Case, the company attempted to invoke the privilege 
in a way that would have blocked a grand jury's access to 
relevant evidence, thus deceiving and misleading it.  See 676 
F.2d at 806 ("Nowhere is the public's claim to each person's 
evidence stronger than in the context of a valid grand jury 
subpoena.");  id. at 822 (noting Company's "sleight-of-hand" 
and attempted "manipulation" of the grand jury).

     It is conceivable that a case might arise in which testimoni-
al use of work-product documents would in effect lead to a 
general waiver of the privilege--where an agency's use of the 
documents would mean that virtually any plaintiff suing the 
agency on a related matter would be able to obtain disclosure 
of those documents.  But we need not decide here whether 
such circumstances would render the documents "routinely" 
or "normally" disclosable for purposes of FOIA, for in this 
case, the Justice Department made no testimonial use of the 
attachments.  It did not use them in an adversary proceed-
ing, nor in anything related to or even remotely resembling 
an adversary proceeding, but instead deployed them in a 

dispute with a co-equal branch of government and in the 
ensuing struggle for public opinion.

     Rockwell acknowledges that the Report was not submitted 
in an adversary proceeding, but nonetheless argues that 
"[t]here is no apparent reason ... why the government 
should be able to obtain unfair advantage over members of 
the public by choosing selective disclosure of otherwise privi-
leged documents, and such a result is contrary to the spirit of 
FOIA."  Appellant's Br. at 31.  Rockwell misunderstands 
FOIA's purposes.  Congress intended Exemption 5 to protect 
documents covered by the litigation privileges.  See Formal-
dehyde Institute, 889 F.2d at 1121.  Our decision does pre-
cisely that:  it protects the "files and mental impressions" of 
Justice Department attorneys preparing the Rocky Flats 
prosecution.  We are, moreover, untroubled by the notion 
that in releasing the Report without the attachments, the 
Attorney General may have put only the Department's best 
face forward.  As we noted earlier, we have allowed "selective 
disclosure" of protected documents "even in some circum-
stances to an adversary" in formal litigation.  Sealed Case, 
676 F.2d at 818.  Equally important, especially in view of the 
intense controversy surrounding recent executive branch ac-
tions, we think--contrary to Rockwell's assertion--that it 
serves the public interest to give attorneys general and other 
cabinet officials every incentive to disclose the results of 
internal investigations, even if they do so in a way that 
presents their agencies in the best possible light.  Other ways 
exist to hold executive branch officials accountable, such as 
congressional oversight hearings and civil litigation.

                                V

     Because the Department claims work-product privilege for 
all relevant documents, and because it has not waived the 
privilege, the documents are protected by Exemption 5.  We 
therefore need not consider Rockwell's remaining claims that 
the Department waived the attorney-client and deliberative-
process privileges with respect to certain specific attach-
ments.  We affirm the judgment of the district court.

                                                   So ordered.

                        