                  United States Court of Appeals 

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 6, 2001   Decided September 28, 2001 

                           No. 00-7081

                        Delta Foods Ltd., 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                   Republic of Ghana, et al., 
                            Appellants

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-7248

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv00044)

     Michael Steven Cole argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellants.

     Robert D. Balin argued the cause for appellee.  With him 
on the brief was Richard L. Cys.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  The government of the Republic of 
Ghana appeals two orders of the district court denying its 
motions to reopen judgment under Rule 60(b).  Those mo-
tions seek relief from a judgment enforcing against Ghana a 
consent decree entered by that country's High Court of 
Justice.  Ghana argues, first, that it never waived sovereign 
immunity before judgment and therefore may raise it after 
judgment and, alternatively, that the parties reached a post-
judgment settlement.  We hold that Ghana may not, after 
having voluntarily withdrawn its direct appeal, assert sover-
eign immunity in a collateral attack, and that the parties did 
not enter into a post-judgment settlement agreement.  
Therefore, we affirm the orders of the district court denying 
Ghana's Rule 60(b) motions.

                          I. Background

     The government of Ghana contracted to buy corn from 
Delta Foods, a Ghanaian corporation.  After Delta purchased 
the corn in the United States and tried to deliver it, the 
government refused to take it or to pay for it.  Delta sued 
Ghana in the High Court of Justice, after which the two 
parties negotiated a settlement agreement, the terms of 
which were then embodied in a consent decree.  Ghana was 
to pay Delta 20.3 billion Ghanaian cedis for:  the corn, the cost 
of pre-judgment storage, and pre-judgment interest.  In addi-
tion, Ghana was to reimburse Delta for any post-judgment 
cost of storage, and to pay Delta post-judgment interest in an 
amount to be negotiated by the parties.

     In January, 1999, still not having been paid any money, 
Delta sued Ghana in the district court here to enforce the 
decree of the High Court.  Ghana moved to dismiss or for 
summary judgment on the grounds of forum non conveniens, 

comity, and ripeness, but it did not assert sovereign immuni-
ty.  Delta opposed Ghana's motion and cross-moved for sum-
mary judgment.  Ghana then filed a reply in which it stated:

     Also confused in the opposition papers are the principles 
     of Sovereign Immunity and "Act of State" with that of 
     Comity.  The first two are doctrines of jurisdictional 
     immunity.  Comity on the other hand, like the doctrine 
     of forum non-conveniens, concerns discretionary jurisdic-
     tion.  Neither Sovereign Immunity nor Act of State is 
     relevant since immunity to jurisdiction is not claimed.
     
     In October, 1999 the district court granted Delta's motion 
for summary judgment and ordered Ghana to pay Delta the 
20.3 billion cedis due under the Ghanaian consent decree, plus 
interest.  Converting the 20.3 billion cedis to dollars using the 
rate of exchange at the time Delta filed suit in the United 
States, the court awarded Delta $8,526,000 plus interest from 
the entry of the consent decree to the entry of judgment in 
the district court, for a total of $9,174,005, plus post-judgment 
interest on that sum.

     Ghana timely appealed to this court "each and every part of 
the said judgment" but still did not assert sovereign immuni-
ty.  In December, 1999, however, Ghana moved voluntarily to 
dismiss its appeal--which motion we granted--so it could file 
in the district court a motion under Rule 60(b) seeking relief 
from that court's judgment.

     Meanwhile, on November 24, 1999 Ghana had deposited 
20.3 billion cedis into the Ghanaian court, pursuant to the 
consent decree, but Delta had rejected the payment, no doubt 
because by that time the cedis were worth millions of dollars 
less than the $9,174,005 to which it was entitled under the 
judgment of the district court.  (Ghana also had tendered 
some 2.282 billion cedis it owed under the consent decree for 
warehouse costs;  Delta accepted that money.)  In its Rule 
60(b) motion Ghana quoted a letter Delta's counsel had sent 
the government in March, 1999 stating that "[i]f the judgment 
debt is satisfied in Ghana, the proceedings in the U.S. cannot 
continue since satisfaction of the judgment in Ghana will be a 
complete answer to proceedings for execution in the U.S."

     The district court denied Ghana's motion to vacate the 
judgment.  The court ruled that neither Delta's letter nor its 
acceptance of payment for post-consent decree warehouse 
costs--a part of the Ghanaian judgment Delta had not sought 
to enforce in the United States--"establishes that the parties 
ever entered into a post-judgment settlement."

     In March, 2000 Ghana moved again under Rule 60(b) to 
vacate the judgment of the district court, this time on the 
ground of sovereign immunity.  Ghana explained its belated 
assertion of immunity as follows:  "[T]here has been a sub-
stantive change in the law which affects the judgment of this 
Court.  This change is affected by virtue of a most recent 
decision of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals," here refer-
ring to Transatlantic Shiffahrtskontor GmbH v. Shanghai 
Foreign Trade Corp., 204 F.3d 384 (2000).

     The district court denied Ghana's second motion to vacate, 
holding that Ghana had, by the earlier-quoted passage in 
Ghana's opposition to the plaintiff's motion for summary 
judgment, "explicitly waived any claim to sovereign immuni-
ty."  Therefore, the court did not reach the question whether 
Ghana was precluded from raising sovereign immunity in a 
post-judgment motion.

     Ghana now appeals the district court's dismissal of its two 
Rule 60(b) motions.  The time for appeal of the underlying 
judgment has long passed, of course.

                           II. Analysis

     Ghana contends initially that it has not waived sovereign 
immunity and may raise it for the first time in a post-
judgment motion.  In the alternative, Ghana argues that it 
satisfied the judgment of the district court when it paid into 
the High Court of Ghana 20.3 billion cedis for the benefit of 
Delta.

     Ghana initially must show that it may assert sovereign 
immunity in a motion under Rule 60(b).  Because we hold 
that it may not, we need not reach the question whether 
Ghana waived sovereign immunity.

A.   Sovereign Immunity

     Ghana points out that it never answered Delta's complaint;  
it merely moved to dismiss or for summary judgment on 
various preliminary grounds, such as forum non conveniens.  
When the district court denied that motion, Ghana filed an 
appeal, which it later withdrew.  There being no doubt it 
could move to dismiss on the ground of forum non conveniens 
(etc.) without thereby waiving sovereign immunity, Ghana 
argues that it could likewise withdraw its appeal of the forum 
non conveniens motion without losing its right to assert 
sovereign immunity.

     Delta counters that Ghana lost its right to assert sovereign 
immunity when it withdrew its direct appeal.  According to 
Delta, a party may not challenge a court's subject-matter 
jurisdiction in a collateral attack if the party initially ap-
peared in its own defense;  the question of jurisdiction is res 
judicata.

     We cannot but agree with Delta.  The problem with Gha-
na's argument is that Ghana never timely asserted sovereign 
immunity in any forum.  Its failure to assert sovereign 
immunity in the district court is not by itself fatal because, as 
Ghana points out, it did not answer the complaint and sover-
eign immunity is not necessarily waived by the tactical choice 
to raise other preliminary objections first.  Canadian Over-
seas Ores, Ltd. v. Compania de Acero del Pacifico S.A., 727 
F.2d 274, 277-78 (2d Cir. 1984).  Therefore, when the district 
court entered summary judgment for Delta, Ghana arguably 
could have asserted sovereign immunity for the first time in 
the court of appeals because the objection goes to the subject 
matter jurisdiction of the court.  See Bazuaye v. United 
States, 83 F.3d 482, 486 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("Challenges to 
subject matter jurisdiction can be raised for the first time on 
appeal").  There is a limit, however, to the timeliness of even 
a jurisdictional objection, and that limit was reached when the 
time to appeal ran out;  with no appeal pending, the judgment 
of the district court then became final.  For, as the Supreme 
Court has stated:

     A party that has had an opportunity to litigate the 
     question of subject-matter jurisdiction may not ... re-
     open that question in a collateral attack upon an adverse 
     judgment.  It has long been the rule that principles of 
     res judicata apply to jurisdictional determinations--both 
     subject matter and personal.
     
Insurance Corp. of Ireland, Ltd. v. Compagnie des Bauxites 
de GuinEe, 456 U.S. 694, 702 n.9 (1982).

     Ghana now seeks to raise the issue of sovereign immunity 
because it believes that Transatlantic, which the Second 
Circuit decided two months after the last day for Ghana to 
appeal, works a "substantive change in the law" from which 
Ghana might benefit.  According to Ghana, that case holds 
that in a suit to enforce a foreign judgment, the immunity of a 
foreign sovereign is not subject to the commercial activity 
exception unless the foreign judgment arises out of commer-
cial activity in the United States.

     Whether Ghana would benefit from the Transatlantic case 
is irrelevant to the proper disposition of its motion to vacate 
the judgment.  The Supreme Court has been clear, in terms 
that might as well have been crafted with this case in mind, 
that "reopening a judgment under Rule 60(b) [is precluded] 
where the movant has voluntarily abandoned his appeal, and 
the only ground for the motion to reopen is an asserted later 
change in the judicial view of applicable law."  Polites v. 
United States, 364 U.S. 426, 431 (1960).  Enough said.

B.   Settlement

     Ghana argues in the alternative that it satisfied the judg-
ment of the district court when it tried to pay Delta 20.3 
billion cedis, plus 2.82 billion cedis for post-consent decree 
warehouse costs, both as required by the Ghanaian consent 
decree, and Delta in fact accepted payment for the warehouse 
costs.  According to Ghana, Delta agreed that if Ghana paid 
the Ghanaian judgment, then Delta would not pursue pay-
ment of the U.S. judgment.  Ghana here relies upon the 
letter it received in March, 1999 from Delta's counsel:  "If the 
judgment debt is satisfied in Ghana, the proceedings in the 

U.S. cannot continue since satisfaction of the judgment in 
Ghana will be a complete answer to proceedings for execution 
in the U.S."

     Delta counters that counsel sent that letter before the 
district court had entered judgment;  in that procedural con-
text the letter meant only that, if Ghana paid the Ghanaian 
judgment for 20.3 billion cedis, then there would be no 
unsatisfied judgment of which Delta could seek enforcement 
in the United States.  Once the district court entered judg-
ment, however, everything changed:  Ghana owed Delta not 
20.3 billion cedis but $9,174,005.  See Competex, S.A. v. 
Labow, 783 F.2d 333 (2d Cir. 1986).  Ghana has not attempt-
ed to pay that amount, nor has Delta agreed to accept less.

     In reply, Ghana does not argue that it could satisfy the 
judgment of the district court by paying the less valuable 
Ghanaian judgment;  such an argument would be squarely at 
odds with the holding in Competex.  Instead Ghana maintains 
that Delta agreed to accept less than the U.S. judgment.  
Ghana first points to counsel's letter, but the letter manifests 
no such agreement.  Although the letter informed Ghana that 
Delta's "proceedings in the U.S. [could not] continue" if 
Ghana paid the Ghanaian judgment, it in no way suggested 
that Delta would accept payment of the Ghanaian judgment 
as satisfaction of any judgment that might later be issued in 
the United States.

     Ghana also emphasizes that Delta accepted payment of the 
warehouse costs in cedis, the suggestion apparently being, 
because the cedis had lost value, that such acceptance is 
evidence that Delta agreed not to demand the full payment 
provided by the judgment of the district court if only Ghana 
satisfied the decree of the High Court.  The warehouse costs, 
however, were not a part of the U.S. judgment.  Delta had to 
accept payment in cedis for those costs because it was not 
owed payment in dollars.  Delta is, by contrast, owed dollars 
under the U.S. judgment, and it has consistently demanded 
full payment of the amount it is owed.  We therefore reject 
Ghana's claim that it is entitled to relief from the judgment 

because the parties entered into a post-judgment settlement 
agreement.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court is

                                                                 Affirmed.

             