                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 9, 2000       Decided June 23, 2000 

                           No. 99-1402

     United Steelworkers of America, Local No. 185, et al., 
                           Petitioners


                                v.

                        Alexis M. Herman, 
                     Secretary of Labor and 
                    LTV Steel Company, Inc., 
                           Respondents


            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
         Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission

     Jeremiah A. Collins argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioners.

     Mark S. Flynn, Senior Appellate Attorney, United States 
Department of Labor, argued the cause for respondent Secre-

tary of Labor.  With him on the briefs were Allen H. 
Feldman, Associate Solicitor, and Nathaniel I. Spiller, Depu-
ty Associate Solicitor.

     Mark D. Katz argued the cause and filed the brief for 
respondent LTV Steel Company, Inc.  Andrew A. Paisley 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Randolph and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  Three local chapters of the Unit-
ed Steelworkers of America ("Union") bring this petition 
for review challenging the Occupational Safety and Health 
Review Commission's ("Commission") refusal to review an 
administrative law judge's ("ALJ") decision approving a set-
tlement between LTV Steel Company, Inc. ("LTV" or 
"Company") and the Secretary of Labor ("Secretary").  The 
Secretary had inspected LTV's facilities and cited the Com-
pany for numerous violations of the Occupational Health 
and Safety Act of 1970 ("Act"), 29 U.S.C. ss 651-678 
(1994).  LTV contested the citations and the case was set 
before an ALJ.  Before the case ever reached the hearing 
stage, however, LTV and the Secretary settled.  The Union 
challenged the settlement on the ground that one of the 
provisions effectively granted LTV a variance from the Oc-
cupational Health and Safety Administration's ("OSHA") 
regulations.  The Union argued that the Secretary is pro-
hibited from granting variances in settlements and urged 
the ALJ to reject the settlement.  The ALJ approved the 
settlement, and the Commission denied the Union's petition 
to review that decision.

     In the petition for review filed with this court, the Union 
contends that the Commission's failure to reject the settle-
ment was arbitrary and capricious.  The Union asserts that, 
although settlement agreements are rarely subject to chal-
lenge, employees should, nonetheless, be allowed to challenge 
a settlement agreement when the Secretary has granted a 
variance in the settlement.  In other words, the Union claims 

that the Secretary acted in excess of her statutory authority 
in granting a variance pursuant to a settlement, and, there-
fore, the settlement should be vacated.

     The Union's argument fails.  During oral argument, Union 
counsel effectively conceded that the settlement agreement 
does not in fact grant LTV a variance from OSHA's regula-
tions;  in other words, the principal premise underlying the 
Union's argument is missing.  We therefore have no occasion 
to address the issue posed by the Union, for the claim that it 
raises lacks foundation.  The law is otherwise clear that 
employee challenges to settlement agreements are limited to 
whether the agreed time for abatement is reasonable.  The 
Union makes no objection to the settlement's abatement time, 
so it has no right to challenge the settlement.  Accordingly, 
the Union's petition for review is denied.

                          I. Background

     Following an OSHA inspection of LTV's Cleveland, Ohio 
steel mill, the Secretary issued LTV two citations alleging 
over 60 violations and proposing $242,000 in penalties.  Only 
one item is at issue in this case.  Item 12b of the first citation 
alleged a violation of 29 C.F.R. s 1910.179(n)(4)(i), which 
provides that "[a]t the beginning of each operator's shift, the 
upper limit switch of each hoist shall be tried out under no 
load."  29 C.F.R. s 1910.179(n)(4)(i) (1998).  The Secretary 
alleged that LTV violated this standard by testing the switch 
with lifting devices still attached to the hook.  See OSHA 
Citation and Notification of Penalty at 13, reprinted in Joint 
Appendix ("J.A.") 1, 13 (charging that "[t]he upper limit 
switch of each hoist was not tried out under no load, at the 
beginning of each operator's shift," because, in one of the 
shops, "some operators who were testing the upper limit 
switch were doing so with the spreader bar on the hook").

     LTV contested the citations, and the case was placed on the 
Commission's docket.  The Union sought and obtained party 
status in the administrative proceeding.  The proceeding 
never took place, however.  Instead, the Secretary and the 
Company, after consulting with the Union, resolved the issues 

and agreed to a settlement;  LTV withdrew its contest to the 
citation.  With respect to Item 12b, the parties agreed that

     the required test may be performed with or without remov-
     ing lifting devices from the cranes so long as LTV Steel's 
     policy and practice is to require that the crane be moved to 
     a safe location and, further, employees do not stand directly 
     below or along the side of the crane during the test.
     
Stipulation and Settlement Agreement at 2-3, reprinted in 
J.A. 65, 66-67.

     The Union objected to this part of the settlement on the 
ground that the settlement was contrary to the regulation 
and, in effect, granted LTV a variance from the standard.  
The Union argued that the Secretary is not authorized to 
grant variances in settlements.  Although the Union conceded 
that, normally, it was free to challenge only the reasonable-
ness of abatement dates in settlements, it nonetheless urged 
the ALJ to reject the settlement, arguing that the Secretary's 
actions were arbitrary and capricious and did not comply with 
the Act.  The Company countered, simply, that the Union 
had no standing to contest the settlement agreement.

     The ALJ approved the settlement.  See Secretary of Labor 
v. LTV Steel Co., OSHRC Docket No. 98-0956, Order Ap-
proving Settlement (June 21, 1999), reprinted in J.A. 91.  The 
Commission denied the Union's petition for discretionary 
review of the ALJ's decision, see Secretary of Labor v. LTV 
Steel Co., OSHRC Docket No. 98-0956, Notice of Final Order 
(Aug. 10, 1999), reprinted in J.A. 104, and this petition for 
review followed.

                          II. Discussion

     Although the Union acknowledges that employee chal-
lenges to settlements are limited, the Union argues that it 
nonetheless should be allowed to challenge the settlement at 
issue in this case, because, by granting the Company a 
variance in the settlement, the Secretary exceeded her statu-
tory authority.  On the record at hand, we find no merit in 
this claim.

     The Secretary's prosecutorial power to enforce the Act is 
broad.  See Cuyahoga Valley R.R. v. United Transp. Union, 
474 U.S. 3, 6-7 (1985).  In particular, she is charged with 
vindicating the public rights embodied in the Act.  See Atlas 
Roofing Co. v. OSHRC, 430 U.S. 442, 444-47 (1977).  She has 
the sole responsibility to enforce the Act and she "is the 
exclusive prosecutor of OSHA violations."  Oil, Chem. and 
Atomic Workers v. OSHRC ("American Cyanamid"), 671 
F.2d 643, 649 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  If the Secretary issues a 
citation and proposed penalty that are not challenged, they 
become final and are not reviewable by any court.  See 29 
U.S.C. s 659(a).  If the citation is contested, the Commission 
adjudicates the dispute and is empowered to affirm, modify, 
or vacate the Secretary's citations and proposed penalties.  
See Id. at s 659(c).

     Employees and employee representatives play only limited 
roles in the prosecutorial and enforcement processes under 
the Act, and their rights to challenge the Secretary's prosecu-
torial and enforcement decisions are narrowly circumscribed.  
See Donovan v. OSHRC, 713 F.2d 918, 926 (2d Cir. 1983).  If 
the Secretary issues a citation, but the employer does not 
challenge it, employees may only challenge whether the 
abatement date in the citation is reasonable.  See 29 U.S.C. 
s 659(c).  If the employer does challenge a citation, employ-
ees may then participate as full parties in any proceeding 
before the Commission.  See American Cyanamid, 671 F.2d 
at 648-49.  Cases sometimes settle before they reach the 
Commission proceedings, however.  See id. at 650 ("Neces-
sarily included within the [Secretary's] prosecutorial power is 
the discretion to withdraw or settle a citation issued to an 
employer, and to compromise, mitigate or settle any penalty 
assessed under the Act.").  If a case settles, employee rights 
of participation are again closely circumscribed.

     Every circuit that has examined the issue has held that 
when a case settles, and the employer withdraws its contest 
to the citation, employees may only challenge-and the Com-
mission may only consider-the reasonableness of the abate-
ment time.  See Donovan v. Allied Indus. Workers, 760 F.2d 
783, 785 (7th Cir. 1985);  Donovan v. Local 962, Int'l Chem. 

Workers Union, 748 F.2d 1470, 1473 (11th Cir. 1984);  Dono-
van v. International Union, 722 F.2d 1415, 1420-21 (8th Cir. 
1983);  Donovan v. United Steelworkers, 722 F.2d 1158, 1160 
(4th Cir. 1983);  Donovan v. Oil, Chem., and Atomic Workers, 
718 F.2d 1341, 1352-53 (5th Cir. 1983);  Donovan, 713 F.2d at 
929-31;  Marshall v. Sun Petroleum Prod. Co., 622 F.2d 1176, 
1186-88 (3d Cir. 1980);  see also American Cyanamid, 671 
F.2d at 650 n.7 (noting in dicta that when a case settles, 
"employees are only empowered to invoke commission juris-
diction to object to the reasonableness of the abatement 
period").  As our sister circuits have ably explained, this rule 
is grounded in the Secretary's well-recognized prosecutorial 
discretion and the statutory limits on employee participation.  
We join our sister circuits and hold that when a case settles, 
and an employer withdraws its contest to the citation, "the 
only ground on which the Union may seek a hearing on a 
settlement is the unreasonableness of the abatement period."  
Donovan, 722 F.2d at 1160.

     The Union attempts to circumvent this rule by arguing 
that, even if employees are not allowed to challenge routine 
settlements, employees should be allowed to challenge settle-
ments in which the Secretary has exceeded her statutory 
authority.  The Union argues that the Secretary has exceed-
ed her statutory authority here by effectively granting LTV a 
variance in the settlement.  Variances, the Union argues, can 
only be granted through the rulemaking provisions of section 
6 of the Act, 29 U.S.C. s 655, and cannot be granted in the 
context of an enforcement proceeding.  Therefore, the Union 
argues, because the Secretary granted LTV a variance in an 
enforcement proceeding, she exceeded her statutory authori-
ty, and the Union should be able to challenge the settlement.

     We need not entertain this argument because, as Union 
counsel was forced to concede at oral argument, the disputed 
settlement agreement in this case did not in fact grant LTV a 
variance.  In other words, the principal premise underlying 
the Union's argument is missing.

     In its briefs to this court, the Union argued that the 
settlement granted LTV a variance from 29 C.F.R. 

s 1910.179(n)(4)(i), which provides that "[a]t the beginning of 
each operator's shift, the upper limit switch of each hoist shall 
be tried out under no load."  The Union claimed that the 
regulation requires the company to test the switch with 
nothing-not even lifting devices-attached to the hook.  The 
settlement, the Union asserted, grants LTV a variance, be-
cause it allows LTV to test the switch without removing the 
lifting devices from the hook.  At oral argument, however, 
Union counsel conceded that if, under the settlement agree-
ment, employees will not be exposed to any unsafe condition, 
then the Act has not been violated and no variance has been 
granted.  This is precisely the posture of the instant case.

     The settlement agreement at issue in this case insures that 
employees will not be exposed to danger while the switch is 
being tested.  In the settlement, LTV agreed to require that 
the "crane be moved to a safe location" to perform the test.  
Both the Secretary and LTV interpret this language to mean 
that employees cannot be exposed to danger when the test is 
performed.  The law is clear that the Act is only violated if 
employees could be exposed to dangers that the statute is 
designed to protect against.  See Astra Pharmaceutical 
Prod., 9 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) 2126 (O.S.H.R.C. 1981), aff'd in 
part, remanded in part, 681 F.2d 69 (1st Cir. 1982).  Because 
the Secretary and LTV are on record as stating that the 
settlement is intended to remove employee exposure, a fortio-
ri, the settlement is not a variance.

     Furthermore, there is no variance here, because the disput-
ed regulation has never been definitively interpreted to re-
quire the employer to remove lifting devices before perform-
ing the test.  The Union's interpretation of the regulation is 
one possible interpretation;  but, as the Company argues, 
another possible interpretation is that the regulation simply 
requires the employer to remove any load from the lifting 
device before performing the test.  Thus, because the settle-
ment is not at odds with any definitive interpretation of the 
regulation, it does not grant LTV a variance.  Significantly, 
at oral argument, both the Company and the Secretary 
conceded that if the regulation is later definitively interpreted 
strictly to require more than is required by the parties' 

settlement agreement, the subsequent regulatory interpreta-
tion will take precedence over the settlement and LTV would 
be bound by the more stringent interpretation.

     The terms of the settlement agreement were entirely with-
in the Secretary's statutory authority.  Accordingly, because 
LTV has withdrawn its contest to the Secretary's citation and 
because no issue has been raised with regard to the abate-
ment time, the Union has no right to challenge the settlement 
agreement.

                         III. Conclusion

     The petition for review is denied.

                                                      So ordered.

                                                