                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                     Filed December 17, 2002

                           No. 01-7185 
                          & No. 01-7186

                    Thomas P. Athridge, Jr., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    Francisco Rivas, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                 (No. 89cv01222 & No. 92cv01868)

     Erik S. Jaffe was on the brief for appellants.  William J. 
Rodgers entered an appearance.

     David F. Grimaldi was on the brief for appellees.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Edwards and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Thomas Athridge, who was struck 
by a driver operating a car owned by the appellees, seeks to 
impose vicarious liability on the appellees on the theory that 
they expressly or impliedly consented to the driver's use of 
their car.  Under the District of Columbia Motor Vehicle 
Safety Responsibility Act ("MVSRA"), D.C. Code 
s 50-1301.08, proof of ownership of a car is prima facie 
evidence that a driver operated the car with the owner's 
permission, and the defendant bears the burden of proving 
non-consent.  The District Court granted summary judgment 
for the appellees, holding that the appellees had overcome the 
statutory presumption of consent.  We reverse.

     The appellees' evidence of non-consent was contradicted by 
the appellants' evidence of implied consent.  Therefore, be-
cause there is a genuine issue of material fact, the District 
Court erred in granting summary judgment.  The weighing 
of evidence and the drawing of legitimate inferences from 
disputed facts are jury functions, not those of a judge.  On 
the record at hand, it cannot be held that, as a matter of law, 
the appellees have presented evidence sufficient to overcome 
the statutory presumption.  The District Court should have 
allowed a jury to weigh the evidence.  Accordingly, we re-
verse the judgment of the District Court and remand the case 
for further proceedings.

                          I. Background

     In July 1987, Francisco and Hilda Rivas went on an 
extended vacation, arranging for Jorge Iglesias, the 17-year-
old son of Mrs. Rivas' first cousin, to mow their lawn while 
they were away from home.  In the Rivases' absence, Iglesi-
as, who did not have a driver's license, entered their house, 
found the keys to their car, and went for a drive.  The car 
was titled to Churreria Madrid Restaurant, a partnership 
then owned by the Rivases.  Iglesias accidentally struck and 
seriously injured his friend Tommy Athridge.

     On May 4, 1989, Athridge and his father filed a suit in the 
District Court against Iglesias, Francisco Rivas, and the 
restaurant, alleging that Iglesias' negligence caused the inju-

ries.  Four months later, GEICO, the Rivases' insurance 
carrier, sued Francisco Rivas, the restaurant, and Iglesias in 
D.C. Superior Court, seeking a declaratory judgment that 
Iglesias' use of the car was without the owners' permission, 
and that therefore GEICO was not liable for any judgment 
that may be rendered against Rivas, the restaurant, or Iglesi-
as.  On March 7, 1990, GEICO, for reasons not contained in 
the record, moved to dismiss its own case against Rivas and 
the restaurant with prejudice, and the motion was granted.  
GEICO continued to pursue its claim against the driver 
Iglesias.  On June 6, 1990, the D.C. Superior Court granted 
summary judgment for GEICO on the issue of non-coverage 
of Iglesias.  See June 6, 1990 Order, reprinted in Joint 
Appendix 75.  This judgment did not purport to implicate the 
Athridges or the Rivases.

     On August 12, 1992, the Athridges filed additional com-
plaints in the District Court against Hilda Rivas, Iglesias' 
parents, and Aetna, the insurance carrier of Iglesias' parents.  
The District Court consolidated these three new actions with 
the original lawsuit.  The District Court then dismissed the 
claims against all defendants except Iglesias.  On November 
8, 1996, after a bench trial, the District Court found Iglesias 
liable for negligence and awarded the Athridges a $5.5 million 
judgment.  See Athridge v. Iglesias, 950 F. Supp. 1187, 1190-
94 (D.D.C. 1996).

     The Athridges appealed the District Court's grant of sum-
mary judgment for the Rivases, Iglesias' parents, and Aetna.  
This court affirmed the grant of summary judgment for 
Iglesias' parents and Aetna, reversed the grant of summary 
judgment for the Rivases, and remanded the case to the 
District Court.  See Athridge v. Rivas, 141 F.3d 357, 364 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).

     On remand, the Athridges moved for partial summary 
judgment.  They argued that the D.C. Superior Court's dis-
missal with prejudice of GEICO's claim against the Rivases 
should be deemed a determination that Iglesias had the 
Rivases' permission to drive the car, and that this determina-
tion precluded the Rivases from relitigating the issue of 

permission.  They also argued that the Rivases were preclud-
ed from contesting damages, which had already been deter-
mined in the Athridges' lawsuit against Iglesias.  On Novem-
ber 14, 2000, the District Court denied the Athridges' motion 
for summary judgment.  It held that the Superior Court's 
dismissal with prejudice of GEICO's claim against the Rivas-
es could not be deemed to have determined that the Rivases 
gave Iglesias permission to use the car.  See Athridge v. 
Iglesias, Nos. 89-1222 & 92-1868, 2000 WL 1780273, at 2 
(D.D.C. Nov. 14, 2000).  Therefore, the District Court held 
that the Rivases were not precluded from arguing that Iglesi-
as' use of their car was non-permissive.  The District Court 
declined to reach the issue of whether the Rivases were 
precluded from relitigating the question of damages that had 
previously been resolved in the suit against Iglesias, since 
there was no reason to reach the issue until the Rivases' 
liability was first established.  See id. at 5.

     The Rivases then filed a motion for summary judgment on 
the ground that they were not liable as a matter of law under 
the MVSRA.  The statute provides that, when a vehicle is 
operated by a person other than the owner, "proof of owner-
ship of said motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that 
such person operated said motor vehicle with the consent of 
the owner."  D.C. Code s 50-1301.08.  The Rivases claimed 
that Iglesias' use of the car was non-permissive.  The Ath-
ridges opposed the motion and filed a cross-motion for partial 
summary judgment.  On October 15, 2001, the District Court 
granted the Rivases' motion, finding that they had met their 
burden of proving that they did not consent to Iglesias' use of 
their car, by presenting uncontradicted and conclusive evi-
dence of non-consent, including the testimony of both Iglesias 
and the Rivases.  See Athridge v. Rivas, 167 F. Supp. 2d 389, 
394 (D.D.C. 2001).  The District Court rejected the Athridg-
es' arguments that there was consent and rejected their 
motion for summary judgment.  See id. at 395-98.  The 
Athridges now appeal the District Court's judgment in favor 
of the appellees.

                           II. Analysis

     This court reviews the District Court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo.  Ass'n of Flight Attendants, AFL-CIO v. 
USAir, Inc., 24 F.3d 1432, 1436 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Summary 
judgment may not be granted if the record reveals genuine 
issues of material fact.  Goldman v. Bequai, 19 F.3d 666, 672 
(D.C. Cir. 1994).  "Credibility determinations, the weighing of 
the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from 
the facts are jury functions, not those of a judge ... on a 
motion for summary judgment."  Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986).

     Under the MVSRA, proof of ownership of a car is prima 
facie evidence that the driver operated the car with the 
owner's permission.  This creates a rebuttable presumption 
that the owner consented to the use of the car, a powerful 
presumption that can only be overcome by "uncontradicted 
and conclusive evidence" of non-consent.  The defendant has 
the heavy burden of establishing non-consent.  See Gaither v. 
Myers, 404 F.2d 216, 218 (D.C. Cir. 1968) (holding that the 
presumption of consent "will support a jury verdict and 
judgment for the plaintiff unless the defendant demonstrates 
nonconsent by 'uncontradicted' and 'conclusive' evidence") 
(citing Hiscox v. Jackson, 127 F.2d 160 (D.C. Cir. 1942);  
Rosenberg v. Murray, 116 F.2d 552 (D.C. Cir. 1940)).

     Under District of Columbia law, an automobile owner is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law if he or she asserts 
without contradiction that the vehicle was taken and used 
without consent.  " 'If the presumption is overcome by uncon-
tradicted proof - and this may be done by the positive 
testimony of the owner - the defendant is entitled to a 
directed verdict as a matter of law.' "  Love v. Gaskins, 153 
A.2d 660, 662 (D.C. Mun. App. 1959) (quoting Stumpner v. 
Harrison, 136 A.2d 870, 871 (D.C. Mun. App. 1957)).  In 
other words, if the owner's testimony of non-consent is uncon-
tradicted and the statutory presumption has been overcome, 
then there is no issue to be submitted to a jury and judgment 
must be granted in favor of the defendant.  See Curry v. 
Stevenson, 26 F.2d 534, 536 (D.C. Cir. 1928);  Miller v. 

Imperial Ins. Inc., 189 A.2d 359, 360 (D.C. App. 1963).  But if 
the plaintiff proffers facts to discredit the defendant's evi-
dence of non-consent, then the issue must be submitted to a 
jury.  Alsbrooks v. Washington Deliveries, Inc., 281 A.2d 220, 
221 (D.C. 1971) ("Any contradiction or inconsistency found in 
the owner's proof prevents a directed verdict....").

     In the instant case, the owners and the driver both assert-
ed that no consent was given.  However, while this evidence 
supports the defendants' claim that Iglesias drove the car 
without the owners' consent, it is neither "uncontradicted" 
nor "conclusive."  The appellants convincingly contend that 
the record is inconclusive on the question of consent, because 
there is evidence indicating that the Rivases may have given 
Iglesias their consent to use the automobile.  The appellants 
are correct on this point.

     The appellants point to several facts that support the 
conclusion that Iglesias acted with the owners' consent.  The 
appellants first argue that an inference can be drawn that 
Iglesias drove the owners' car in the past, because of his 
facility with a stick-shift vehicle.  The appellants contend that 
this inference is strengthened by the fact that Iglesias 
claimed to have driven the car in the past, and also by the 
fact that Iglesias was seen on a different occasion driving 
another car belonging to the Rivases' son.  Second, the 
owners and Iglesias are relatives, which might raise doubts 
about their veracity on the matter of consent.  Third, the 
Rivases did not press charges against Iglesias for unautho-
rized use of the vehicle after the accident, and this failure is 
arguably inconsistent with a claim that the car was used 
without consent.  Fourth, the Rivases allowed Iglesias access 
to their house while they were away and left the car keys 
available therein.  Finally, the appellants suggest that the 
non-consent testimony is less than categorical, since Francis-
co Rivas could not read English when he signed an affidavit 
asserting that no consent was given.

     These facts do not constitute conclusive evidence of express 
or implied consent.  They do, however, raise a "genuine issue 
of material fact" regarding consent.  The District Court 

found otherwise, reasoning that no reasonable jury could 
return a verdict for the plaintiffs:  "The implausibility that 
[the Rivases], without any reason, would have ever consented 
to such a remarkable, extraordinary, and dangerous use of 
their car while they were out of the country requires that 
plaintiffs' evidence of consent amount to more than dubious 
inferences to be 'significantly probative.' "  Athridge, 167 
F. Supp. 2d at 392-93 (quoting First Nat'l Bank of Ariz. v. 
Cities Serv. Co., 391 U.S. 253, 290 (1968)).  The District 
Court's judgment is based on the erroneous conclusion that 
there are no genuine issues of material fact on the question of 
consent.  As indicated above, the record is inconclusive on the 
question of consent, because there is evidence indicating that 
the owners may have given Iglesias consent to use their 
automobile.  This evidence also calls into question the credi-
bility of the driver's and the owners' testimony on non-
consent.  Therefore, the defendants have not demonstrated 
non-consent by "uncontradicted" and "conclusive" evidence 
necessary to support a judgment as a matter of law.

     In short, the District Court was obliged to submit the case 
to a jury.  The factual assertions offered by the appellants 
weighed against the consent to which the owners and the 
driver had testified, and clearly raised a genuine issue of 
material fact.  The evidence was insufficient to justify a 
judgment as a matter of law for either side.  The District 
Court therefore should have allowed a jury to weigh the 
evidence to determine whether the defendants' evidence of 
non-consent is sufficient to overcome the statutory presump-
tion of consent.

     In reaching this conclusion, we reject the appellants' con-
tention that they are entitled to judgment as a matter of law 
based on the statutory presumption.  As noted above, the 
defendants' assertions of non-consent are sufficient to send 
the case to a jury.  In an effort to avoid this result, the 
appellants argue that the Rivases should be precluded from 
arguing that Iglesias' use of their car was non-permissive, 
because the D.C. Superior Court dismissed with prejudice 
GEICO's claim against the Rivases.  We reject this conten-
tion.  In dismissing the claim against the Rivases, the Superi-

or Court never made any findings on the question of consent 
in conjunction with that claim.  Although a "judgment dis-
missing [a] previous suit with prejudice bars a later suit on 
the same cause of action," a judgment "unaccompanied by 
findings ... [does] not bind the parties on any issue ... 
which might arise in connection with another cause of action."  
Lawlor v. Nat'l Screen Serv. Corp., 349 U.S. 322, 327 (1955) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  Therefore, we hold that 
the Superior Court dismissal cannot have preclusive effect on 
the issue of consent in the instant case.

     Appellants also claim that they are entitled to partial 
summary judgment on the issues of Iglesias' negligence and 
damages, based on the preclusive effect of the $5.5 million 
judgment against Iglesias.  The District Court declined to 
reach this issue until the Rivases' liability was first estab-
lished.  We therefore leave that issue for resolution by the 
District Court in the first instance.

                         III. Conclusion

     We reverse the District Court's judgment for the appellees 
and remand this case for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion.

                                                    