                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 6, 2001   Decided November 9, 2001 

                           No. 00-1207

              Verizon Telephone Companies, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                   Sprint Corporation, et al., 
                            Intervenor

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Aaron M. Panner argued the cause for petitioners and 
supporting intervenors.  With him on the briefs were Michael 
K. Kellogg, Michael E. Glover, John M. Goodman, James D. 

Ellis, Roger K. Toppins, Jeffry A. Brueggeman, Jay C. 
Keithley, and Michael B. Fingerhut.

     John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, argued the cause for respon-
dents.  With him on the briefs were Daniel M. Armstrong, 
Associate General Counsel, Laurel R. Bergold and Lisa E. 
Boehley, Counsel, John M. Nannes, Acting Assistant Attor-
ney General, United States Department of Justice, Robert B. 
Nicholson and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys.  Christopher J. 
Wright, General Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-
sion, and Lisa S. Gelb, Counsel, entered appearances.

     Michael J. Thompson, Albert H. Kramer, Katherine J. 
Henry, and Andrew J. Phillips were on the joint brief of 
intervenors ABTEL Communications, Inc., et al.  Robert F. 
Aldrich entered an appearance.

     Michael E. Glover, John M. Goodman, James D. Ellis, 
Roger K. Toppins, Jeffry A. Brueggeman, Michael K. Kel-
logg, Aaron M. Panner, Jay C. Keithley, and Michael B. 
Fingerhut were on the brief of Local Exchange Carrier 
intervenors.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  A group of local phone companies 
(known as "local exchange carriers," or "LECs") seek review 
of an order of the Federal Communications Commission 
("FCC" or "Commission") holding them liable for violating 
the unreasonable charge provisions of 47 U.S.C. s 201(b) 
(1994).  The violations occurred when the LECs wrongfully 
imposed so-called End User Common Line ("EUCL") fees on 
certain "independent payphone providers" ("IPPs").  In an 
agency adjudication that addressed complaints challenging 
the fees, the FCC initially construed the rules enunciated in 
an earlier rulemaking, In re MTS and WATS Market Struc-
ture, 97 F.C.C.2d 682 (1983) ("Access Charge Reconsidera-
tion") (setting rules by which LECs could recover costs 
associated with calls made on payphones), to allow the imposi-

tion of the fees.  However, the FCC's decision did not survive 
judicial review.  In C.F. Communications Corp. v. FCC, 128 
F.3d 735 (D.C. Cir. 1997), the court held that the Access 
Charge Reconsideration did not allow for the fees.  The case 
was remanded, leading the Commission to reverse itself in 
the order now under review.  See In re C.F. Communications 
Corp. v. Century Tel. of Wisconsin, Inc., 15 F.C.C.R. 8759 
(2000) ("Liability Order").  In changing its position following 
judicial review, the FCC conclusively determined that the 
LECs had violated the applicable Access Charge Reconsidera-
tion rules by imposing the EUCL charges;  the Commission 
decided, however, that the question of what damages should 
flow from that violation was best reserved for another day.

     In their present petition, the LECs contend, first, that the 
Liability Order is final, and thus immediately reviewable by 
this court.  Second, they argue that the agency may not now 
sanction them for conduct that had been expressly approved, 
and may have even been compelled, by the Commission itself.  
The FCC responds that we lack jurisdiction at this time, 
because by leaving the issue of damages unresolved, the 
Liability Order was rendered non-final.  Moreover, the Com-
mission asserts that even if we do reach the merits, the 
LECs' retroactivity argument must fail, as whatever reliance 
those carriers placed on ultimately erroneous FCC pro-
nouncements cannot excuse their violations of governing 
law - as that law is properly construed.  We conclude that 
the Liability Order is final, and that we therefore have 
jurisdiction to review it.  It is true that the general rule is 
that an adjudicatory decision resolving only liability and not 
damages is not final.  In this case, however, the relevant 
jurisdiction-conferring statute, 47 U.S.C. s 208(b), provides 
that an order "concluding an investigation ... of the lawful-
ness of a charge" is a final order subject to immediate appeal.  
We are presented with just such an order here.

     On the merits, we hold that it was appropriate for the FCC 
to find the LECs liable for their EUCL charges, even though 
the Commission initially construed the Access Charge Recon-
sideration rules to allow the charges.  We do not believe that 
the Commission should be prevented from stating the law 

correctly merely because it may have misconstrued the appli-
cable rules in the past.  We emphasize, however, that this 
holding does not necessarily doom the LECs' retroactivity 
arguments.  Because the FCC has not yet fixed the means by 
which it will calculate damages, the LECs are not foreclosed 
from presenting their equitable concerns to the agency during 
the next phase of the proceedings.  We therefore express no 
opinion as to the Commission's authority to impose damages 
on the LECs for charges that they may have collected in 
reliance on the agency's initial (and mistaken) interpretations 
of the Access Charge Reconsideration rules.

                          I. Background

     Much of the regulatory and procedural background to the 
present petition is set out in C.F. Communications.  See 128 
F.3d at 736-38.  We will not repeat that entire discussion 
here, but rather will concentrate on the most salient points.  
The underlying issue in this case is how local phone compa-
nies are to recover the costs that they incur when long-
distance calls are made on coin-operated telephones.  The 
story begins in 1983, when the FCC issued general rules 
establishing a regulatory mechanism for LECs to be compen-
sated for providing long-distance carriers (known as "interex-
change carriers" or "IXCs") access to their local networks.  
In re MTS and WATS Market Structure, Third Report and 
Order, 93 F.C.C.2d 241 (1983) ("Access Charge Rulemaking"), 
modified on recon., 97 F.C.C.2d 682 (1983), modified on 
further recon., 97 F.C.C.2d 834 (1984), aff'd and remanded in 
part sub nom. Nat'l Ass'n of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. 
FCC, 737 F.2d 1095 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  For most phones, the 
Commission decided that these costs were to be footed by 
"end users" who would be assessed EUCL charges by the 
LECs.  Pay telephones, however, which tend to have no 
predetermined end-user, required a different solution.  Ac-
cordingly, the FCC decided to exempt public payphones from 
EUCL fees altogether, instead allowing the LECs to recover 
their costs from the IXCs directly, in the form of Carrier 
Common Line ("CCL") charges.  See Access Charge Recon-
sideration at 705.  Not all payphones were exempted, howev-

er.  Instead, the FCC distinguished between true "public" 
payphones - such as those in airports and on street corners - 
and those which it labeled "semi-public" - a category that 
included coin-operated phones found in restaurants and gas 
stations, where "there is a combination of general public and 
specific customer need for the service."  Id. at 704 & n.40.  
Reasoning that this latter class could be linked to identifiable 
subscribers, the Commission allowed the LECs to impose flat 
EUCL charges on those subscribers, just as they would do 
for ordinary private phones.  See id. at 706.

     At the time when the Access Charge Reconsideration was 
issued, all of the nation's payphones were owned by the LECs 
themselves.  This situation was soon undermined when the 
FCC allowed a group of "independent" providers to enter the 
payphone market.  See Registration of Coin Operated Tele-
phones, 49 Fed. Reg. 27,763 (July 6, 1984).  These IPPs 
brought with them a technological advantage:  so-called 
"smart" phones, which connected to ordinary phone lines 
rather than to the special coin lines that linked the LEC-
owned phones to the central processors that supervise their 
calls.  The new phones, which were able to perform this 
managerial task internally, needed no such specialized hook-
up.  However, despite their architectural and cognitive differ-
ences, the two types of phones are found in the same kinds of 
places and are basically indistinguishable from the lay user's 
perspective.  Nevertheless, when it came to EUCL charges, 
the LECs decided to treat the smart phones rather different-
ly from their less sophisticated cousins.  Acting at first 
without any guidance from the Commission other than the 
original Access Charge Reconsideration, the LECs imposed 
EUCL fees on all of the new phones - not merely those 
located in semi-public places - and assessed these tolls on the 
IPPs directly.

     Unsurprisingly, the IPPs balked at these charges.  Their 
concerns, however, were not well received by officials at the 
FCC.  In 1988 and 1989, informal complaints filed by two 
IPPs generated two letters from Anita J. Thomas, an analyst 
in the Enforcement Division of the Commission's Common 
Carrier Bureau.  In both of these letters, Thomas declared 

that by imposing EUCL fees on IPPs, the LECs violated 
neither their own tariffs nor the agency's regulations.  See 
Letter from Anita J. Thomas to LeRoy A. Manke, Manager, 
Coon Valley Farmers Telephone Co. (Apr. 4, 1989), reprinted 
in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 154;  Letter from Anita J. Thomas 
to Lance C. Norris, Vice President, American Payphones, Inc. 
(Sept. 14, 1988), reprinted in J.A. 152.  In May of 1989, 
another IPP, C.F. Communications Corp. ("CFC"), filed a 
formal complaint, alleging that the LECs' conduct had violat-
ed various provisions of the Communications Act and seeking 
reparations for the wrongfully collected EUCL charges.  This 
challenge proved unsuccessful at the agency level, as both the 
Common Carrier Bureau and ultimately the Commission it-
self sided with the LECs.  In re C.F. Communications Corp. 
v. Century Tel. of Wisconsin, 8 F.C.C.R. 7334 (Com. Car. 
Bur. 1993);  10 F.C.C.R. 9775 (1995) ("EUCL Decisions").  In 
rejecting CFC's complaint, the FCC concluded that IPPs 
were properly considered "end users" and thus could be 
subjected to EUCL charges.  Moreover, the agency held that 
the IPPs' payphones were "semi-public" within the meaning 
of the Access Charge Reconsideration no matter where they 
were located or how they were used.

     CFC sought review of the FCC decision in this court and 
found some success.  In C.F. Communications, the court 
vacated the EUCL Decisions, holding both that the classifica-
tion of IPPs as "end users" was an unreasonable interpreta-
tion of the relevant regulation, 47 C.F.R. s 69.2(m), and that 
the FCC had not adequately justified allowing EUCL charges 
to be collected for IPP phones while exempting similarly 
situated LEC-owned payphones from such fees.  See 128 
F.3d at 738-42.  In deciding this second issue, the court 
pointedly rejected the FCC's theory that a payphone should 
be denied "public" (and thus EUCL-exempt) status under the 
Access Charge Reconsideration merely because it was capa-
ble of private use.  Rather, the court stated that the relevant 
question was how a phone was actually used, that is, the 
manner in which it was held out to the public.  Id. at 741-42.  
These holdings were significant because they undermined the 
legal basis on which the LECs had relied to rationalize their 

disparate treatment of independently owned "smart" pay-
phones.  And, without such support, the LECs' actions seem 
to collapse into the kind of unreasonable discrimination pro-
scribed by the Communications Act.  See 47 U.S.C. s 202(a).  
However, the court in C.F. Communications declined to 
decide "whether the Commission's interpretation compelled 
LECs to discriminate under Section 202(a), or the precise 
consequences if it did," leaving those issues for another day.  
128 F.3d at 742.

     On remand, the FCC chose not to mount a renewed 
defense of its decision to allow the LECs to assess end-user 
fees on the IPPs.  Instead, the Commission decided to hold 
the LECs liable for devising and implementing that policy in 
the first place.  In the Liability Order now on review, the 
FCC concluded that, in light of the C.F. Communications 
decision, a EUCL fee imposed on an independent payphone 
that is used in the same manner as a LEC-owned "public" 
payphone is an "unreasonable charge" under 47 U.S.C. 
s 201(b).  See Liability Order at 8766, p 20.  The agency 
then concluded that an award of damages for such liability 
was appropriate.  Id. at 8768-69, p p 27-29.  At the same 
time, however, the agency postponed a final ruling on dam-
ages, reasoning that further briefing and argument were 
needed in order to fix the proper amount of the award.  Id. at 
8771, p p 33-34.  The LECs filed the present petition for 
review before that phase of the proceedings commenced.

                         II. Discussion 

     This petition presents two central questions, one jurisdic-
tional and one merits-based.  The first is whether the FCC's 
Liability Order is final and therefore subject to immediate 
judicial review.  We answer this question in the affirmative.  
The second is whether it was permissible for the Commission 
to hold the LECs liable for imposing charges that had 
previously been condoned by the FCC itself.  We answer this 
question in the affirmative as well.  At the same time, 
however, we note that, because the agency has not yet 
conclusively determined how it will measure damages, the 

LECs still will be able to raise their concerns about retroac-
tivity and reliance with the FCC during the next phase of 
these proceedings.  And, until the Commission reaches a 
conclusion on that issue, we are unable to review the propri-
ety and permissible extent of damages in this case.

A. Finality under 47 U.S.C. s 208(b)

     Under 28 U.S.C. s 2342(1) (1994), this court has jurisdic-
tion to determine the validity of "all final orders of the 
Federal Communications Commission made reviewable by 
section 402(a) of title 47."  In turn, 47 U.S.C. s 208(b) states 
that "[a]ny order concluding an investigation" of, inter alia, 
"the lawfulness of a charge" commenced at the behest of a 
party complaining about the actions of a common carrier 
"shall be a final order and may be appealed under section 
402(a) of this title."  The jurisdictional question in this case, 
then, is whether the Liability Order "concluded" the investi-
gation that began with CFC's original 1989 complaint against 
the LECs.

     All parties agree that, in the Liability Order, the FCC 
reached a final determination that the LECs had imposed 
unreasonable charges in collecting EUCL fees from the IPPs, 
thereby violating 47 U.S.C. s 201(b).  See Liability Order at 
8773, p p 40-41.  This decision is undoubtedly final, in the 
sense that there is no indication that the agency will revisit it 
in future proceedings.  Indeed, neither the Commission's 
brief nor agency counsel's argument on appeal claimed that 
the finding of liability is subject to further review by the FCC 
sans a court order requiring it.  Nonetheless, the Commission 
contends that its decision to bifurcate the damages phase of 
its investigation from the liability phase stripped the entire 
Liability Order of its finality.  In other words, according to 
the FCC, an investigation under s 208 of a single complaint 
that seeks a determination of liability and an award of 
damages is not over until the Commission has resolved both 
aspects of the complaint.  See Br. for Respondents at 27.

     As a general proposition, an FCC order is final if it "(1) 
represents a terminal, complete resolution of the case before 
the agency, and (2) determines rights or obligations, or has 

some legal consequence."  Capital Network Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 
3 F.3d 1526, 1530 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (internal quotations and 
citations omitted).  Here, we are sure that the Liability 
Order, even without a concomitant determination of damages, 
has "some legal consequence" for the LECs.  The actions of 
the FCC bear this out.  Agency officials have relied on the 
Liability Order at least twice in unrelated cases to deny 
requests made by SBC Communications, one of the named 
LECs, to have sanctions against it mitigated.  See In re SBC 
Communications, Inc., 16 F.C.C.R. 10963, 10968, p 15 & n.38 
(Enf. Bur. rel. May 24, 2001);  In re SBC Communications, 
Inc., 16 F.C.C.R. 5535, 5543, p 19 & n.53 (Enf. Bur. rel. Mar. 
15, 2001).  If the Liability Order now furnishes the basis for 
agency judgments in subsequent cases, the FCC is hard 
pressed to deny that the finding of legal liability is sufficient 
to satisfy the second prong of the finality test.  Cf. Consolida-
tion Coal Co. v. Fed. Mine Safety & Health Review Comm'n, 
824 F.2d 1071, 1078 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (holding that an agency 
designation that "became a part of [the regulated party's] 
permanent record, thereby exposing [it] to more severe sanc-
tions for later violations" supplied "the 'modicum of injury' 
necessary to support jurisdiction") (quoting Meredith Corp. v. 
FCC, 809 F.2d 863, 868 (D.C. Cir. 1987)).

     The FCC is, however, quite correct to point out that, under 
a well-established principle of finality, when a tribunal elects 
to resolve the issue of liability in a particular action while 
reserving its determination of damages on that liability, that 
decision generally is not considered "final" for purposes of 
judicial review.  See Franklin v. District of Columbia, 163 
F.3d 625, 628 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("In damage and injunction 
actions, a final judgment in a plaintiff's favor declares not 
only liability but also the consequences of liability--what, if 
anything, the defendants must do as a result.");  see also 
Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Wetzel, 424 U.S. 737, 744 (1976) 
(holding that a summary judgment order imposing liability is 
not considered final under 28 U.S.C. s 1291 where "assess-
ment of damages or awarding of other relief remains to be 
resolved").  This basic understanding of finality is the norm 
not only in civil litigation, but also in the administrative 

context, at least where the relevant statute does not embrace 
a non-traditional view of finality.  See, e.g., Rivera-Rosario v. 
United States Dept. of Agric., 151 F.3d 34, 37 (1st Cir. 1998) 
("A final decision in an adjudicatory proceeding is one that 
resolves not only the claim but, if liability is found, also the 
relief to be afforded.");  Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth. v. Dir., Office of Workers' Comp. Programs, 824 F.2d 
94 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  accord AAA Eng'g & Drafting, Inc. v. 
Widnall, 129 F.3d 602, 603 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (holding that an 
order of the Armed Service Board of Contract Appeals was 
not final because it resolved only "entitlement" (liability) 
while reserving decision as to "quantum" (damages)).

     In this case, however, this norm of finality has been sup-
planted by statute.  Congress added subsection (b) to 47 
U.S.C. s 208 in 1988.  See Pub. L. No. 100-594, s 8(c), 102 
Stat. 3021 (1988).  This amendment converted what had been 
s 208 - which allowed a broad group of entities to bring 
complaints to the FCC challenging the actions of common 
carriers, thus triggering investigations by the Commission of 
the "matters complained of" - into what is now subsection (a).  
In turn, the new provision, subsection (b), established time 
limits pursuant to which certain investigations cognizable 
under subsection (a) had to be concluded, and decreed that 
dispositions in those investigations would be subject to imme-
diate judicial scrutiny.  Thus, when the FCC conducts an 
investigation into the "lawfulness" of a (1) charge, (2) classifi-
cation, (3) regulation, or (4) practice, "any order concluding" 
such an investigation is deemed to be a final order under 
s 208(b).  This case falls squarely within the meaning of this 
expediting amendment.

     Our conclusion is compelled by the statutory text.  The 
crucial word in s 208(b) is "lawfulness," which must be read 
to mean what it says, namely that which is "allowed or 
permitted by law."  Webster's Third New International 
Dictionary 1279 (1993);  cf. Holland v. Williams Mountain 
Coal Co., 256 F.3d 819, 826 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (Sentelle, J., 
concurring) ("While it is fashionable in some legal circles to 
deride 'hyper-technical reliance upon statutory provisions,' 
this Court does not - and should not - move in them.") (citing 

Palm Beach County Canvassing Bd. v. Harris, 772 So.2d 
1220, 1227 (Fla. 2000), vacated, 531 U.S. 70 (2000)).  As such, 
interpreted literally (as we think is proper), s 208(b) applies 
to final determinations of liability of the sort that the FCC 
has delivered here.

     This conclusion is further buttressed by the fact that 
s 208(b) does not mention damages.  By contrast, damages 
are specifically covered in three other sections of the chapter:  
s 206 makes common carriers who do anything "declared to 
be unlawful" liable for damages;  s 207 allows any party 
harmed by the actions of a common carrier to file a complaint 
with the FCC seeking damages;  and s 209 authorizes the 
Commission to "make an order directing the carrier to pay to 
the complainant the sum to which he is entitled" if it deter-
mines that damages are appropriate.  Given that s 208(b) 
was designed to render only a limited category of FCC 
decisions final, the failure of that provision to mention dam-
ages, set against the explicit reference to damages in these 
other provisions, militates in favor of applying s 208(b) as it 
is written.

     It is also noteworthy that s 201(b) declares all "charges, 
practices, classifications, and regulations" that are "unjust or 
unreasonable" to be "unlawful."  The categories listed in 
s 201(b) are coterminous with those cognizable under 
s 208(b), further suggesting that, as to this class of investiga-
tions, a determination of lawfulness is separate and distinct 
from a determination of what damages (if any) should flow 
from a violation of the law.  For, even if the FCC ultimately 
decides that the LECs need not pay any damages for their 
EUCL charges, it would not follow from such a decision that 
they had done nothing unlawful.  One can violate the law 
without being made to pay for it.  Accordingly, when the 
FCC conclusively resolved that the EUCL charges were 
unreasonable within the meaning of s 201(b) and the Access 
Charge Reconsideration, see Liability Order at 8766, p 20, it 
simultaneously and necessarily concluded its investigation 
into the "lawfulness" of those charges, as it left nothing more 
to be said on the question of whether the LECs had run afoul 
of the statute's proscriptions.

     To the argument that the original "investigation" has not 
been concluded because CFC's original complaint sought 
damages, and the agency's failure to determine damages 
means that it has not resolved all of the "matters complained 
of" under s 208(a), our answer is simple.  The class of 
investigations contemplated by s 208(b), and subject both to 
that subsection's time limitations and finality rules, is narrow-
er than the class of investigations contemplated by s 208(a).  
Indeed, the FCC has conceded as much.  See Br. for Respon-
dents at 32.  This difference in coverage is stark, and plain on 
the face of the statute.  Under s 208(a), investigations can be 
launched regarding "anything done or omitted to be done by 
any common carrier subject to this chapter in contravention 
of the provisions thereof."  By contrast, s 208(b) governs 
only the four types of investigations enumerated above.  Its 
text refers not to investigations "of the matters complained 
of," but rather to investigations "of the lawfulness of a 
charge, classification, regulation, or practice."

     Taken together, then, the language of s 208(b), which 
speaks only of lawfulness, and the structure of the common 
carrier chapter, which contemplates separate determinations 
of lawfulness and damages, compel the conclusion that when 
the FCC enters an order dealing solely with the lawfulness of 
a charge, that order is final under s 208(b)(3) even if it fails 
to resolve a complainant's properly presented claim for dam-
ages.  Our holding in no way limits how the Commission may 
elect to investigate complaints under s 208.  No FCC order 
is subject to review under s 208(b)(3) unless it actually 
terminates an investigation of the lawfulness of a common 
carrier's activities.  Thus, had the agency not bifurcated the 
proceedings in this case, but instead reserved final judgment 
on the LECs' liability until it was in a position to consider 
damages simultaneously, this court would have been com-
pelled to wait as well.  But, having elected to bifurcate, and 
thus to render a conclusive finding that the LECs acted 
unlawfully, the FCC subjected its decision to immediate 
review.  Accordingly, we proceed to the merits of the LECs' 
petition.

B.   The LECs' Liability for Imposing EUCL Charges

     The LECs argue that the Liability Order was arbitrary 
and capricious for two related reasons.  First, they contend 
that the Supreme Court's decision in Arizona Grocery Co. v. 
Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway Co., 284 U.S. 370 
(1932), precludes a finding of liability where a common carrier 
imposes charges pursuant to and in reliance on the Commis-
sion's official mandate.  Second, they assert that the FCC's 
change in position amounted to a "new" rule, and, therefore, 
the agency was foreclosed from applying it retroactively.  We 
reject both claims.  In doing so, we emphasize that our 
analysis here is limited to the question of whether it was 
permissible for the FCC to hold the LECs liable for violating 
the Communications Act.  We do not decide the question of 
whether the FCC may award damages for the LECs' charges 
that have been found to be unlawful.

     1.   The Arizona Grocery Rule
          
     In Arizona Grocery, the Supreme Court held that the 
Interstate Commerce Commission could not order a common 
carrier to pay reparations for charging a rate that the agency 
had explicitly approved at the time it was collected, but 
subsequently determined to have been unreasonable.  In that 
case, the ICC had, in a proceeding described by the Court as 
"quasi-legislative," 284 U.S. at 388-89, ordered railroads ship-
ping sugar from California to Phoenix, Arizona to charge no 
rate exceeding 96.5 cents per 100 pounds.  In response, the 
carriers adopted a rate of 86.5 cents, which they later reduced 
to 84 cents;  these rates were then challenged before the 
Commission.  In that proceeding, which the Court described 
as "quasi-judicial," id. at 389, the agency determined that this 
rate was unreasonable to the extent that it exceeded 71 to 73 
cents and awarded the sugar shippers reparations from the 
carriers for the difference.  The Supreme Court ultimately 
held that this damages award was improper:

     Where the Commission has, upon complaint and after 
     hearing, declared what is the maximum reasonable rate 
     to be charged by a carrier, it may not at a later time, and 
     upon the same or additional evidence as to the fact 
     
     situation existing when its previous order was promulgat-
     ed, by declaring its own finding as to reasonableness 
     erroneous, subject a carrier which conformed thereto to 
     the payment of reparation measured by what the Com-
     mission now holds it should have decided in the earlier 
     proceeding to be a reasonable rate.
     
Id. at 390.

     Despite the superficial appeal of this passage, the rule 
enunciated therein is of no help to the LECs in this case.  
First, Arizona Grocery deals only with the power of the ICC 
to award reparations to shippers for unreasonable rates that 
they had paid to carriers.  See id. at 381 ("This case turns 
upon the power of the Interstate Commerce Commission to 
award reparations with respect to shipments which moved 
under rates approved or prescribed by it.").  Arizona Gro-
cery has been and should be understood in the terms in which 
it was decided, as a proscription against the retroactive 
revision of established rates through ex post reparations.  
See, e.g., Alabama Power Co. v. ICC, 852 F.2d 1361, 1373 
(D.C. Cir. 1988) (suggesting that Arizona Grocery stands for 
the proposition that requiring railroads "to pay refunds, 
based on a determination that the earlier Commission-
approved rates were impermissible, runs counter to the well-
established prohibition against retroactive ratemaking");  
AT&T v. FCC, 836 F.2d 1386, 1394-95 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (Starr, 
J., concurring) (citing Arizona Grocery for the "basic rule of 
ratemaking" that "when the Commission determines that 
existing rates are excessive, it cannot order a refund of past 
payments under the revoked rate");  cf. Sea Robin Pipeline 
Co. v. FERC, 795 F.2d 182, 189 n.7 (D.C. Cir. 1986) ("FERC 
may not order a retroactive refund based on a post hoc 
determination of the illegality of a filed rate's prescription.").

     As such, neither Arizona Grocery nor the rule it announced 
are concerned with a situation such as the one presented 
here, in which we must decide not whether the FCC may 
force the LECs to repay that which they took through EUCL 
charges, but rather whether the Commission may make a 
retroactive determination that those charges were unlawful at 

the time that they were imposed.  Indeed, the rule against 
retroactive ratemaking is premised on the implicit under-
standing that an established rate is not made illegal if it is 
later found to be impermissible or unreasonable.  See, e.g., 
Arizona Grocery, 284 U.S. 370, 389 (1932) (the ICC "could 
repeal the order as it affected future action, and substitute a 
new rule of conduct as often as occasion might require, but 
this was obviously the limit of its power, as of that of the 
legislature itself");  Town of Norwood, Mass. v. FERC, 53 
F.3d 377, 381 (D.C. Cir. 1995) ("The retroactive ratemaking 
doctrine prohibits the Commission from authorizing or requir-
ing a utility to adjust current rates to make up for past errors 
in projections.  If a utility includes an estimate of certain 
costs in its rates and subsequently finds out that the estimate 
was too low, it cannot adjust future rates to recoup past 
losses.");  Sea Robin, 795 F.2d at 189 n.7 ("Sea Robin had a 
right to rely on the legality of the filed rate once the 
Commission allowed it to become effective.").  The subse-
quent determination rejecting the earlier rate prescription is 
similar to a congressional action revising an earlier statutory 
enactment - the later action may suggest that the original 
legislative act was ill-advised, but this will not justify repara-
tions for persons who were disadvantaged by the original 
legislative enactment.  This case does not involve the sort of 
ratemaking contemplated by Arizona Grocery, so the same 
assumptions do not apply here.

     Second, in light of the implicit assumptions underlying the 
rule against retroactive revision of established rates through 
ex post reparations, it is not surprising that the Court in 
Arizona Grocery observed that the ICC had prescribed a 
legal rate in its "quasi-legislative capacity."  284 U.S. at 388.  
The Court recognized that ratemaking - "fixing rates or rate 
limits for the future" - is a legislative function, and held that 
once the Commission had exercised such a power it could only 
undo the results prospectively.  Id. at 388-89.  In other 
words, Arizona Grocery, by its own terms, does not apply 
where an adjudicating agency alters, even with retroactive 
effect, a policy established in a previous quasi-judicial action.  
Nor has it ever been so applied.  The lines between these 

categories of activity are not always clear - indeed, in Ari-
zona Grocery itself the quasi-legislative rates were estab-
lished in an adjudicatory proceeding, see id. at 388.  Never-
theless, the Court in Arizona Grocery made clear that there 
is an important distinction between rules resulting from 
quasi-adjudication and rules resulting from quasi-legislation.  
We are therefore bound to follow the Court's mandate and 
apply this distinction.

     With these principles in mind, we are constrained to con-
clude that the FCC's actions in this case are not governed by 
the rule established in Arizona Grocery.  The Access Charge 
Reconsideration, a rulemaking designed to establish how the 
LECs were to recover end-user costs in the future, was 
undoubtedly legislative in character.  But this rulemaking 
was not "revised" by the Liability Order that the LECs now 
challenge.  Rather, the Liability Order merely corrected the 
EUCL Decisions, agency adjudications that had erroneously 
interpreted the original Access Charge Reconsideration by 
holding that particular instances of challenged conduct on the 
part of the LECs did not violate the regulations arising from 
that rulemaking.  In those decisions, the FCC did not pur-
port to substitute a new legislative rule for an old one.  
Moreover, when the court in C.F. Communications vacated 
the judgment in the EUCL Decisions, it did so on the 
grounds that the FCC had misconstrued the Access Charge 
Reconsideration rulemaking.  See 128 F.3d at 741-42.  Our 
opinion in that case did not, however, suggest that the 
underlying rulemaking was in any way infirm.  And on 
remand, the FCC issued the Liability Order to rectify the 
errors found pursuant to the judicial review of the EUCL 
Decisions.

     Therefore, the FCC's actions in issuing the orders in the 
EUCL Decisions and the Liability Order were not analogous 
to the situation in Arizona Grocery.  In Arizona Grocery, the 
ICC purported to retroactively revise an established rate 
(that was the product of a "quasi-legislative" action);  in this 
case, by contrast, the FCC purported to interpret and apply 
legislative regulations in succeeding adjudications.

     There is no doubt that the EUCL Decisions were intended 
to have prospective application, in the sense that these adjudi-
catory actions purported to interpret the Access Charge Re-
consideration rulemaking, which remained in force all along.  
But this fact does not advance the LECs' argument.  It is 
well understood that judicial interpretations of legislative 
enactments have consequences for parties in the future;  yet, 
this does not render the statutory construction a legislative 
activity.  See Japan Whaling Ass'n v. Am. Cetacean Soc., 478 
U.S. 221, 230 (1986) ("[u]nder the Constitution, one of the 
Judiciary's characteristic roles is to interpret statutes ...");  
Northwest Airlines, Inc. v. Transport Workers Union of Am., 
451 U.S. 77, 95 & n.34 (1981) (emphasizing that "the federal 
lawmaking power is vested in the legislative, not the judicial, 
branch of government," but that once the legislature speaks, 
"the task of the federal courts is to interpret and apply 
statutory law").  So too with adjudication by administrative 
agencies.  See Bowen v. Georgetown Univ. Hosp., 488 U.S. 
204, 216-17 (1988) (Scalia, J., concurring) ("Adjudication ... 
has future as well as past legal consequences, since the 
principles announced in an adjudication cannot be departed 
from in future adjudications without reason.");  Goodman v. 
FCC, 182 F.3d 987, 994 (D.C. Cir. 1999) ("[T]he nature of 
adjudication is that similarly situated non-parties may be 
affected by the policy or precedent applied, or even merely 
announced in dicta, to those before the tribunal.").  To sug-
gest, as the LECs do here, that the EUCL Decisions were 
somehow "legislative" merely because they interpreted a 
rulemaking or because they had some future impact would 
entirely collapse the distinction between rulemaking and adju-
dication, and thus the very distinction on which Arizona 
Grocery rests.  As such, we hold that when the FCC depart-
ed from the EUCL Decisions in a subsequent adjudication, it 
was not constrained by Arizona Grocery's blanket prohibition 
on retroactive repeals of quasi-legislative ratemaking.

     2.   The Retroactivity Doctrine
          
     This is not to say that agency adjudications that modify or 
repeal rules established in earlier adjudications may always 
and without limitation be given retroactive effect.  To the 

contrary, there is a robust doctrinal mechanism for alleviating 
the hardships that may befall regulated parties who rely on 
"quasi-judicial" determinations that are altered by subsequent 
agency action.  Over fifty years ago, in SEC v. Chenery 
Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 203 (1947), the Supreme Court cautioned 
that the ill effects of retroactivity "must be balanced against 
the mischief of producing a result which is contrary to a 
statutory design or to legal and equitable principles."

     In the ensuing years, in considering whether to give retro-
active application to a new rule, the courts have held that

     [t]he governing principle is that when there is a "substi-
     tution of new law for old law that was reasonably clear," 
     the new rule may justifiably be given prospectively-only 
     effect in order to "protect the settled expectations of 
     those who had relied on the preexisting rule."  Williams 
     Natural Gas Co. v. FERC, 3 F.3d 1544, 1554 (D.C. Cir. 
     1993).  By contrast, retroactive effect is appropriate for 
     "new applications of [existing] law, clarifications, and 
     additions."  Id.
     
Pub. Serv. Co. of Colo. v. FERC, 91 F.3d 1478, 1488 (D.C. Cir. 
1996) ("PSCC").  See also Aliceville Hydro Assocs. v. FERC, 
800 F.2d 1147, 1152 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (discussing the distinc-
tion between "new applications of law" and "substitutions of 
new law for old law").  In a case in which there is a 
"substitution of new law for old law that was reasonably 
clear," a decision to deny retroactive effect is uncontroversial.  
Epilepsy Found. of N. Ohio v. NLRB, No. 00-1332, slip op. at 
12-13 (D.C. Cir. Nov. 2, 2001).  In cases in which there are 
"new applications of existing law, clarifications, and addi-
tions," the courts start with a presumption in favor of retroac-
tivity.  See, e.g., Health Ins. Ass'n of Am. v. Shalala, 23 F.3d 
412, 424 (D.C. Cir. 1994). However, retroactivity will be 
denied "when to apply the new rule to past conduct or to 
prior events would work a 'manifest injustice.' "  Clark-
Cowlitz Joint Operating Agency v. FERC, 826 F.2d 1074, 
1081 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (en banc) (quoting Thorpe v. Housing 
Auth. of the City of Durham, 393 U.S. 268, 282 (1969));  see 
also Consol. Freightways v. NLRB, 892 F.2d 1052, 1058 (D.C. 
Cir. 1989).

     This court has not been entirely consistent in enunciating a 
standard to determine when to deny retroactive effect in 
cases involving "new applications of existing law, clarifica-
tions, and additions" resulting from adjudicatory actions.  In 
Clark-Cowlitz, the en banc court adopted a non-exhaustive 
five-factor balancing test, see 826 F.2d at 1081-86 (citing 
Retail, Wholesale & Dep't Store Union v. NLRB, 466 F.2d 
380, 390 (D.C. Cir. 1972).  In a subsequent case, however, we 
substituted a similar three-factor test.  See Dist. Lodge 64 v. 
NLRB, 949 F.2d 441, 447-49 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (citing Chevron 
Oil Co. v. Huson, 404 U.S. 97, 106-07 (1971)).  And in other 
cases, the court has jettisoned multi-pronged balancing ap-
proaches altogether.  See Cassell v. FCC, 154 F.3d 478, 486 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (declining to "plow laboriously" through the 
Clark-Cowlitz factors, which "boil down to a question of 
concerns grounded in notions of equity and fairness");  PSCC, 
91 F.3d at 1490 (concluding that "the apparent lack of detri-
mental reliance ... is the crucial point supporting retroactivi-
ty").

     In the present case, the LECs argue that the Liability 
Order should not be given retroactive effect, because it would 
be grossly unfair to punish them for imposing EUCL charges 
that were approved, and perhaps even required, by the 
authoritative pronouncements of the Commission itself.  Be-
fore addressing these concerns, we note that even if we were 
to accept the LECs' argument in full, there would still remain 
a period of approximately four years - from the IPPs' entry 
into the payphone market in 1984 until the first Thomas letter 
in 1988 - during which no claim of reliance can possibly be 
maintained.  During this period, the LECs imposed EUCL 
fees on the IPPs wholly on their own initiative, i.e., without 
specific guidance from the FCC, and thus entirely at their 
own risk.

     That said, we conclude that the FCC's decision to hold the 
LECs liable for EUCL charges levied even after the Commis-
sion had spoken on the issue was not an abuse of discretion or 
otherwise impermissible.  In reaching this determination, we 
rely primarily on two factors.  The first is the fact that the 
FCC's policy regarding the propriety of imposing end-user 

fees on IPPs was never authoritatively articulated outside of 
the same complaint proceeding in which it was eventually 
reversed.  Indeed, the two EUCL Decisions, on which the 
LECs' reliance argument primarily rests, were part of a 
single chain of decisions triggered by CFC's original com-
plaint, a chain whose natural progression led to this court, 
where the Commission's holdings were vacated.  Thus, the 
agency orders on which the LECs claim to have relied not 
only had never been judicially confirmed, but were under 
unceasing challenge before progressively higher legal authori-
ties.  Our cases indicate that under such circumstances reli-
ance is typically not reasonable, a conclusion that significantly 
decreases concerns about retroactive application of the rule 
eventually announced.  See Clark-Cowlitz, 826 F.2d at 1083 
n.7 ("[A] holding of nonretroactivity ... cannot be premised 
on a single, recent agency decision ... that is still in the 
throes of litigation when it is overruled.").

     Indeed, our holding in PSCC is directly on point here.  In 
that case, a group of natural gas producers increased the 
prices that they charged their pipeline customers in order to 
recover an ad valorem tax imposed by the state of Kansas;  
the legal theory behind this increase was that this tax was a 
severance tax under s 110 of the Natural Gas Policy Act.  
These price hikes were challenged before FERC, which sided 
with the producers, holding that the Kansas tax came within 
the meaning of s 110.  Reviewing this decision, this court 
found that FERC's statutory interpretation was unreasonable 
and reversed.  On remand, the Commission retreated from 
its earlier analysis and found that the tax did not qualify as a 
severance tax, and therefore that the producers had over-
charged the pipelines. We upheld the retroactive application 
of this decision, in the process rejecting the claims of reliance 
advanced by the producers, claims that uncannily echo those 
made by the LECs in the present case.  91 F.3d at 1488-91.  
The court held that as soon as the pipelines had petitioned 
the Commission for a ruling that the producers' preferred 
interpretation of s 110 was incorrect, the producers were put 
on notice that the recoverability of the tax was "in dispute."  
Once this challenge had been lodged, it was then unreason-

able for the producers to rely on that interpretation, even 
though it was explicitly endorsed by the agency before ulti-
mately being reversed by this court.  Id. at 1490.  Thus, we 
concluded that it was appropriate for FERC to hold the 
producers liable for that which they had taken when the law 
was uncertain but the Commission was on their side.  Just so 
here.  Because the object of the LECs' reliance was neither 
settled (but rather was perpetually enmeshed in litigation) 
nor "well-established," see Clark-Cowlitz, 826 F.2d at 1083 
("[T]he Commission's ruling in that solitary proceeding can 
scarcely be viewed as 'well-established.' "), we are skeptical 
that retroactive liability against the LECs would actually 
impose a manifest injustice.  In light of the ongoing legal 
challenges to the EUCL Decisions, whatever reliance the 
LECs placed on those rulings was something short of reason-
able for purposes of the retroactivity analysis.

     The second factor pointing toward retroactive liability is 
that the agency pronouncements on which the LECs relied 
were subsequently held by this court to be mistaken as a 
matter of law.  As such, the FCC's Liability Order was 
largely an exercise in error correction.  We have previously 
held that administrative agencies have greater discretion to 
impose their rulings retroactively when they do so in re-
sponse to judicial review, that is, when the purpose of retroac-
tive application is to rectify legal mistakes identified by a 
federal court.  See Exxon Co., USA v. FERC, 182 F.3d 30, 
49-50 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  cf. Pub. Utils. Comm'n of the State of 
Cal. v. FERC, 988 F.2d 154, 161-63 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (noting 
that the normal rule against retroactive ratemaking may be 
relaxed where the original order was challenged and deter-
mined by this court to be unlawful).  Indeed, there can be 
little dispute that had the FCC originally (whether in 1993 or 
1995) held in favor of the IPPs, the Commission at that point 
would have been well within its rights to have held the LECs 
liable for violating the unreasonable charge provisions of 47 
U.S.C. s 201(b).  As such, the LECs' argument that the FCC 
may not reach the same conclusion now reduces to the 
assertion that the agency may not retroactively correct its 
own legal mistakes, even when those missteps have been 

highlighted by the federal judiciary.  But this is not the law.  
See United Gas Improvement Co. v. Callery Props., Inc., 382 
U.S. 223, 229 (1965) ("An agency, like a court, can undo what 
is wrongfully done by virtue of its order.");  Natural Gas 
Clearinghouse v. FERC, 965 F.2d 1066, 1073 (D.C. Cir. 1992) 
(reading Callery to embody the "general principle of agency 
authority to implement judicial reversals").

     In sum, then, the IPPs should not be denied now what they 
asked for in their original complaint - a determination that 
the LECs violated the law - merely because the FCC bun-
gled their case the first time around.  To do so would make a 
mockery of the error-correcting function of appellate review.  
It would be to say that the LECs must prevail now because 
they (wrongfully) prevailed below.  We are unwilling to tie 
the Commission's hands in this way.  Cf. Exxon USA, 182 
F.3d at 49 ("There is also a strong equitable presumption in 
favor of retroactivity that would make the parties whole.").  
As such, we conclude that the Liability Order represented a 
permissible exercise of the FCC's discretion and therefore 
deny the LECs' petition for review.

     Having upheld the imposition of retroactive liability, we 
decline to address whether a similar finding regarding dam-
ages would be equally permissible.  As described above, the 
FCC has not yet entered a final order with respect to 
damages.  Both the amount that the LECs will ultimately 
have to pay, and the time period that those payments will 
cover, remain for determination.  As such, the LECs' conten-
tion that equitable restitution, and not legal damages, is the 
sole remedy available to the IPPs, see Atlantic Coast Line 
R.R. Co. v. Florida, 295 U.S. 301 (1935);  Moss v. Civil 
Aeronautics Bd., 521 F.2d 298, 314 (D.C. Cir. 1975), is plainly 
not ripe for adjudication at this time.  See Abbott Labs. v. 
Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 149-50 (1967).  Only after the Com-
mission both commits itself to a method for calculating the 
proper amount of the award, and concretely applies that 
method to the LECs, will this court be in a position to 
evaluate the arguments regarding damages.  See Eagle-
Pitcher Indus., Inc. v. EPA, 759 F.2d 905, 915 (D.C. Cir. 

1985).  By bifurcating the proceedings as it did, the FCC left 
those decisions for another day.

     As we read the Liability Order, the FCC has suggested a 
possible means for figuring damages, but has not foreclosed 
the possibility of modifying that suggestion during the next 
phase of the proceedings.  See Liability Order at 8771, 
p p 33-34.  Specifically, the FCC has not reached a conclusive 
determination that it will compel the LECs to return all of 
the monies that they collected in possible reliance on the 
FCC's official pronouncements.  Nor has it rendered a final 
judgment that the LECs are not entitled to some kind of 
equitable offset in light of such reliance.  We will not pre-
judge these issues in advance of the agency.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the reasons given above, we hold that the Liability 
Order is final despite its failure to reach the issue of damages.  
Rejecting the LECs' arguments that either the Arizona 
Grocery doctrine or the rule against retroactivity bars the 
FCC from imposing liability, we deny the petition for review 
and uphold the Commission's finding that the LECs violated 
the unreasonable charge provisions of the Communications 
Act.  At the same time, we express no opinion as to whether 
damages or some other monetary remedy are appropriate in 
this case, or whether such a remedy, if appropriate, may be 
imposed retroactively.

                                                                         