                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 14, 2002      Decided June 7, 2002 

                           No. 01-5172

                        Gene C. McKinney, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                        Thomas A. White, 
                     Secretary of the Army, 
                               and 
                  W. B. Huffman, Major General, 
                   The Judge Advocate General, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv00728)

     Charles W. Gittins argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Thomas M. Ray, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. Howard, 
Jr., U.S. Attorney and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. 
Attorney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Rogers and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Gene C. McKinney, now retired, 
was a Sergeant Major of the Army who was court martialed 
in 1998 and found guilty of obstructing justice in violation of 
Article 134 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
("UCMJ"), 10 U.S.C. s 934.  After unsuccessful attempts to 
have his conviction set aside under the UCMJ, he sought 
review in the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia under the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), 5 
U.S.C. ss 701-706, of the Judge Advocate General's denial of 
his request to set aside the court martial finding and sen-
tence.  The district court dismissed the complaint on the 
ground that the Judge Advocate General is not an "agency" 
for purposes of the APA.  We hold that the statutory scheme 
created by Congress for review of courts martial precludes 
review of the Judge Advocate General's decision under the 
APA.  Accordingly, we affirm the dismissal of the complaint.

                                I.

     The relevant facts are undisputed.  Pursuant to UCMJ 
Article 32, 10 U.S.C. s 832, an Army investigation of allega-
tions of sexual harassment and assault by six female military 
personnel resulted in McKinney's being court martialed.  He 
was charged in 18 counts with violations of military law 
arising out of alleged sexual harassment and in a separate 
count with obstruction of justice in violation of UCMJ Article 
134, 10 U.S.C. s 934.  In March 1998, a jury acquitted him of 
the 18 sexual harassment counts and convicted him of the 
obstruction count.  He was sentenced to a reprimand and a 
reduction in grade from Army Sergeant Major to Army 
Master Sergeant.

     McKinney sought a post-trial evidentiary hearing pursuant 
to UCMJ Article 39(a), 10 U.S.C. s 839(b), to inquire into 
allegations of prosecutorial misconduct in not disclosing and 
destroying evidence and attempting to influence witnesses.  
The Military Trial Judge denied the motion on the papers.  
The Judge also denied McKinney's renewed Article 39(a) 
request, to which he had attached the affidavit of his counsel 
recounting a discussion with a prosecution witness.  McKin-
ney then filed a petition for mandamus in the United States 
Army Court of Criminal Appeals in a further effort to obtain 
a post-trial evidentiary hearing;  the court denied the petition.  
His writ of appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Armed Forces was also denied, without prejudice to his 
right of review under UCMJ Article 69, 10 U.S.C. s 869.  
McKinney v. United States, 51 M.J. 270 (C.A.A.F. 1998).

     Pursuant to UCMJ Article 69, 10 U.S.C. s 869(a), the 
Commander for the Military District of Washington affirmed 
the findings and sentence and forwarded the record of the 
trial to the Judge Advocate General for review.  Following 
an investigation of McKinney's allegations of prosecutorial 
misconduct that included interviews of several prosecution 
witnesses, including the witness referred to in McKinney's 
Article 39(a) affidavit, the Judge Advocate General stated 
summarily:  "The finding and sentence are supported in law 
and the sentence is appropriate.  No modification of the 
finding or sentence is warranted."  The Judge Advocate 
General did not refer the case to a Court of Criminal Appeals 
for review as to matters of law.  Id. s 869(d) & (e).

     Having failed to obtain relief from the military justice 
system, McKinney filed a complaint in the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia.  He alleged that 
the decision of the Judge Advocate General was arbitrary and 
capricious and not based on substantial evidence within the 
meaning of the APA, 5 U.S.C. s 706, because the Judge 
Advocate General failed to provide an adequate explanation 
for rejecting McKinney's claims of prosecutorial misconduct.  
The Secretary of the Army and the other defendants ("the 
Secretary") moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to 
state a cause of action under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 

12(b)(6).  The district court granted the motion to dismiss, 
ruling that the Judge Advocate General is not an "agency" for 
purposes of the APA.

                               II.

     McKinney contends that the district court erred in ruling 
that the Judge Advocate General's decision is not subject to 
review under the APA.  He maintains that because decisions 
by the Judge Advocate General under UCMJ Article 69 are 
reached independently and constitute final binding decisions 
affecting the rights of individuals, the Judge Advocate Gener-
al is an "authority" within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. s 701(b)(1) 
whose decisions are subject to judicial review under the APA 
as final agency action.  He relies on the broad definition of 
the word "agency" in the APA, 5 U.S.C. s 701(b)(1), and the 
presumption favoring review of final agency decisions that is 
overcome only by clear and convincing evidence that Con-
gress intended to restrict access to the courts.  See Abbott 
Labs. v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 141 (1967).

     Although the district court addressed McKinney's com-
plaint in terms of whether the Judge Advocate General was 
an "agency" subject to APA review, we conclude that a 
threshold jurisdictional issue must be addressed.  The APA 
provides for the non-reviewability of "courts martial and 
military commissions," 5 U.S.C. s 701(b)(1)(F), but does not 
expressly preclude review of Judge Advocate General deci-
sions reviewing courts martial pursuant to UCMJ Article 69, 
10 U.S.C. s 869.  Congress' establishment, pursuant to Arti-
cle I, Section 8 of the Constitution, of a separate judicial 
system for courts martial review is, however, convincing 
evidence that Congress could not have intended Judge Advo-
cate General review of courts martial to fall within APA 
review of agency decisions.

     In Schlesinger v. Councilman, 420 U.S. 738, 746 (1975), the 
Supreme Court stated that it "repeatedly has recognized that 
of necessity '(m)ilitary law ... is a jurisprudence which exists 
separate and apart from the law that governs in our federal 
judicial establishment.' "  420 U.S. at 746 (quoting Burns v. 

Wilson, 346 U.S. 137, 140 (1953)).  The Court also reiterated 
in Schlesinger both the general rule that "the acts of a court 
martial, within the scope of its jurisdiction and duty, cannot 
be controlled or reviewed in the civil courts, by writ of 
prohibition or otherwise," 420 U.S. at 746 (citations omitted), 
and the limited exception for collateral attack seeking a 
declaration that a judgment is void, having no res judicata 
effect, "because of lack of jurisdiction or some other equally 
fundamental defect."  Id. at 747.  Observing that "[t]he mili-
tary is 'a specialized society separate from civilian society' 
with 'laws and traditions of its own (developed) during its 
long history,' " id. at 757 (quoting Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 
733, 743 (1974)), the Court noted that "Congress attempted to 
balance ... military necessities against the equally significant 
interest of ensuring fairness to servicemen charged with 
military offenses."  Id.  The Court further observed that:

     implicit in the congressional scheme embodied in the 
     [UCMJ] is the view that the military court system gener-
     ally is adequate to and responsibly will perform its 
     assigned task.  We think this congressional judgment 
     must be respected and that it must be assumed that the 
     military court system will vindicate servicemen's consti-
     tutional rights.
     
Id. at 758.

     As the proceedings in McKinney's case illustrate, Congress 
has established a complete and distinct procedure for mem-
bers of the military who are charged with law violations 
under the UCMJ.  While direct parallels are imprecise, the 
proceedings in his case suggest a process that begins with a 
review that serves a function comparable to that of the grand 
jury for Article III courts.  This was followed by a jury trial, 
imposition of a sentence, and post-trial motions proceedings.  
Then, in a procedure unique to the military, the finding and 
sentence were subject to the approval of the Commander of 
the Military District.  10 U.S.C. s 860.  Upon such approval, 
the trial record was forwarded, in light of the length of 
McKinney's sentence, to the Judge Advocate General for 
review instead of a Court of Criminal Appeals.  Id. 

ss 866(b)(1), 869(a).  UCMJ Article 69 provides that a soldier 
who is convicted during a general court martial and sentenced 
to less than one year of confinement is entitled to an automat-
ic review of the record of the trial by the Judge Advocate 
General, unless the soldier affirmatively waives review.  Id. 
s 869.  "If any part of the findings or sentence is found to be 
unsupported in law or if reassessment of the sentence is 
appropriate, the Judge Advocate General may modify or set 
aside the findings or sentence or both."  Id. s 869(a).  Upon 
referral by the Judge Advocate General, further review of 
questions of law is available by a Court of Criminal Appeals 
pursuant to UCMJ Article 69, 10 U.S.C. s 869.  UCMJ 
Article 76 provides that:

     [t]he appellate review of records of trial provided by 
     [Chapter 47, UCMJ] ... are final and conclusive....  
     [and] are binding upon all departments, courts, agencies, 
     and officers of the United States, subject only to action 
     upon a petition for a new trial as provided in section 837 
     of this title (article 73) and to action by the Secretary 
     concerned as provided in section 847 of this title (article 
     74) [Remission and suspension], and the authority of the 
     President.
     
Id. s 876.

     The proceedings under the UCMJ demonstrate that the 
designated reviewing authorities have "heard [McKinney] out 
on every significant allegation which [he] now urge[s]."  
Burns, 346 U.S. at 144.  The Military Trial Judge reviewed 
McKinney's allegations of prosecutorial misconduct on two 
occasions and the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces 
denied his writ of appeal.  The Judge Advocate General 
reviewed the court martial finding and sentence and also 
conducted his own investigation into the allegations of prose-
cutorial misconduct.  McKinney makes no claim that the 
procedures established by Congress in the UCMJ were inade-
quate to the task, much less "fundamentally defect[ive]."  
Schlesinger, 420 U.S. at 747.

     This court has long acknowledged that it lacks jurisdiction 
of a direct appeal of a court martial.  Although McKinney 
does not seek review of a decision of the Court of Appeals for 

the Armed Forces, he, like the petitioners in Shaw v. United 
States, 209 F.2d 811, 813 (D.C. Cir., 1954), seeks review of a 
decision by the military authority that Congress has designat-
ed to review his direct appeal and his collateral attack on his 
general court martial conviction.  The fact that he did not 
receive a more severe sentence, whereby his appeal would 
have gone to a Court of Criminal Appeals, is a distinction 
without difference with regard to the jurisdiction of this 
court.  As in Shaw, then, "we are clear" that Congress has 
not granted jurisdiction to this court to review direct appeals 
from the highest military official of a general court martial.  
209 F.2d at 812-13.

     Furthermore, Congress has expressly provided that "courts 
martial" are not subject to review under the APA.  5 U.S.C. 
s 701(b)(1)(F).  While McKinney contends that this prohibi-
tion does not extend to the final decision of the Judge 
Advocate General, the logic of his position is illusive.  Con-
gress has provided a separate justice system in the UCMJ for 
military personnel and it has expressly determined that 
"courts martial" are not to be subject to APA review.  Hence, 
it is difficult to understand the reasoning that Congress would 
have utilized in making the final UCMJ review of "courts 
martial" subject to review by Article III courts under the 
APA.  To adopt that position would not only be contrary to 
the long-established understanding that "[m]ilitary law, like 
state law, is a jurisprudence which exists separate and apart 
from the law which governs in our federal judicial establish-
ment," Burns, 346 U.S. at 140, "[i]t is well settled that 'by 
habeas corpus the civil courts exercise no supervisory or 
correcting power over the proceedings of a court martial' " 
and that "[t]he correction of any errors it may have commit-
ted is for the military authorities which are alone authorized 
to review its decision."  Hiatt v. Brown, 339 U.S. 103, 111 
(1950) (citations omitted).  In Shaw, this court rejected the 
view that the Court of Military Appeals (now the Court of 
Appeals for the Armed Forces), was anything other than "a 
court in every significant respect, rather than an administra-
tive agency."  209 F.2d at 813.  Although the Judge Advocate 
General has independent fact-finding authority under UCMJ 

Article 69, unlike a Court of Criminal Appeals under UCMJ 
Article 66 or an Article III appellate court, McKinney points 
to nothing that would indicate that Congress viewed the 
UCMJ Article 69 procedures for review of courts martial 
involving sentences of less than one year to be so inferior as 
to warrant review by Article III courts under the APA.  
Although review by the Judge Advocate General is in the 
nature of a collateral proceeding akin to coram nobis, Curci 
v. United States, 577 F.2d 815, 818 (2d Cir. 1978) (citing inter 
alia S. Rep. No. 1601, 90th Cong., 2d Sess. (1968), reprinted in 
1968 U.S.C.C.A.N 4501, 4515), for the military justice system 
where "Congress has taken great care both to define the 
rights of those subject to military law[ ] [and to] provide a 
complete system of review within the military system to 
secure those rights," Burns, 346 U.S. at 140, the Judge 
Advocate General's decision is properly viewed as what Con-
gress concluded should be the final decision under military 
law in McKinney's court martial.  So understood, Congress' 
preclusion of APA review of "courts martial" reaches the 
Judge Advocate General's decision in McKinney's case.

     Although McKinney contends only that the Judge Advocate 
General's summary statement of his decision is inadequate to 
reveal the basis of his reasoning, and arguably is not seeking 
review of the underlying court martial finding that he ob-
structed justice in violation of UCMJ Article 134, by assum-
ing jurisdiction in his case the court would be unable to deny 
review in later cases where it would be required to review 
courts martial findings.  As framed, moreover, McKinney's 
allegations of prosecutorial misconduct would effectively re-
quire this court to determine whether the alleged misconduct 
so affected his court martial that he was denied a fair trial.  
Cf. United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 678-79 (1985);  
Greer v. Miller, 483 U.S. 756, 765 (1987).  Yet this is the type 
of question that Congress has determined is to be conducted 
by the Judge Advocate General when a court martial sen-
tence imposes less than one year's confinement.  See Schles-
inger, 420 U.S. at 746-47.  Moreover, as the Second Circuit 
has suggested, the Judge Advocate General's decision to use a 
short form of response in claims seeking discretionary review 
is not unexpected where there are a large number of claims.  

See Curci, 577 F.2d at 818.  McKinney's attempt to invoke 
the APA amounts, then, to an attempt to end run a military 
justice system wherein Congress has afforded him the direct 
review procedures it deemed appropriate.

     Accordingly, we hold that this court has no jurisdiction 
under the APA to review the decision of the Judge Advocate 
General denying McKinney's request to set aside the court 
martial finding and sentence, and we affirm the dismissal of 
the complaint.

                                                                               