                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 12, 2002    Decided October 18, 2002

                           No. 01-1234

            California Department of Water Resources, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

   California Independent System Operator Corporation, et al., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Edna Walz, Deputy Attorney General, Attorney General's 
Office of State of California, argued the cause for petitioner.  
With her on the briefs were Bill Lockyer, Attorney General, 
Richard M. Frank, Chief Assistant Attorney General, and 
Elisa J. Grammar.  Mary E. Hackenbracht, Senior Assistant 

Attorney General, Attorney General's Office of State of Cali-
fornia, and Peter C. Kissel entered appearances.

     Michael Postar argued the cause for intervenors M-S-R 
Public Power Agency and the Cities of Redding, Santa Clara, 
and Palo Alto, California.  On the briefs were Wallace L. 
Duncan, James D. Pembroke, Richmond F. Allan, and Sean 
M. Neal.

     Beth G. Pacella, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 
the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Jennifer L. Key, Kenneth G. Jaffe, and Michael E. Ward 
were on the joint brief for intervenors California Independent 
System Operator Corporation and Southern California Edison 
Company.  Richard L. Roberts and Edward Berlin entered 
appearances.

     Before:  Sentelle and Randolph, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  The first and, as it turns out, the 
last question we must decide in this petition for judicial 
review of an order of the Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission is whether we have jurisdiction.

     California Independent System Operator Corporation (the 
California ISO) operates a grid comprising the transmission 
systems of several public utilities that have turned over 
operational control of their facilities to it.  See Pub. Utils. 
Comm'n v. FERC, 254 F.3d 250, 252-53 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  
Entities with firm contractual rights to transmissions gener-
ated by these public facilities (contractual rightsholders) may 
also join the California ISO by assigning their contractual 
rights to the ISO's control.  ISO Revised Tariff s 2.4.4.1.2.  
Public utilities and contractual rightsholders joining the Cali-
fornia ISO are called transmission owners.  Under the ISO's 
regulations, transmission owners are required to develop 

pricing mechanisms.1  ISO Revised Tariff s 7.1.  Through 
these pricing mechanisms, the California ISO compensates 
transmission owners for the transmissions they convert to the 
ISO's control and sets the prices customers pay for transmis-
sions.  Id.

     On May 3, 1999, the Commission issued an order condition-
ally approving Amendment 9, a proposal by the California 
ISO for the provision of firm transmission rights (May Or-
der).  California Indep. Sys. Operator Corp., 87 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,143 (1999).  Under Amendment 9, the ISO auctions 
transmission paths that are subject to congestion.  87 
F.E.R.C. at 61,570.  Auction revenues are distributed to the 
transmission owner that owns, or has contractual rights to, 
the auctioned transmission paths.  Id.  Transmission owners 
receiving auction revenues are required to deduct these reve-
nues from the costs they seek to recoup from the California 
ISO.  Id.  The Commission specifically held that the May 
Order did not address "the exercise of conversion rights 
(which permits Existing Customers to convert to ISO Tariff 
service[)]."  Id. at 61,581.

     The petitioner in this case, the California Department of 
Water Resources (the Water Department), is a contractual 
rightsholder that has firm transmission contracts with Pacific 
Gas & Electric and Southern California Edison.  The Water 
Department anticipates joining the California ISO as a trans-
mission owner.  On June 2, 1999, the Water Department 
sought rehearing of the May Order, arguing that contractual 
rightsholders should not be required to develop and use ISO 
pricing mechanisms because they do not apply to contractual 
rightsholders.  The Water Department's logic was as follows:  

__________
     1  The pricing mechanisms are a Transmission Revenue Re-
quirement, which is the total annual authorized revenues turned 
over to the California ISO;  a Transmission Revenue Balancing 
Account, which ensures that all credits a transmission owner re-
ceives are subtracted from its Transmission Revenue Requirement;  
and an Access Charge, which is the price a transmission owner 
charges customers.  ISO Tariff s 7.1;  see generally California ISO 
Second Revised Sheet No. 354.

(1) the ISO pricing mechanisms are calculated by determining 
the costs of providing transmissions, ISO Tariff s 7.1;  (2) 
because contractual rightsholders receive transmissions from 
other transmission providers, contractual rightsholders do not 
have costs associated with transmissions;  therefore (3) the 
Water Department, and other contractual rightsholders, 
should not be required to develop and use ISO pricing 
mechanisms.  California Indep. Sys. Operator Corp., 88 
F.E.R.C. p 61,156, at 61,527-28 (1999).  On August 2, 1999, 
the Commission granted the Water Department's rehearing 
petition (August Order).  Id. at 61,528.

     The California ISO and Southern California Edison Compa-
ny filed an application for rehearing of the August Order, 
contending that because the California ISO compensates 
transmission owners for their costs and prices transmission 
charges based upon the ISO pricing mechanisms, contractual 
rightsholders that join the California ISO must develop ISO 
pricing mechanisms to avoid "severely skew[ing] the cost 
allocation system under the California ISO tariff."  Califor-
nia Indep. Sys. Operator Corp., 94 F.E.R.C. p 61,343, at 
62,269 (2001).  On March 28, 2001, the Commission granted 
the California ISO's and Southern California Edison's petition 
for rehearing (March Order).  Id.

     In a related proceeding, on November 10, 1999, in response 
to questions regarding the jurisdictional status of transactions 
under the California ISO's proposal, the Commission issued 
an opinion holding that pursuant to section 205 of the Federal 
Power Act, 16 U.S.C. s 824d, the Commission has jurisdiction 
over the sale of transmission rights.  California Indep. Sys. 
Operator Corp., 89 F.E.R.C. p 61,153, at 61,435 (1999).  The 
Cities of Redding, Santa Clara, and Palo Alto, California, and 
the M-S-R Public Power Agency (Redding), sought rehear-
ing of this decision, arguing that the Commission had imper-
missibly attempted to assert jurisdiction over municipalities 
in violation of section 201(f) of the Federal Power Act.2  The 

__________
     2  Section 201(f) provides, in relevant part:  "No provision in this 
subchapter shall apply to ... any political subdivision of a State ... 

Commission denied Redding's petition for rehearing on 
March 28, 2001.  94 F.E.R.C. at 62,270-71.

     Without seeking rehearing of the March Order, the Water 
Department filed this petition for judicial review of the 
March, August and May Orders, arguing that the Commis-
sion's decision requiring it to develop and use ISO pricing 
mechanisms was not based upon substantial evidence.  The 
Water Department also contends that the Commission cannot 
exercise jurisdiction over it because it is a transmission 
customer, not a utility owner.  See 16 U.S.C. s 824(b).  Red-
ding intervened in support of the Water Department, raising 
the same argument Redding presented in its petition for 
rehearing before the Commission.

     Section 313(a) of the Federal Power Act provides that a 
"state commission aggrieved by an order issued by the Com-
mission ... may apply for a rehearing."  16 U.S.C. s 825l(a).  
It further provides that "no proceeding to review any order of 
the Commission shall be brought by any person unless such 
person shall have made application to the Commission for 
rehearing thereon."  Id.  The rehearing requirement is an 
"express statutory limitation[ ] on the jurisdiction of the 
court." Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 871 F.2d 1099, 
1107 (D.C. Cir. 1989);  see also Granholm ex rel. Michigan 
Dep't of Natural Resources v. FERC, 180 F.3d 278, 280 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999).  Neither the court nor the Commission has the 
discretion to ignore it.  See Granholm, 180 F.3d at 280-81;  
see also Blue Stone Energy Design, Inc. v. FERC, 74 F.3d 
1288, 1293 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  Town of Norwood, Mass. v. 
FERC, 906 F.2d 773, 774 (D.C. Cir. 1990).

     As we have interpreted s 313(a), if an order on rehearing 
modifies the results of the earlier order in a significant way 
adverse to a party, that party must seek a rehearing of the 
order before filing a petition for judicial review.  See Nor-
wood, 906 F.2d at 775.  This gives the Commission "an 
opportunity to bring its knowledge and expertise to bear" on 
the petitioner's objections before they are presented to the 

__________
unless such provision makes specific reference thereto."  16 U.S.C. 
s 824(f).

court;  if the objections are well-founded, Commission action 
on the rehearing request may obviate judicial proceedings.  
Northwest Pipeline v. FERC, 863 F.2d 73, 77-78 (D.C. Cir. 
1988);  Granholm, 180 F.3d at 280.

     The Water Department concedes that the March Order, in 
which the Commission reversed its position regarding wheth-
er the Water Department must use ISO pricing mechanisms, 
significantly modified the August Order.  It maintains, 
though, that the March Order did not significantly modify the 
May Order because it merely reinstated the aggrievement the 
Water Department suffered from the May Order.3  The idea 
must be that in determining whether there was enough of a 
change to require a rehearing petition, one must compare the 
original order with the last order, ignoring whatever orders 
issued in between.  We doubt that our precedents support 
this approach.  But even if they did, the March Order cannot 
be viewed as making only a minor alteration to the May 
Order.  In its May Order, the Commission conditionally 
approved the California ISO's proposal regarding firm trans-
mission rights, and nothing more.  The Water Department's 
alleged injury stems not from the May Order, but from the 
Commission's decision in its March Order that contractual 
rightsholders must develop ISO pricing mechanisms. The 
March Order thus significantly altered legal relationships and 
gave rise to the grievance the Water Department now presses 
in court.  See Norwood, 906 F.2d at 775.  Even if we had 
jurisdiction and agreed with the Water Department's argu-
ments that it should not be required to develop California 
ISO pricing mechanisms, this would have no bearing on the 
May Order approving Amendment 9.

     Given these circumstances, there is no possibility of "an 
endless cycle of applications for rehearing and denial."  

__________
     3  Our use of the term "aggrievement" is for convenience and is 
not meant to imply that the Water Department has in fact been 
aggrieved.  The Water Department is not a member of the Califor-
nia ISO, which the Commission claims deprives it of standing to 
challenge the March Order.  We do not resolve this particular 
standing question. See Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon Oil Co., 526 U.S. 
574, 585 (1999).

Southern Natural Gas Co. v. FERC, 877 F.2d 1066, 1073 
(D.C. Cir. 1989).  In Southern Gas, the court held that a 
petitioner did not need to seek a rehearing of a Commission 
order denying rehearing when the outcome had not been 
changed but the Commission had "supplie[d] a new improved 
rationale."  Id. (emphasis in original).  Here, the March 
Order directed an outcome significantly different from the 
May and August Orders, not the same outcome with a new 
rationale.  The Southern Gas court explicitly stated that in 
such a situation the rehearing requirement under s 313(a) 
begins anew.4  Id.

     The Water Department also sought judicial review of the 
May and August Orders, but we do not have jurisdiction over 
those orders either because the Water Department plainly 
does not have standing to contest them.  A party claiming to 
be aggrieved within the meaning of s 313(a) must satisfy the 
constitutional requirements for standing.  See Public Utility 
Dist. No. 1 of Snohomish County, Washington v. FERC, 272 
F.3d 607, 613 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  One such requirement is that 
a party suffer an "injury-in-fact."  Id.  As is clear from the 
preceding discussion, neither the May Order nor the August 
Order aggrieved the Water Department.  The May Order 
merely approved Amendment 9 without binding the Water 
Department to any of the pricing schemes that it currently 
challenges, and in the August Order the Commission decided 
in its favor.  The Water Department suffered "injury-in-fact" 
from neither of these orders.

     As to the intervenors, "absent extraordinary circumstances, 
intervenors 'may join issue only on a matter that has been 
brought before the court by' " a petitioner.  Alabama Mun. 
Distribs. Group v. FERC, 300 F.3d 877, 879 (D.C. Cir. 2002) 
(quoting Illinois Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 911 F.2d 776, 786 (D.C. 
Cir. 1990)).  An exception to this rule is that an intervenor 
may raise an issue if the intervenor has preserved the issue in 
its own petition for rehearing before the Commission, and the 
intervenor satisfies the statutory requirements for a petition-

__________
     4  Southern Gas construed s 19(b) of the Natural Gas Act.  
That provision is analogous to s 313(a).  See Norwood, 906 F.2d at 
774.

er to seek judicial review of the Commission's order.  See 
Alabama Mun., 300 F.3d at 880;  see also Rio Grande 
Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 178 F.3d 533, 539 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
(intervenors must seek direct review to raise additional is-
sues).  Neither situation is present here.  The Water Depart-
ment, toward the end of its brief, mentions in a footnote that 
16 U.S.C. s 824(f) precludes the Commission from exercising 
jurisdiction over political subdivisions of a state;  the footnote 
adds that the provision has no "direct applicability" to it, but 
shows congressional intent.  The Water Department's foot-
note does not properly present, and thus does not preserve, 
the issue the intervenors wish to argue.  See Carducci v. 
Regan, 714 F.2d 171, 177 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  Although Redding 
raised the arguments it makes in court in its petition for 
rehearing before the Commission, Redding did not satisfy the 
statutory requirements for judicial review.  Petitioners must 
seek review "within sixty days after the order of the Commis-
sion upon the application for rehearing."  16 U.S.C. s 825l(b).  
Redding intervened on June 25, 2001--eighty-nine days after 
the Commission entered its March 28, 2001 order.

     The petition for judicial review is therefore dismissed for 
lack of jurisdiction.  We also have no jurisdiction to consider 
the intervenors' contentions regarding the merits.

                                                                 Dismissed.

                                    