                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 19, 2001    Decided April 17, 2001 

                           No. 00-7265

                      Nevin M. Katz, M.D., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                 Georgetown University, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv02412)

     Steven K. Hoffman argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the brief was Martha Walfoort.

     Thomas S. Williamson, Jr. argued the cause for appellee.  
With him on the brief was Anthony T. Pierce.  Charles F. 
Ruff entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Henderson, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  In this case, Dr. Nevin M. Katz, 
appellant, filed a diversity action claiming that he was im-
properly terminated from his tenured position as a Professor 
and Surgeon at Georgetown University Medical Center 
("GUMC"), because he was denied one-year's advance notice 
prior to his dismissal.  In pursuit of his claims in District 
Court, Dr. Katz sought a preliminary injunction against 
Georgetown University (the "University"), pursuant to which 
he would be reinstated in his positions at GUMC and retained 
with full salary and benefits until June 30, 2001.  The motion 
for preliminary injunction was denied by the District Court 
and Dr. Katz now appeals pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 1292(a)(1).

     In his Complaint for Specific Performance, Preliminary and 
Permanent Injunctive Relief and Damages at 18-19, Katz v. 
Georgetown University, (No. 00-02412), reprinted in Joint 
Appendix ("J.A.") 21-22, Dr. Katz asserts that, under the 
terms of the University Faculty Handbook ("Faculty Hand-
book"), he could not be terminated by the University without 
at least one-year's notice;  he also asserts that he had a right 
to continued employment and tenure during the notice period.  
The University answers that Dr. Katz was properly terminat-
ed due to financial exigencies, and that he was not entitled to 
one-year's notice in advance of dismissal.  We find that Dr. 
Katz has no reasonable likelihood of success on the merits of 
his claim.  Accordingly, the District Court was fully justified 
in denying the motion for preliminary injunction.

                          I. Background

     Dr. Katz was a full-time faculty member in the Department 
of Surgery at GUMC for approximately 20 years.  He earned 
tenure in 1985 and he held the position of Professor from 
1992 until his termination in 2000.

     Prior to July 1, 2000, GUMC consisted of the School of 
Medicine, the School of Nursing, and a clinical operation that 
included the hospital, the Faculty Practice Group, and the 

Community Practice Network.  GUMC faculty members nor-
mally worked in either "research" or "clinical" practice.  Gen-
erally, research faculty were supported by research grants 
and clinicians were supported by revenues generated from 
clinical patients.  As a member of the clinical faculty, Dr. 
Katz was primarily engaged in cardiac surgery;  however, his 
duties also entailed some teaching responsibilities and medi-
cal research.  Many of the principal terms of employment for 
GUMC faculty members, including Dr. Katz, were contained 
in the Faculty Handbook.  Katz v. Georgetown Univ., No. 
00-02412, Mem. Op. at 2 (D.D.C. Nov. 6, 2000), reprinted in 
J.A. 642.

     Beginning in 1996, the University was threatened by a 
financial crisis attributable in large measure to GUMC.  The 
situation was serious enough to cause University officials to 
explore ways in which to rid itself of significant portions of 
GUMC operations.  In February 2000, the University Board 
of Directors finally entered into an agreement with MedStar 
Health, Inc. ("MedStar"), whereby the University transferred 
the operation of the hospital and clinical practice to MedStar, 
while retaining control of the medical school.  Under this 
arrangement, the University no longer needed to employ 
clinical faculty members who were primarily engaged in 
clinical practice.  As a result, 330 members of the clinical 
faculty at GUMC, including Dr. Katz, were terminated.  Id. 
at 2-3, reprinted in J.A. 642-43.

     On March 29, 2000, Dr. Katz was notified that, due to the 
University's "grave economic stringenc[ies]," his tenure with 
GUMC would be terminated on June 30, 2000.  Letter from 
John J. DeGioia to Dr. Nevin M. Katz 1-3 (Mar. 29, 2000), 
reprinted in J.A. 78-80.  The letter received by Dr. Katz 
indicated that former GUMC clinicians would be eligible for 
employment with MedStar;  Dr. Katz was also advised that he 
could pursue a non-tenured, clinical-faculty appointment with 
the University.  In addition, in recognition of his tenure, Dr. 
Katz was offered a lump-sum payment of $750,000 as a 
severance buy-out.  Id. at 2-3, reprinted in J.A. 79-80.

     In June 2000, MedStar offered Dr. Katz a one year, non-
tenured faculty appointment at a salary of $345,000.  Later 
that month, the University offered to pay Dr. Katz the 
difference between his former salary at the University, 
$500,000, and the MedStar-offered salary, on a monthly-
installment basis.  Dr. Katz accepted the monthly disburse-
ments, but rejected MedStar's employment offer, as well as 
the $750,000 lump-sum buy-out.  Katz, No. 00-02412, Mem. 
Op. at 3, reprinted in J.A. 643.

     On June 15, 2000, Dr. Katz filed a grievance with the 
University, contesting his termination.  Dr. Katz's principal 
claim was that the University had improperly terminated him 
without one-year's notice as allegedly required by the Faculty 
Handbook.  A three-member Grievance Panel upheld Dr. 
Katz's grievance claim, and this decision was subsequently 
affirmed by the full University Grievance Code Committee.  
Id. at 3-4, reprinted in J.A. 643-44.  University officials then 
appealed the Committee's decision to the University Presi-
dent, Father Leo O'Donovan, who issued a final judgment 
dismissing Dr. Katz's grievance.  President O'Donovan held 
that the University's grievance process was "not designed and 
cannot be used as a forum to second-guess or question the 
correctness of the Board's decision."  Letter from Leo J. 
O'Donovan, S.J. to Steven K. Hoffman, Esq. and Charles F.C. 
Ruff, Esq. 5 (Aug. 7, 2000), reprinted in J.A. 303.  He further 
noted that the Board had explained its decision to transfer 
the clinical enterprise to MedStar, because the University 
" 'faced a state of grave economic stringency' that required 'a 
change in the University's institutional aims.' "  Id. at 3, 
reprinted in J.A. 301.  In short, President O'Donovan's ruling 
implicitly rejected the suggestion that Dr. Katz's status as a 
tenured faculty member protected him from dismissal due to 
financial exigencies;  the ruling also implicitly rejected the 
claim that the University was required to give Dr. Katz one-
year's notice in advance of termination.

     On October 6, 2000, Dr. Katz filed his complaint in the 
United States District Court for the District of Columbia.  
Subsequently, on October 11, 2000, Dr. Katz filed a motion 
seeking a preliminary injunction enjoining the University to 

reinstate him to his position as a tenured Professor of Sur-
gery for the duration of an asserted contractually mandated 
notice period.  Dr. Katz also sought back pay for the period 
during which the University had refused to employ him 
consistent with the alleged notice provision.  Motion for 
Preliminary Injunction at 1, Katz v. Georgetown Univ., (No. 
00-02412), reprinted in J.A. 29.  This appeal followed the 
District Court's denial of the motion for injunctive relief.

                           II. Analysis

     To prevail in his request for a preliminary injunction, Dr. 
Katz must "demonstrate 1) a substantial likelihood of success 
on the merits, 2) that [he] would suffer irreparable injury if 
the injunction is not granted, 3) that an injunction would not 
substantially injure other interested parties, and 4) that the 
public interest would be furthered by the injunction."  City-
Fed Fin. Corp. v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 58 F.3d 738, 
746 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  "We review a district court decision 
regarding a preliminary injunction for abuse of discretion, 
and any underlying legal conclusions de novo."  Id.

     In the instant case, we have no doubt that the District 
Court got it right in denying the motion for a preliminary 
injunction, because on this record there is no merit whatsoev-
er to Dr. Katz's claim that he was entitled to one-year's notice 
before being terminated for just cause.  See Ross-Simons of 
Warwick, Inc. v. Baccarat, Inc., 102 F.3d 12, 16 (1st Cir. 
1996) (in assessing a request for a preliminary injunction, 
"[l]ikelihood of success is the main bearing wall of the four-
factor framework").  And "[g]iven the inadequacy of [Dr. 
Katz]'s prospects for success on the merits, there may be no 
showing of irreparable injury that would entitle him to injunc-
tive relief."  Taylor v. Resolution Trust Corp., 56 F.3d 1497, 
1507 (D.C. Cir.), amended on other grounds on reh'g, 66 F.3d 
1226 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  In other words, although we apply a 
four-factor test in weighing a request for a preliminary 
injunction, such relief never will be granted unless a claimant 
can demonstrate "a fair ground for litigation."  Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Comm'n v. Holiday Tours, Inc., 559 

F.2d 841, 844 (D.C. Cir. 1977).  Dr. Katz's request for relief 
based on a claim that he was entitled to one-year's notice 
before being terminated for just cause is hopelessly deficient 
in this regard.

     Dr. Katz contends that the University's Faculty Handbook 
constituted a binding contract of employment to which we 
must look to determine his rights as a tenured member of the 
faculty.  This point is not contested by the University.  See 
McConnell v. Howard Univ., 818 F.2d 58, 62-63 (D.C. Cir. 
1987) ("Faculty Handbook defines the rights and obligations 
of the employee and the employer, and is a contract enforce-
able by the courts.").  Dr. Katz also asserts that because he 
was an "Ordinary Faculty" member as defined in the Faculty 
Handbook, the University could not terminate him without at 
least one-year's notice.  The University disputes this second 
point, and with good basis.

     The Faculty Handbook states that

     [t]hose officers of instruction who by reason of their 
     qualifications have been appointed to one of the four full-
     time tenure-eligible academic ranks (which in ascending 
     order are Instructor, Assistant Professor, Associate Pro-
     fessor, and Professor) constitute the Ordinary Faculty of 
     the University.
     
Georgetown University, Faculty Handbook 24 (1999), reprint-
ed in J.A. 115.  Dr. Katz maintains that, pursuant to this 
provision, it is clear that tenured professors are "Ordinary 
Faculty" members and, thus, are covered by the following 
notice provision in the Faculty Handbook:

     For one regularly appointed to the Ordinary Faculty the 
     normal term of employment is one year, renewable annu-
     ally.  The appointment may be extended to seven years.
     
      ...

     Notice of nonreappointment will be given in writing to 
     members of the Ordinary Faculty ... 
     
     3. Not later than July 31st in the year prior to termi-
     nation after two or more years of service.
     
Id. at 27, reprinted in J.A. 118.

     In the light of the foregoing provisions, Dr. Katz presses an 
extended, and largely pointless, argument over the scope of 
"Ordinary Faculty" under the Faculty Handbook.  The argu-
ment is pointless because it is absolutely clear that the notice 
of nonreappointment provision in the Faculty Handbook has 
nothing whatsoever to do with the termination of tenured 
faculty members for just cause.  Indeed, it is clear that 
tenured faculty members have the benefit of "continuing 
employment," with or without notice, unless they are dis-
missed for "just cause."

     The Faculty Handbook states explicitly that

     Tenure may be defined as a mutually acknowledged 
     expectation of continuing employment that is terminable 
     by the University only for just cause (as for professional 
     incompetence or moral turpitude of the faculty member, 
     for grave economic stringency on the part of the Univer-
     sity, or for reasons of major changes in institutional 
     aims).
     
Id. at 27-28, reprinted in J.A. 118-19.  In other words, under 
this provision, faculty members with tenure retain their em-
ployment indefinitely, subject only to termination for "just 
cause."  The previously cited notice of nonreappointment 
provisions-which refer to a "normal term of employment [of] 
one year, renewable annually" and "appointment[s] [that] 
may be extended to seven years"-obviously do not pertain to 
tenured faculty members.  And, most importantly, Dr. Katz 
can point to no provision in the Faculty Handbook that 
requires the University to give one-year's notice to a tenured 
faculty person who is subject to termination for just cause.

     Dr. Katz argues that the Faculty Handbook does not mean 
what it says, because some tenured faculty members have in 
fact received annual notices of appointment in the past.  
Even if this were true, it proves nothing of importance in this 
case.  Under the terms of the Faculty Handbook, tenure 

means "continuing employment" absent termination for "just 
cause."  This is a typical definition of tenure in the context of 
faculty employment in colleges and universities in the United 
States.  See McConnell, 818 F.2d at 68 n.11 ("[T]enure nor-
mally carries with it an expectation that, absent demonstrable 
cause to terminate a faculty member's appointment, a tenured 
professor will enjoy the freedom to carry out his or her duties 
free from the fear of dismissal.");  see generally Richard P. 
Chait & Andrew T. Ford, Beyond Traditional tenure:  A Guide 
to Sound Policies and Practices (1982);  Comm'n on Academic 
Tenure in Higher Education, Faculty Tenure (1973);  Aca-
demic Freedom and Tenure:  A Handbook of the American 
Association of University Professors (Louis Joughin ed., 2d 
ed. 1969).  Thus, traditional forms of tenure do not typically 
depend upon notice of reappointment.  Unsurprisingly, Dr. 
Katz points to nothing in the Faculty Handbook or in Univer-
sity practice to suggest otherwise.  Indeed, we are quite sure 
that tenured members of the Georgetown University faculty 
would be stunned were this court to hold that a faculty 
member's tenure would be nullified if the University failed to 
furnish an annual notice of reappointment.

     Dr. Katz also asserts that, whether or not a tenured faculty 
member must receive an annual notice of reappointment, the 
University always must provide one-year's notice of termi-
nation for just cause.  This is a specious argument.  It would 
make little sense for the University to agree to give one-
year's notice to a faculty person designated for dismissal for 
"just cause" (which includes dismissals for "professional in-
competence," "moral turpitude," and "grave economic strin-
gency").  Counsel for appellant conceded as much at oral 
argument when he acknowledged that a non-tenured member 
of the faculty may be dismissed for just cause without one-
year's notice, i.e., notwithstanding the previously cited "notice 
of nonreappointment" provision.  If non-tenured faculty per-
sons, who are covered by the "notice of nonreappointment" 
provision admittedly can be dismissed for just cause without 
one-year's notice, then there is no question that this very 
same notice provision cannot limit the right of the University 
to terminate tenured faculty members for just cause.  In-

deed, as noted above, the Faculty Handbook explicitly states 
that tenured faculty members may be terminated for just 
cause, including for "grave economic stringency."  There is 
no one-year notice requirement that limits this provision;  and 
there is no serious dispute in this case that Dr. Katz was 
terminated for any reason other than the alleged dire finan-
cial exigencies faced by the University.

     Finally, Dr. Katz suggests that we should defer to the 
views of the Grievance Panel and Grievance Code Committee 
in interpreting the Faculty Handbook.  It is undoubtedly 
correct that ambiguous contract terms "must be construed in 
keeping with general usage and custom at the University and 
within the academic community."  McConnell, 818 F.2d at 64;  
accord Greene v. Howard Univ., 412 F.2d 1128, 1135 (D.C. 
Cir. 1969).  Accordingly, we may look to the decisions of the 
Grievance Panel and Grievance Code Committee to gain an 
understanding of the issues before us, just as we must give 
due weight to the decision of the President of the Universi-
ty--the ultimate and final authority in the Grievance Proce-
dure.  In the end analysis, however, it is the Faculty Hand-
book that controls.  See McConnell, 818 F.3d at 62-63.  And 
in this case, the Faculty Handbook is unambiguously clear 
that a tenured faculty person may be terminated for "just 
cause" without one-year's notice.

     On this record, we conclude that there is no merit whatso-
ever to Dr. Katz's claim that he was entitled to one-year's 
notice before being terminated for just cause.  We therefore 
affirm the District Court's denial of Dr. Katz's request for 
preliminary injunction.

                                                            So ordered.

               