                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 14, 2002    Decided April 26, 2002 

                           No. 01-3039

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Donald Ray Draffin, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 97cr00391-01)

     Sean Grimsley, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for the appellant.  A. J. Kramer, Federal Public 
Defender, was on brief.  Gregory L. Poe, Assistant Federal 
Public Defender, entered an appearance.

     Matthew P. Cohen, Assistant United States Attorney, ar-
gued the cause for the appellee.  Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., 

United States Attorney, and John R. Fisher, Assistant Unit-
ed States Attorney, were on brief.

     Before:  Henderson and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Donald Ray 
Draffin appeals his sentence on the ground that the district 
court erred in not departing from the sentencing range 
mandated by the career offender provisions of the United 
States Sentencing Guidelines (Guidelines).  Under circuit pre-
cedent, because Draffin did not request the departure below, 
the failure to depart is either not reviewable or, at most, 
reviewable for plain error only.  We conclude that the district 
court's failure to grant an unrequested departure should be 
reviewed for plain error and that Draffin has demonstrated 
none.  Accordingly, his sentence is affirmed.

                                I.

     On September 25, 1997 Draffin was indicted on one count 
of bank robbery in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 2113(a), to which 
he pleaded guilty on November 20, 1997.  On April 5, 2001 
the district court sentenced Draffin as a career offender 
under U.S.S.G. s 4B1.11 to 151 months' imprisonment,2 con-
secutive to an unrelated felony sentence and to be followed by 
three years' supervised release, and imposed a $100 special 
assessment.  Draffin appeals his sentence.

                               II.

     In sentencing Draffin, the district court rejected his con-
tentions that the government had failed to prove that the 

__________
     1 Section 4B1.1 enhances the sentence of a career offender, that 
is, a defendant whose offense of conviction is at least his third adult 
felony conviction of a crime of violence and/or a controlled sub-
stance offense.

     2 This sentence is at the bottom of the sentencing range of 151-
188 months the court below found applicable to Draffin as a career 
offender with an offense level of 29 and a criminal history of VI.

robbery fit the definition of "crime of violence" set out in 
U.S.S.G. s 4B1.2, that the court should depart from the 
career offender provisions of the Guidelines based on dimin-
ished capacity pursuant to U.S.S.G. s 5K2.13 and that the 
sentence should be concurrent with the other felony sentence.  
On appeal Draffin does not urge any of the arguments raised 
below but asserts instead that the district court should have 
departed under U.S.S.G. s 4A1.3 either because the offense 
of conviction should not be considered a crime of violence3 or 
because the career criminal status overstates Draffin's crimi-
nal history and likelihood of recidivism.  Before addressing 
the merits of his claim we must determine the appropriate 

__________
     3 This court acknowledged such a departure ground, at least 
where the violent nature of previous crimes is challenged, in United 
States v. Baskin, 886 F.2d 383 (D.C. Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 494 
U.S. 1089 (1990):

     A sentencing judge retains discretion to examine the facts of a 
     predicate crime to determine whether it was a crime of violence 
     notwithstanding the Commentary to the guidelines' predeter-
     mined list of crimes which it considers to be crimes of violence.  
     Obviously, the guidelines' definitions, commentary and the like 
     provide a solid starting point for determining whether a prior 
     conviction was in fact a crime of violence.  However, it may be 
     appropriate, as provided by the guidelines, for a district judge 
     to depart from the guidelines' statutory definition of a particu-
     lar crime depending on the facts of the case.  We remand for 
     reconsideration of the defendant's previous robbery conviction 
     to determine whether or not it was in fact a crime of violence 
     under 18 U.S.C. s 16(a).
     
886 F.2d at 389-90;  see also United States v. Chatman, 986 F.2d 
1446, 1453 n.7 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  We subsequently clarified that this 
authority to depart arises under U.S.S.G. s 4A1.3, which authorizes 
departure "if reliable information indicates that the criminal history 
category does not adequately reflect the seriousness of the defen-
dant's past criminal conduct or the likelihood that the defendant will 
commit other crimes."  See United States v. Beckham, 968 F.2d 47, 
54 (D.C. Cir. 1992);  United States v. Clark. 8 F.3d 839, 843 (D.C. 
Cir. 1993).  We need not and do not decide here whether the 
departure ground applies to the offense of conviction as well as to 
earlier crimes.

scope of our review.  Because the level of review depends on 
whether Draffin has preserved his departure argument for 
appeal, we must first determine whether, as Draffin main-
tains, he adequately presented the argument to the district 
court.  We conclude he did not.

     The record below reveals that Draffin at no time asked the 
district court to depart based on the specific grounds he now 
cites.  It is true he argued the offense of conviction is not one 
of violence but he did so within the confines of the Guidelines, 
asserting the offense does not fit within the Guidelines' 
definition of "crime of violence."  He did not claim that 
characterizing the robbery as a crime of violence "so distorted 
the sentence as to take it out of the Guidelines' heartland" 
and therefore to justify departing from the Guidelines sen-
tencing range.  See United States v. Vizcaino, 202 F.3d 345, 
348 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  We therefore review Draffin's sentence 
pursuant to our precedent governing unrequested departures.

     As a general rule, the sentencing court's failure to depart 
"is reviewable ... if it rests on a misconstruction of its 
authority to depart" but the "court's discretionary decision 
that the particular circumstances of a given case do not 
warrant a departure ... is not reviewable."  United States v. 
Pinnick, 47 F.3d 434, 439 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (quotation omitted).  
Accordingly, some of our decisions have reasoned that, when 
a defendant does not raise a departure argument before the 
sentencing court, the court's consequently unexplained failure 
to depart is as unreviewable as an expressed discretionary 
decision not to depart.  See United States v. Bradshaw, 935 
F.2d 295, 303 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (defendant who did not "press 
that specific argument before the district court" failed to 
preserve assertion "it was error for the district court to fail to 
determine whether his prior robberies were actually crimes of 
violence justifying a career offender designation");  United 
States v. Foster, 988 F.2d 206, 209 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (failure to 
depart either "not reviewable" or "waived" where "record 
does not support the assertion that appellant ever made a 
request for a section 4A1.3 departure" and "[a]ppellant does 
not even allege that the trial judge misconstrued his legal 
authority to depart");  United States v. Pinnick, 47 F.3d at 

439-40 (failure to depart "not reviewable" because defendant 
did not object after court "imposed sentence without com-
menting on the departure request");  In re Sealed Case, 199 
F.3d 488 490-92 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (Sealed Case I) (no review 
where defense "never specifically argued for ... departure 
from the appropriate Guideline range before or during the 
sentencing hearing") (citing Pinnick).  In apparent contrast, 
other decisions have concluded the failure to grant an unre-
quested departure should be reviewable for plain error.  See 
United States v. Klat, 156 F.3d 1258, 1267 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(where "appellant failed to request a downward departure 
under section 5K2.13," court "review[s] the district court's 
failure, sua sponte, to depart downward on the basis of 
appellant's diminished capacity under plain error");  In re 
Sealed Case, 204 F.3d 1170, 1171-72 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (plain 
error applies where defendant "never argued [the asserted 
departure ground] to the district court" and therefore "the 
issue of whether the district court had authority to depart [on 
that ground] was never presented in the district court").  Still 
other cases have reviewed for plain error without expressly 
deciding which standard should apply.  See United States v. 
Albritton, 75 F.3d 709, 712 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("[a]ssuming, 
without deciding" that plain error applies to "district court's 
failure to grant sua sponte a section 5K2.0 departure");  
United States v. Vizcaino, 202 F.3d 345, 348 (D.C. Cir. 2000) 
("Because Vizcaino failed to preserve the argument for ap-
peal, we review the district court's failure to depart sua 
sponte at most for plain error.");  cf. Sealed Case I, 199 F.3d 
at 491("[I]f a different rule does apply, then it would seem 
that at best, the waived objection should be reviewed for plain 
error.").  We believe the correct standard is plain error.

     The cited caselaw is not so inconsistent as it may seem.  As 
a practical matter, denying review of the failure to depart sua 
sponte and reviewing it for plain error will ordinarily yield 
the same result:  the sentence will be upheld.  Although the 
plain error standard appears more lenient than no review at 
all, it is, as the decisions cited above make manifest, almost 
impossible to satisfy in the departure setting.

     To establish plain error an appellant must show that "from 
the perspective of the trial court, the claimed error was 'so 
"plain" the trial judge and prosecutor were derelict in counte-
nancing it, even absent the defendant's timely assistance in 
detecting it.' "  United States v. Saro, 24 F.3d 283, 286 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) (quoting United States v. Frady, 456 U.S. 152, 163 
(1982)) (other citations omitted).  Ordinarily, such error will 
not be found where the lawyer fails to propose a discretionary 
departure ground because " '[u]nder these circumstances, we 
assume that the district court kn[ew] and applie[d] the law 
correctly.' "  Sealed Case I, 199 F.3d at 491 (quoting Pinnick, 
47 F.3d at 439-40) (quotation omitted);  see also Pinnick, 47 
F.3d at 439 ("[T]he appellant, not us, has the initial responsi-
bility to ensure that the district court explains its reasoning 
for the record.").  We have, however, recognized one unlikely 
circumstance--and there may conceivably be others--in 
which plain error might be shown:  namely, when, notwith-
standing the defendant's silence, the sentencing court makes 
it plain on the record sua sponte that it is choosing not to 
depart on a particular ground because it believes (mistakenly, 
as it turns out) it lacks authority to do so.  See Sealed Case I, 
199 F.3d at 490-91.  Because of the possibility of such 
reversible error, however remote, we conclude we should 
apply the plain error standard rather than withhold review 
altogether.  We find no plain error here.

     Draffin claims the record shows the court below misunder-
stood its authority to depart because of statements by the 
judge indicating she sympathized with Draffin but was re-
quired to follow sentencing rules.  See 4/5/2001 Sentencing 
Tr. 96-97.  The cited language, however, is at most ambigu-
ous, particularly in light of the court's simultaneous acknowl-
edgment that she "ha[d] some discretion," id. 97, and the 
absence of any express refusal to depart.  Cf. In re Sealed 
Case I, 199 F.3d at 490-91 (finding "at worst ambiguous" 
judge's statement "that he 'wish[ed]' he could have sentenced 
appellant below the guideline range but concluded that he did 
not 'have any alternative' ").  As Draffin himself acknowl-
edges, see Reply Br. at 11, ambiguous statements cannot 

redeem a defendant's failure to ask for departure.  See 
Sealed Case I, 199 F.3d at 491 ("To hold ... that a record at 
worst ambiguous supports reversal is hardly consistent with 
plain error review.").

     For the preceding reasons, we conclude the district court's 
failure to depart under U.S.S.G. s 4A1.3 was not plain error 
because Draffin did not ask the court to grant such a depar-
ture and he has not unequivocally demonstrated the sentenc-
ing court misconstrued its authority to depart.  Accordingly, 
the judgment of the district court is

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                                                            