                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 17, 2000      Decided June 16, 2000 

                           No. 99-1517

             District No. 1, Pacific Coast District, 
            Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Maritime Administration, et al., 
                           Respondents

                       BLNG, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                 Federal Maritime Administration

     Thomas L. Mills argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Constantine G. Papavizas, William A. 
Anderson, II and W. Patrick Morris.

     Bruce G. Forrest, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief were 
David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Douglas 
N. Letter and Robert S. Greenspan, Attorneys, John Patrick 
Wiese and John G. Salisbury, Attorneys, U.S. Department of 
Transportation.  Edward Himmelfarb, Attorney, U.S. De-
partment of Justice, entered an appearance.

     Michael Joseph argued the cause for intervenor.  With him 
on the brief were E. Alex Blanton and Joseph O. Click.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Sentelle and Garland, Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Pursuant to s 9 of the Shipping 
Act, 1916, the Maritime Administration (MarAd) conditionally 
granted applications to transfer the registry of eight vessels 
from the United States to the Republic of the Marshall 
Islands.  District No. 1, Pacific Coast District, Marine Engi-
neers' Beneficial Association, the collective bargaining repre-
sentative for the licensed officers on the vessels, along with 
certain of its members (hereinafter collectively, the Union), 
petitioned for review.  The Union claims that:  (1) the Mar-
Ad's decision was arbitrary and capricious;  (2) the MarAd 
accepted and relied upon ex parte communications in violation 
of both the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. s 551 et 
seq., and the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States;  and (3) s 9 of the Shipping Act is an unconsti-
tutional delegation of legislative authority.  Because we lack 
jurisdiction over the claims based upon the APA, we dismiss 
the petition in part.  In all other respects we deny the 
petition:  MEBA did not properly raise its Fifth Amendment 
argument and s 9 of the Shipping Act is not an unconstitu-
tional delegation of authority.

                          I. Background

     Section 9 of the Shipping Act prohibits the owner of a 
vessel from transferring its registry out of the United States 
without the approval of the Secretary of Transportation.  See 
46 U.S.C. App. s 808(c)(2).  The Secretary has delegated his 
authority under that section to the MarAd, 49 C.F.R. 

s 1.66(a), which has in turn promulgated regulations imple-
menting the approval requirement.  The regulations provide 
in pertinent part:

     (b) Vessels of 1,000 gross tons or more.
     
     (1) Applications for approval of Transfer to foreign regis-
     try and flag ... of Documented Vessels or vessels the 
     last documentation of which was under the laws of the 
     United States and which are of 1,000 gross tons or more 
     will be evaluated in light of--
     
          (i) The type, size[,] speed, general condition, and age 
     of the vessel;
     
          (ii) The acceptability of the owner, proposed transfer-
     ee and the country of registry ...;  and
     
          (iii) The need to retain the vessel under U.S. documen-
     tation, ownership or control for purposes of national 
     defense, maintenance of an adequate merchant marine, 
     foreign policy considerations or the national interest.
     
46 C.F.R. s 221.15(b).

     BLNG applied to the MarAd for permission to transfer the 
registry of eight vessels from the United States to the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands.  Although not required by 
statute or regulation to do so, the MarAd published in the 
Federal Register notice of the applications and a call for 
comments thereon.  After the announced period for the sub-
mission of comments had ended, however, the MarAd accept-
ed additional comments from, among others, BLNG and its 
attorneys.

     In its decision the MarAd canvassed the arguments put 
forth in the comments and determined that the following 
regulatory criteria were relevant to its decision:  (1) the 
general condition of the vessels;  (2) the acceptability of the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands;  (3) national defense;  (4) 
the maintenance of an "adequate merchant marine";  (5) 
"foreign policy considerations";  and (6) other aspects of the 
"national interest."

     The MarAd applied these criteria as follows:  (1) The 
vessels, which are used to ship liquified natural gas, are in 
good working condition.  (2) The agency has previously found 
the Republic of the Marshall Islands to be an acceptable 
transferee.  (3) The Department of Defense, upon the Mar-
Ad's inquiry, determined that the vessels are not necessary 
for national defense;  in any event, the transfer was condi-
tioned so that the vessels could be returned to the United 
States if needed in an emergency.  (4) Maintenance of an 
adequate merchant marine does not require retaining the 
vessels.  The Department of Energy confirmed there are no 
current projects planned that would require the vessels and, 
although some jobs might be lost to United States seamen 
because of the transfer, BLNG has agreed for at least five 
years to maintain crews composed significantly of United 
States seamen on six of the eight vessels.  (5) The Depart-
ment of State informed the MarAd that no foreign policy 
consideration required retaining the vessels in United States 
registry.  (6) The national interest did not otherwise require 
retaining the vessels, primarily because the Republic of the 
Marshall Islands adequately regulates safety aboard vessels 
and the crew will continue to be composed mainly of United 
States seamen.

                           II. Analysis

     As indicated above, the Union raises three objections to the 
MarAd's order:  (1) It is arbitrary and capricious and there-
fore invalid under the APA;  (2) the MarAd's acceptance of 
and reliance upon ex parte comments violated both the APA 
and the Fifth Amendment;  and (3) s 9 is an unconstitutional 
delegation of lawmaking authority.  Before reaching the mer-
its of those arguments, we address whether the Union has 
standing to raise them.

     BLNG contends that the Union lacks standing under Arti-
cle III of the Constitution because it has demonstrated 
neither a legally significant injury nor that the MarAd's order 
is the cause of any injury the Union may have suffered.  
BLNG also maintains that the Union lacks prudential stand-

ing to sue under s 9 of the Shipping Act because the interests 
the Union is seeking to protect are not "arguably within the 
zone of interests to be protected or regulated by" s 9.  
Reytblatt v. NRC, 105 F.3d 715, 721 (D.C. Cir. 1997).

     BLNG does not dispute that, as a result of the MarAd's 
order, some of the Union's members among the crews will 
lose their jobs and the Union will be displaced as the exclu-
sive bargaining representative.  That is surely enough to give 
the Union standing for the purposes of Article III.  In 
addition, the Union's claimed interest in "maintaining and 
promoting jobs in the U.S. merchant marine to service this 
nation's economic and national defense needs" is arguably 
within the zone of interests protected by s 9.  The preamble 
to the Shipping Act states as its purposes in creating the 
MarAd's predecessor "encouraging, developing, and creating 
a naval auxiliary and naval reserve and a merchant marine," 
39 Stat. 728 (1916), and the MarAd reasonably concluded in 
its order that a meaningful merchant marine is one with "a 
trained and efficient citizen personnel."  See also Meacham 
Corp. v. United States, 207 F.2d 535, 542-43 (4th Cir. 1953) 
(tracing legislative history of and amendments to Shipping 
Act).  Indeed, the MarAd's organic statute provides that "the 
United States shall have a merchant marine ... operated 
under the United States flag by citizens of the United States 
insofar as may be practicable."  46 U.S.C. App. s 1101.  We 
therefore conclude that the Union clearly has demonstrated 
both the injury in fact and the causation necessary to give it 
constitutional standing and that its interests are arguably 
within the zone of interests protected by s 9.

     A.   Claims based upon the APA
          
     The Union first contends that MarAd's order is invalid 
under the APA because it is arbitrary and capricious.  See 5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).  The MarAd responds that decisions re-
garding transfers of registry are "committed to agency dis-
cretion by law," 5 U.S.C. s 701(a)(2), and therefore outside 
the range of judicial review authorized in the APA.  If the 
MarAd is correct, then this court lacks jurisdiction over the 
Union's claims based upon the APA.  See, e.g., ICC v. Broth-

erhood of Locomotive Engineers, 482 U.S. 270, 282, 287 
(1987).

     The MarAd concedes that its regulations provide specific 
criteria to govern its decisions regarding transfers of registry, 
but contends that, as in National Federation of Federal 
Employees v. United States, 905 F.2d 400 (D.C. Cir. 1990) 
(NFFE), the subject matter of the agency's decision does not 
admit of judicially manageable standards.  We agree.  In 
NFFE, we were asked to review an APA challenge to the 
closure of certain military bases.  The Secretary of Defense 
had created a Commission on Base Realignment and Closure 
and directed it to "identify which bases should be closed or 
realigned."  Id. at 402.  The Secretary listed nine criteria 
upon the basis of which the Commission was to make its 
recommendations, see id., but the Commission itself decided 
that, of the nine, the "military value of a base should be the 
preeminent factor."  Id. at 405-06.  After the Commission 
had submitted its recommendations to the Secretary, the 
Congress passed the Base Closure Act directing the Secre-
tary to implement them.  See id. at 403.

     The court held that the Secretary's decisions regarding 
base closures and realignments were "committed to agency 
discretion by law" and hence not subject to review under the 
APA.  See id. at 405.  Although the Base Closure Act incor-
porated the nine specific criteria that had informed the 
Secretary's closure and realignment decisions, the court held 
that his decisions were not reviewable because the "subject 
matter of those criteria is not 'judicially manageable.' "  Id. at 
405;  see Heckler v. Cheney, 470 U.S. 821, 830 (1985).  Review 
of the Secretary's decisions would require "second guessing 
the Secretary's assessment of the nation's military force 
structure and the military value of the bases within that 
structure," and courts are "ill-equipped to conduct reviews of 
the nation's military policy."  Id. at 405-06.

     Even a cursory examination of the order under review in 
this case reveals that the primary factors driving the MarAd's 
decision are national defense, the adequacy of the merchant 
marine, foreign policy, and the national interest.  Indeed, the 

MarAd specifically consulted the Departments of State, De-
fense, and Energy to aid in its decision, and the overwhelm-
ing majority of the analysis in the agency's decision relates to 
these factors.  Were we to decide whether the MarAd's order 
is reasonable, we would necessarily be "second guessing" not 
only the Executive's determinations regarding the military 
value of the eight vessels but also its judgments on questions 
of foreign policy and national interest.  These are not sub-
jects fit for judicial involvement.  See, e.g., People's Mojahe-
din Org. v. Dep't of State, 182 F.3d 17, 23 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     The Union attempts to distinguish NFFE on the ground 
that the concededly "preeminent factor" in the decision under 
review in that case was the military value of the bases, 
whereas in this case consideration of the national defense was 
"but one factor [the MarAd] was required to consider per its 
own regulations."  As we have noted, however, considerations 
of national security, foreign policy, and national interest were 
clearly at the center of the MarAd's decision;  the Union does 
not even suggest that the other criteria listed in the regula-
tions were given similar weight in this case.

     The Union also argues that the MarAd's decision must be 
subject to review for conformity with the APA because the 
Hobbs Act specifically provides that the courts of appeal 
have:

     jurisdiction ...  to determine the validity of--
     
     (3) all rules, regulations, or final orders of--
     
          (A) the Secretary of Transportation issued pursuant to 
     section 2, 9, 37, or 41 of the Shipping Act, 1916 ...
     
28 U.S.C. s 2342(3)(A).  That the courts have statutory juris-
diction over an act of the Executive in some contexts does not 
automatically imply, however, that the courts always have 
jurisdiction to review that act for conformity with the APA.  
In ICC v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, the Supreme 
Court held, despite the grant of jurisdiction in the Hobbs Act 
over "final orders" issued by the ICC, that the agency's order 
denying reconsideration of a prior order was not subject to 
review under the APA because the latter decision was "com-

mitted to agency discretion by law."  See 482 U.S. at 282.  
Having held that the MarAd's decision is likewise committed 
to agency discretion by law, it follows that the grant of 
jurisdiction in the Hobbs Act to review final orders issued 
under s 9 is similarly qualified.

     In sum, the MarAd's decision regarding the transfer of 
registry in this case is committed to its discretion by law.  
We therefore lack jurisdiction over the Union's claims based 
upon the APA.  See Locomotive Engineers, 482 U.S. at 282, 
287.  We also note, but we do not decide, that in a case where 
considerations of national defense, foreign policy, and the 
national interest do not play a significant role, if such there 
be, we may well have jurisdiction to review the MarAd's 
decision regarding a transfer of registry.

     B.   Ex Parte Communications
          
     The Union next contends that the MarAd's acceptance of 
and reliance upon ex parte communications denied it "funda-
mental fairness" in violation of both the APA and the Fifth 
Amendment.  To the extent the Union's procedural complaint 
rests upon the APA, again, we lack jurisdiction to review it.

     Although the APA prohibits ex parte contacts in an adjudi-
cation or rulemaking "required by statute to be made on the 
record after opportunity for an agency hearing," 5 U.S.C. 
s 553(c), see 5 U.S.C. ss 554(a), 557(d), there is no such 
requirement applicable to the MarAd's review of an applica-
tion under s 9.  In the absence of such a statutory command, 
of course, "[a]gencies are free to grant additional procedural 
rights in the exercise of their discretion, but reviewing courts 
are generally not free to impose them if the agencies have not 
chosen to grant them."  Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power 
Corp. v. NRDC, 435 U.S. 519, 524 (1978).  Here the agency 
has not granted anyone the right to be free of ex parte 
communications.  In the absence of any statutory or self-
imposed limitation, we have no jurisdiction to review under 
the APA an agency's procedural decision regarding how best 
to make a substantive decision committed by law to the 
agency's discretion.

     The Union attempts to circumvent this analysis by arguing 
that once the MarAd requested comments from interested 
parties, it relinquished its discretion to "accept and rely upon 
ex parte communications without giving the public an oppor-
tunity to respond to them."  The authorities the Union cites 
as support for that claim, however, do not stand for that 
broad proposition.  In each case either the governing statute 
or a regulation or both required the agency to afford interest-
ed parties an opportunity to submit comments.  See Indepen-
dent U.S. Tanker Owners Comm. v. Lewis, 690 F.2d 908, 923 
(D.C. Cir. 1982) (regulation requiring "opportunity for com-
ment by interested parties");  United States Lines, Inc. v. 
FMC, 584 F.2d 519, 539 (D.C. Cir. 1978) ("Under the Ship-
ping Act notice and a hearing are required prior to Commis-
sion approval of any agreement subject to Section 15");  
National Wildlife Fed'n v. Marsh, 568 F. Supp. 985, 992-93 
(D.D.C. 1983) (statute requiring "notice and opportunity for 
public hearings" and regulation requiring opportunity for 
"meaningful comments").  As we have already noted, no 
statute or regulation requires the MarAd to afford interested 
parties the opportunity to submit comments on an application 
for a transfer of registry under s 9 and, in the absence of 
such a requirement, whether the MarAd permits comments 
and how it deals with those comments are procedural deci-
sions that, like the underlying substantive decision, are mat-
ters within the agency's discretion.  See Vermont Yankee, 435 
U.S. at 524.

     To the extent the Union's objection to ex parte communica-
tions rests upon the Fifth Amendment, its argument is not 
properly before the court.  In its opening brief the Union 
conclusorily asserted that the MarAd accepted ex parte com-
munications in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  The other 
parties understandably did not dignify this naked assertion 
with a response;  nor shall we.  See Carducci v. Regan, 714 
F.2d 171, 177 (D.C. Cir. 1983) ("We ...  decline to entertain 
appellant's asserted but unanalyzed constitutional claim");  see 
also United States v. Watson, 171 F.3d 695, 699 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 
1999) (same).  Even if the Union had developed the argument 
in its reply brief beyond the vanishingly terse afterthought it 

did present, out of fairness to the parties we still would not 
review the Union's argument.  Cf. Sitka Sound Seafoods, Inc. 
v. NLRB, 206 F.3d 1175, 1181 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("In order to 
prevent this sort of sandbagging of appellees and respon-
dents, we have generally held that issues not raised until the 
reply brief are waived").

     C.   Delegation of Legislative Authority
          
     The Union's final contention is that s 9 of the Shipping Act 
is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative authority to the 
Executive.  Relying primarily upon our recent decision in 
American Trucking Ass'ns v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027, modified, 
195 F.3d 4 (1999), cert. granted sub nom. Browner v. Ameri-
can Trucking Ass'ns, No. 99-1257, 2000 U.S. LEXIS 3577 
(May 22, 2000), and No. 99-1426, 2000 U.S. LEXIS 3629 
(May 30, 2000), the Union argues that neither the statute nor 
the MarAd's regulations provide an "intelligible principle" to 
guide the agency's decisionmaking under s 9.  For its part, 
the MarAd contends there is an intelligible principle but, even 
were there not, the constraints upon the ability of the Con-
gress to delegate its lawmaking authority do not apply in this 
case.  Because we agree with the latter point, we do not 
address the former.

     In United States v. Curtiss-Wright Corporation, 299 U.S. 
304 (1936), the Supreme Court held that the bar against 
excessive delegation of the Congress's lawmaking authority 
did not apply to a Joint Resolution authorizing the President 
to declare unlawful the sale of arms to certain countries if he 
determined such a ban would encourage peace between them.  
See 299 U.S. at 312.  The Court offered two general ratio-
nales.  First, it reasoned that the "investment of the federal 
government with the powers of external sovereignty did not 
depend upon the affirmative grants of the Constitution," id. 
at 318, and, in the realm of "external affairs," "the President 
alone has the power to speak or listen as a representative of 
the nation."  Id. at 319.  The Court noted especially the need 
for the President to have wide discretion in order to avoid 
embarrassing our relations with foreign nations.  See id. at 
320.  Second, the Court traced the long historical practice 

supporting the delegation of broad discretion to the Executive 
in external affairs.  See id. 322-326.  The legislation noted by 
the Court includes:  (1) an act permitting the President to 
"lay the embargo upon all ships and vessels in the ports of 
the United States, including those of foreign nations," when-
ever he determined the public safety so required, id. at 322;  
(2) an act authorizing the President, "whenever an armed 
vessel entering the harbors or waters within the jurisdiction 
of the United States and required to depart therefrom should 
fail to do so," to "forbid ... all intercourse with such vessel 
... and the officers and crew thereof" and to "prohibit all 
supplies and aid from being furnished them," id. 323-24;  and 
(3) numerous acts permitting the President to suspend the 
duties laid upon foreign vessels if he determined that duties 
laid upon ships of the United States were removed.  See id. 
at 324-25 n.2.  On the basis of these two lines of reasoning, 
the Court held that the "uniform, long-continued and undis-
puted legislative practice just disclosed rests upon an admissi-
ble view of the Constitution which, even if the practice found 
far less support in principle then we think it does, we should 
not feel at liberty at this late day to disturb."  Id. at 329.

     The transfer of a vessel's registry from the United States 
to a foreign nation involves considerations and concerns simi-
lar to those operative in Curtiss-Wright.  Little imagination 
is required to envision situations in which a request to 
transfer the registry of a vessel might involve delicate foreign 
policy and national defense concerns.  Indeed, in the course 
of granting the application in this case, the MarAd consulted 
with the Departments of State, Defense, and Energy in an 
effort to gauge just those types of concerns.  Furthermore, 
as the Court noted in Curtiss-Wright, there is a long tradi-
tion of permitting the Executive broad discretion in the area 
of international shipping;  the Union has offered no reason to 
treat s 9 differently.  Instead, the Union simply asserts that 
"[s]ection 9 does not involve delicate negotiations with other 
governments or any manner of interaction with other coun-
tries."  In fact, however, the Union itself opposed the applica-
tion below on the ground that the transfer would adversely 
affect the balance of trade with Japan and that the Republic 

of the Marshall Islands would not adequately regulate the 
safety of the vessels.  In sum, because "the whole aim of 
[s 9] is to affect a situation entirely external to the United 
States," it is not "open to ... challenge [as] an unlawful 
delegation of legislative power to the Executive."  Curtiss-
Wright, 299 U.S. at 315.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is

                                        Dismissed in part and denied in part.

