                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

     Argued January 14, 2000      Decided February 15, 2000 

                           No. 98-5508

                    Fort Sumter Tours, Inc., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                         Bruce Babbitt, 
         Secretary of the Department of the Interior and 
       Robert G. Stanton, Director, National Park Service, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00293)

     Peter Dickson argued the cause for appellant.  With him 
on the briefs were Paul F. Enzinna and Jody Manier Kris.

     Marina Utgoff Braswell, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellees.  With her on the brief were Wilma 

A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant 
U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Silberman, Henderson, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Fort Sumter Tours, Inc. (FST) 
provides passenger boat service to Fort Sumter National 
Monument in Charleston Harbor, South Carolina.  The ser-
vice is provided pursuant to a concession contract with the 
Secretary of the Interior, through the National Park Service 
(NPS or "Park Service"), under which FST pays the Secre-
tary an annual franchise fee.  This case involves a dispute 
over the fees charged during the second and third five-year 
periods of FST's current contract.  The district court rejected 
FST's challenge to the fees, as do we.  We conclude that this 
court is without jurisdiction to consider plaintiff's attack on 
the fee charged during the second contractual period, because 
that challenge is to NPS' nonreviewable refusal to settle then-
pending litigation between the parties concerning that fee.  
We reject plaintiff's attack on the fee charged during the 
third contractual period because FST failed to comply with 
the contractual requirements for seeking reconsideration.

                                I

     FST's current, fifteen-year contract with the Park Service 
was signed in 1986 and will expire in December 2000.  The 
contract is governed by the National Park System Conces-
sions Policy Act, 16 U.S.C. ss 20-20g,1 and Chapter 24 of 
NPS' Concessions Guidelines, commonly referred to as NPS-
48 ("NPS-48") (Joint Appendix (J.A.) at 88-135).  Under the 
contract, FST must pay the Park Service an annual franchise 
fee, which is a set percentage of plaintiff's annual gross 
receipts.  The fee is calculated to provide the concessioner 

__________
     1 In 1998, the Concessions Policy Act was replaced by the 
National Park Service Concessions Management Improvement Act, 
16 U.S.C. s 5951 et seq.  The new legislation does not affect the 
issues in this case.

with a reasonable profit, based on a comparison to rates of 
return in similar industries.  See 16 U.S.C. s 20b(d);  NPS-48 
(J.A. at 100).  In evaluating a concessioner's reported net 
profits, NPS may adjust reported expenses by comparing 
them to industry statistics.  See NPS-48 (J.A. at 126).

     FST's 1986 contract is divided into three five-year periods.  
During the first, the franchise fee was set at 4.25% of gross 
receipts.  Section 9(e) of the contract provides that the fee for 
the second and third five-year periods may be reconsidered 
on either party's initiative pursuant to specified procedures.  
See J.A. at 32-33.  This case involves efforts to reconsider the 
fee charged during each of those two periods.

                                A

     In June 1991, at the end of the first five-year period, the 
Park Service notified plaintiff that it was reconsidering the 
franchise fee.  After an initial analysis, NPS tentatively con-
cluded that the appropriate fee should be 12%.  That conclu-
sion was based on an examination of FST's financial reports, 
which persuaded the Park Service that FST had leased one of 
its boats from a related partnership in a deal that was "not an 
arm's length transaction and has resulted in lower earnings 
than would have occurred under an outright purchase of the 
boat."  See NPS Franchise Fee Analysis ( J.A. at 74).  NPS 
also found that FST overpaid its corporate officers relative to 
benchmarks for the water transportation industry.  See id. at 
73.  Plaintiff objected to the proposed fee increase, and 
notified NPS that rather than arbitrate or negotiate the fee, 
"we believe it is in our mutual interest to seek a declaration of 
rights by the courts on this critical issue."  Fort Sumter 
Tours v. Babbitt ("FST I"), No. 0918-1AJ, slip op. at 3 
(D.S.C. Feb. 3, 1994) (J.A. at 138).  Having received notice of 
FST's decision to forego arbitration and proceed to court, the 
Park Service notified FST that it had made a final decision to 
raise the fee to 12%.

     On April 21, 1993, FST filed suit in the United States 
District Court for the District of South Carolina, charging, 
inter alia, that:  (1) NPS lacked contractual or statutory 

authority to increase the franchise fee;  (2) the increase 
violated the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. 
s 706, because NPS acted arbitrarily and capriciously in 
employing the procedures it used to raise the fee;  and (3) 
imposition of a 12% fee violated the APA because it was 
unjustified "by substantial evidence regarding the profits 
earned by FST."  FST I, slip op. at 4, 14 (J.A. at 139, 149).  
The South Carolina District Court rejected all of plaintiff's 
claims, finding the agency's procedures authorized and ration-
al, and holding that the 12% fee was "not so excessive as to 
preclude a reasonable opportunity for [plaintiff] to earn a 
profit from its concession."  Id. at 11-21 (J.A. at 146-56).  
Plaintiff appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Fourth Circuit, which, after de novo review, upheld the 
district court's decision.  The Court of Appeals rejected 
FST's contractual and APA challenges to the franchise fee, 
finding that "NPS had both the statutory and the contractual 
authority to raise FST's franchise fee.... [and that] the fee 
determination itself [was] unobjectionable."  Fort Sumter 
Tours, Inc. v. Babbitt ("FST II"), 66 F.3d 1324, 1337 (4th Cir. 
1995).  On February 22, 1996, plaintiff petitioned the Su-
preme Court for a writ of certiorari.

     During the week of March 10, 1996, while the petition for 
certiorari was pending, FST's president, George Campsen, 
Jr., approached NPS' Concessions Program Manager, Robert 
Yearout, at a trade association meeting.  Campsen asked 
Yearout whether he was willing to discuss the franchise fee.  
Although the parties dispute the contents of the ensuing 
conversation,2 shortly after the meeting Campsen wrote Year-
out a letter.  In it, Campsen noted that "the litigation was 
ongoing" and that the "judicial process" was "time consuming 
and expensive," and he suggested that it was "of mutual 
interest that NPS and FST make a good faith attempt to 

__________
     2 Yearout contends he informed Campsen that, because the 
matter was still in litigation, he could not make any commitments 
without the approval of the Department of Justice.  See Yearout 
Decl. p 6 (J.A. at 174-75).  Campsen says Yearout merely told him 
he would be happy to look at any information Campsen wanted to 
present.  See Campsen Responsive Decl. p 5 (J.A. at 210).

resolve this matter."  J.A. at 177-78.  Campsen also ex-
pressed his appreciation for Yearout's "willingness to explore 
the opportunity for some 'common ground' resolution."  Id. at 
177.

     On May 10, 1996, Campsen and his son met with three 
government officials:  Yearout, an Interior Department attor-
ney, and a financial analyst for the Park Service.  The parties 
again dispute the contents of their conversation.3  Five days 
after the meeting, the Interior Department attorney sent 
Campsen a letter, thanking him for the opportunity to meet, 
and concluding that "[b]ecause of the continuing litigation 
... , any further correspondence on this matter will come 
from John Douglas, Assistant U.S. Attorney."  Id. at 187.

     On May 28, 1996, the Supreme Court denied the petition 
for certiorari.  See Fort Sumter Tours, Inc. v. Babbitt, 116 
S. Ct. 1848 (1996).  In early June, the NPS financial analyst 
traveled to South Carolina to meet with FST officials.  On 
July 1, 1996, shortly after the expiration of the 25-day period 
for filing a petition for rehearing of the denial of certiorari, 
Assistant U.S. Attorney Douglas sent FST's counsel a letter 
advising plaintiff that "we have concluded that settlement 
would not be in the interests of the United States."  J.A. at 
198.

                                B

     While the litigation regarding the second contractual period 
was winding to a close, so too was the second period itself.  
Under section 9(e) of FST's concession contract, a party must 

__________
     3 NPS contends that agency counsel stated at the outset that 
the purpose of the meeting was to "receive from FST information to 
be considered by NPS for the purpose of possibly recommending to 
the Department of Justice whether the Justice Department should 
engage in settlement discussions regarding FST's pending lawsuit."  
Hanslin Decl. p 5 (J.A. at 181).  NPS also contends that Campsen 
"stated that he understood and agreed as to this purpose."  Id. p 6 
(J.A. at 181).  Campsen remembers no such statement by agency 
counsel and denies making the statement attributed to him.  See 
Campsen Responsive Decl. pp 15, 16 (J.A. at 211-12).

request reconsideration in writing within sixty days of the 
end of a five-year period.  If no adjustment has been agreed 
to within 120 days thereafter, the concessioner is required to 
reduce its position to writing within thirty days and submit it 
to the Secretary for a determination of appropriate fees.  See 
J.A. at 32.

     On June 14, 1996, the day after the second period ended, 
plaintiff wrote John Tucker, the superintendent of Fort Sum-
ter National Monument, requesting that, for the third period, 
the 12% fee be reduced to the original 4.25%.  See id. at 205.  
On August 1, Tucker wrote back:

     [W]e would be pleased to meet with you to discuss your 
     proposal in relation to the probable value of the contract.  
     We would propose a meeting in late September at which 
     our respective positions would be discussed....  I will 
     get back to you in a few weeks to discuss a meeting date.
     
Id. at 207.  No further correspondence ensued, and no meet-
ing was held.

                                C

     While the parties disputed the second- and third-period 
franchise fees, FST refused to pay the increase and continued 
to remit payments at the 4.25% rate.  Between June 1993 and 
June 1996, NPS sent FST five letters demanding payment of 
past due amounts.  See id. at 190-97.  In December of 1996, 
NPS presented FST with a debt compromise proposal for the 
approximately $1 million in back fees, interest, and penalties 
still due.  FST counter offered.  See id. at 200.  On January 
21, 1997, NPS rejected the counteroffer and notified FST that 
if payment were not made by February 28, 1997, NPS would 
terminate the contract.  See id. at 203.

     Plaintiff responded by filing the present lawsuit, which 
challenged the Park Service's refusal to reduce the franchise 
fee for the second and third contractual periods.  At an early 
hearing in the case, NPS advised the district court that a final 
decision had not yet been reached regarding the third-period 
fee, but that such a decision would be forthcoming.  That 
decision was made on March 31, 1997.  NPS notified plaintiff 

that the 12% fee would remain in effect because FST had 
failed to reduce its final position to writing and submit it to 
the Secretary by the date specified in the contract.  Refer-
ring to section 9(e) of the contract, NPS' notification letter 
stated:

     As we did not come to agreement upon an adjustment of 
     the franchise fee by October 12, 1996, 120 days after 
     June 14, 1996, you had 30 days from that date, to 
     November 11, 1996, to reduce your position to writing 
     and to submit it to the Secretary for a determination of 
     an appropriate fee for the period commencing June 14, 
     1996.  This you did not do.  Likewise, you did not 
     request that advisory arbitration be initiated in connec-
     tion with your request for reconsideration of the con-
     tract's 12% franchise fee.
     
J.A. at 311-12.

     Although Plaintiff's complaint raised multiple claims, only 
two sets remain at issue on this appeal.  In the first, FST 
contended that the Park Service violated the APA by arbi-
trarily and capriciously refusing--in July 1996--to reduce the 
second-period fee as requested by plaintiff.  Granting sum-
mary judgment for defendants, the district court did not 
reach the merits of this claim, but instead held that NPS' 
refusal was judicially nonreviewable because it represented 
nothing more than a refusal to settle the then-pending South 
Carolina litigation.  See Fort Sumter Tours, Inc. v. Babbitt 
("FST III"), No. 97cv00293, slip op. at 12-16 (D.D.C. Aug. 28, 
1998) (J.A. at 312-16).  Plaintiff's second contention was that 
NPS breached the concession contract, and acted arbitrarily 
and capriciously, by refusing to reconsider the fee for the 
third period.  The court granted summary judgment for 
defendants on that contention as well, holding that plaintiff 
had failed to submit its request for reconsideration in accor-
dance with the procedures outlined in section 9(e) of the 
contract.  See id. at 16-18 (J.A. at 316-18).  This appeal 
followed.4

__________
     4 Plaintiff's other claims challenged various NPS actions in 
connection with the concession contract, on grounds ranging from 

                                II

     We begin with the dispute over the second-period fee.  
Because the district court decided the issue on summary 
judgment, our standard of review is de novo.  See Hunter-
Boykin v. George Wash. Univ., 132 F.3d 77, 79 (D.C. Cir. 
1998);  see also Grant v. United States Air Force, 197 F.3d 
539, 541 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  The question before us, however, is 
quite narrow.  Needless to say, we have no authority to 
review the decision of the Fourth Circuit, which upheld the 
merits of NPS' initial decision to raise the franchise fee.  
Plaintiff contends, however, that we may review NPS' July 
1996 refusal to reconsider and lower the fee.  The question 
before us, then, is whether NPS' refusal is subject to judicial 
review.

     An agency's refusal to reconsider a prior decision is only 
reviewable under limited circumstances.  See ICC v. Brother-
hood of Locomotive Eng'rs (BLE), 482 U.S. 270, 278-81 
(1987);  Sendra Corp. v. Magaw, 111 F.3d 162, 166-67 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997).  It is true that "[i]f for any reason the agency 
reopens a matter, and after reconsideration, issues a new and 
final order, that order is reviewable on its merits."  Sendra 
111 F.3d at 167;  see BLE, 482 U.S. at 278.  Plaintiff contends 
that NPS did reopen the fee issue in 1996.  NPS, by contrast, 
contends that it merely evaluated the issue for purposes of 
deciding whether to settle plaintiff's South Carolina lawsuit, 
and that the July 1996 letter from Assistant U.S. Attorney 
Douglas represented a decision not to do so.  FST does not 
dispute that the Justice Department has sole authority to 
settle lawsuits on behalf of the United States, see 28 U.S.C. 

__________
breach of contract to violation of the APA.  The district court 
dismissed those claims pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), in some 
instances because they were barred by the Fourth Circuit's decision 
in FST II.  See FST III, slip op. at 19, 22 (J.A. at 319, 322).  
Plaintiff has not appealed from the dismissal of any claims other 
than those discussed in the text.

ss 516, 519, and that a decision whether to settle a case like 
FST's--if that is what occurred here--would not be reviewa-
ble under the APA, see Oral Arg. Tr. at 5.  Cf. New York 
State Dep't of Law v. FCC, 984 F.2d 1209, 1213-15 (D.C. Cir. 
1993) (holding nonreviewable FCC decision to settle enforce-
ment action);  Schering Corp. v. Heckler, 779 F.2d 683, 685-87 
(D.C. Cir. 1985) (holding nonreviewable FDA decision to 
settle and dismiss enforcement action).5

     We agree with the district court that the July 1996 letter 
represented a decision not to settle the litigation between the 
parties.  The government's initial written response to plain-
tiff's overtures, sent by Interior Department attorney Lars 
Hanslin in May of 1996, made clear that the government was 
undertaking to review the matter in connection with the then-
pending litigation.  Hanslin advised FST that the Park Ser-
vice's consideration would be made "in consultation with 
appropriate officials of the Department of Justice."  J.A. at 
187.  And he emphasized that

     Because of continuing litigation between Fort Sumter 
     Tours and the National Park Service, any further corre-
     spondence on this matter will come from John Douglas, 
     Assistant United States Attorney.  As I am sure you 
     appreciate, the National Park Service, because of the 
     litigation is not in a position to directly respond to the 
     concerns you have raised.
     
Id. (emphasis added).

     The government's final decision letter, dated July 1, 1996, 
makes the character of its determination even more manifest.  
That letter, which is set out in relevant part in the 

__________
     5 Although there may be circumstances in which a substantive 
statute places limits on an agency's settlement discretion, see New 
York State Dep't of Law, 984 F.2d at 1215, no such argument has 
been advanced concerning the Justice Department's litigation au-
thority here.

margin,6 was sent not by the agency, but by its Justice 
Department counsel.  It was sent not to FST itself, but to its 
attorneys.  Its subject-reference line indicated that the topic 
was FST's lawsuit.  The letter recited that the Park Service 
had reviewed the franchise fees "with a view toward potential 
settlement."  Id. at 198 (emphasis added).  And it informed 
plaintiff's counsel that:  "[W]e have concluded that settlement 
would not be in the best interests of the United States."  Id. 
(emphasis added).
     Notwithstanding the express language of the July 1996 
letter, plaintiff contends that it represents the denial of a 
__________
     6     Marvin D. Infinger, Esq. 
            Sinkler & Boyd, P.A. 
             ....
            RE:  Fort Sumter Tours, Inc. v. Bruce Babbitt
                     C/A No. 2:93-0918-1, District of South Carolina
                      No. 94-1570, Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals       
                       No. 95-1353, Supreme Court
          
     Dear Marvin:
     
           As you no doubt know, the responsible officials at the Park 
     Service have recently engaged in a thorough review of the 
     franchise fees that were at issue in the above litigation, at the 
     instigation of your client, with a view toward potential settle-
     ment.  This review was undertaken with the full agreement 
     and cooperation of the Justice Department.  After due consid-
     eration of both the merits of your client's contentions and the 
     procedural posture of the case, we have concluded that settle-
     ment would not be in the interests of the United States.  I 
     would emphasize that this decision was based both upon the 
     review of the apparent fairness of the franchise fees imposed 
     and the fact that the Supreme Court has denied the writ of 
     certiorari which you had sought.  This concludes my handling 
     of this case and I am closing my file on it at this time.
               ....
          
                                                             Sincerely yours,
                                                             ....
                                                            John H. Douglas
                                                       Assistant U.S. Attorney
J.A. at 198-99 (emphasis added)


reopened administrative decision, rather than the rejection of 
a settlement.  FST proffers three related arguments.  First, 
it argues that the letter cannot represent a decision regarding 
settlement because the South Carolina litigation had effective-
ly ended by the time FST made the March 1996 overture to 
which the letter responded.  All that remained pending at 
that time was the petition for certiorari, which, FST suggest-
ed at oral argument, was not "cert. worthy."  Oral Arg. Tr. at 
11.

     FST's argument is unpersuasive.  While we raise our eye-
brows at plaintiff's admission that it filed a certiorari petition 
knowing it was unworthy of Supreme Court review,7 the fact 
remains that that petition was pending at the time FST's 
president approached NPS' Concessions Program Manager 
for reconsideration.  Indeed, FST's March 15, 1996 letter 
expressly noted that "the litigation is ongoing because ...  
[FST] has petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court in the hopes of 
judicially correcting what we perceive as a grave injustice."  
J.A. at 177.  Moreover, also pending at that time--and still 
pending after the petition was denied--were NPS' efforts to 
collect nearly a million dollars in unpaid fees, interest, and 
penalties.  As plaintiff itself later suggested, those, too, were 
potentially part of a global settlement between the parties.  
See id. at 201 (Dec. 31, 1996 letter from FST, proposing to 
pay fees in arrearage at 5% and third-period fees at 6%).  
Although plaintiff's self-assessment of its weak litigating posi-
tion turned out to be correct, that merely confirms the 
wisdom of the government's ultimate decision not to settle;  it 
does not establish that the government never assessed the 
situation on its own.

     Second, plaintiff contends that the July 1996 letter reflects 
an administrative reopening, rather than the rejection of a 
settlement, because it recites that the Park Service engaged 
in a "thorough review" of the franchise fees, considered "the 
merits" of FST's contentions, and made its decision based in 
part on a "review of the apparent fairness of the franchise 

__________
     7 See Oral Arg. Tr. at 11 ("This was not a cert. worthy case.  
Anybody could have looked at it and decided that.").

fees imposed."  J.A. at 188-89.  According to FST, these are 
indicators of a true agency reconsideration, not merely of a 
decision whether to settle a lawsuit.

     Once again, we find plaintiff's argument unpersuasive.  The 
fact that the agency considered the merits of plaintiff's posi-
tion can hardly serve to remove its decisionmaking from the 
realm of settlement.  Indeed, it would be extraordinary for 
the government to make a settlement decision without consid-
ering the merits of the underlying dispute.  And as we have 
said more generally with respect to determining whether an 
agency has truly reopened a prior decision:  "That the agency 
discusses the merits at length when it denies a request for 
reconsideration does not necessarily mean the agency has 
reopened the proceedings....  It would make no sense what-
soever to hold that when an agency offers an explanation for 
'affirming a prior denial,' it has in effect reopened the pro-
ceedings and rendered a new, judicially-reviewable decision."  
Sendra, 111 F.3d at 167 (quoting BLE, 482 U.S. at 281).  The 
Supreme Court has made precisely the same point:

     It is irrelevant that the commission's order refusing 
     reconsideration discussed the merits of the unions' claim 
     at length....  [O]ne cannot intelligently rule upon a 
     petition to reconsider without reflecting among other 
     things, whether clear error was shown.  It would hardly 
     be sensible to say that the Commission can genuinely 
     deny reconsideration only when it gives the matter no 
     thought;  nor to say that the character of its action (as 
     grant or denial) depends upon whether it chooses to 
     disclose its reasoning.  Rather, it is the Commission's 
     formal action, rather than its discussion, that is disposi-
     tive.
     
BLE, 482 U.S. at 280-81

     But, plaintiff continues, surely the inclusion of language 
indicating the agency undertook a "thorough review" at least 
renders the letter ambiguous.  And, that being so, was not 
summary judgment inappropriate, since on summary judg-
ment uncertainties are to be resolved in the non-moving 
party's favor?  See FST Br. at 26 (citing Adickes v. S. H. 
Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 157 (1970)).  The answer is:  not 
these kinds of uncertainties.  For the reasons just stated, the 

"thorough review" language does not render the letter ambig-
uous.  But even if it did, ambiguity as to whether the agency 
had reopened its decisionmaking would not advance appel-
lant's cause.  To the contrary:

     Only "when the agency has clearly stated or otherwise 
     demonstrated" that it has reopened the proceeding will 
     the resulting agency decision be considered a new final 
     order subject to judicial review under the usual stan-
     dards....  [U]nless the agency clearly states or indi-
     cates that it has reopened the matter, its refusal of a 
     request for reconsideration will be treated as simply that.
     
Sendra, 111 F.3d at 167 (quoting Morris v. Sullivan, 897 F.2d 
553, 558 (D.C. Cir. 1990)) (citations omitted) (emphasis add-
ed).  Not even plaintiff contends that NPS "clearly" stated it 
had reopened the matter.

     Finally, plaintiff argues that it was error for the district 
court to conclude that NPS' decision was a nonreviewable 
settlement determination without first demanding that the 
agency produce the full administrative record of the 1996 
decision.  Summary judgment was inappropriate, FST con-
tends, because there are factual disputes over what happened 
at several meetings between the parties, see supra notes 2 & 
3, and because NPS did not characterize its decision as one 
involving settlement "until this suit was filed and then only in 
the [form of] post hoc affidavits." FST Br. at 26.

     We reject this argument as well.  As the district court 
held, while there may be factual disputes in this case, they 
are not material to resolution of the issue at hand.  Here we 
have a formal decision document:  the July 1, 1996 letter from 
Assistant U.S. Attorney Douglas.  That document is not "post 
hoc."  To the contrary, because it was a contemporaneous 
communication of the agency's final determination, it is as 
"hoc" as a document can be.  The decision expressly commu-
nicated on the face of that document is:  "[W]e have concluded 
that settlement would not be in the interests of the United 
States."  J.A. at 198 (emphasis added).  In such circum-
stances, both this court and the Supreme Court have held 
that we should look no further.  "Courts will not," we said in 
Sendra Corp. v. Magaw, "look behind the agency's formal 

disposition of the reconsideration request to see whether the 
agency 'in fact' reopened its original decision (and thus ren-
dered a new final order)."  Sendra, 111 F.3d at 167.  "Where 
the [agency's] formal disposition is to deny reconsideration, 
and where it makes no alteration in the underlying order, we 
will not undertake an inquiry into whether reconsideration 'in 
fact' occurred."  BLE, 482 U.S. at 280-81.

     In sum, we agree with the district court that the July 1996 
decision was a nonreviewable settlement determination.  This 
Circuit has recently held that the nonreviewability of a simi-
lar kind of agency decision is not simply a question of 
deference to agency discretion, but of the absence of jurisdic-
tion.  See Entravision Holdings, LLC v. FCC, No. 99-1025, 
slip op. at 4 & n.* (D.C. Cir. 2000) (denial of reconsideration);  
see also BLE, 482 U.S. at 282, 287.  Accordingly, we must 
vacate the judgment with respect to the claims regarding the 
second contractual period, and remand with instructions to 
dismiss those claims for lack of jurisdiction.

                               III

     In its remaining set of claims, plaintiff contends that NPS' 
refusal to reconsider the franchise fee for the third five-year 
period breached the concession contract and was arbitrary 
and capricious.  NPS refused to reconsider on the ground 
that, as it read the contract, FST had failed to comply with a 
requirement that it submit a second written statement of its 
position after 120 days had passed without agreement.  The 
district court found that the language of the contract unam-
biguously supported NPS' interpretation.  See FST III, slip 
op. at 17 (J.A. at 317).  Because the ambiguity of a contract is 
a question of law, our review is de novo.  See Bennett Enters., 
Inc. v. Domino's Pizza, Inc., 45 F.3d 493, 497 (D.C. Cir. 
1995);  LTV Corp. v. Gulf States Steel, Inc., 969 F.2d 1050, 
1055 (D.C. Cir. 1992).

     Like the district court, we believe the contract is clear and 
that the government was entitled to enforce it according to its 
terms.  Section 9(e) states:

     Within sixty (60) days after the end of each 5-year 
     period of this contract or as otherwise specified, at the 
     instance of either party hereto, the amount and character 
     
     of the franchise fees provided for in this section may be 
     reconsidered.  Such request shall be made in writing 
     within 60 days after the end of the applicable contract 
     year but cannot be made before the end of such year.  In 
     the event that the Secretary and the Concessioner cannot 
     agree upon an adjustment of the franchise fees within 
     120 days from the date of the request for renegotiation as 
     made by either party, the position of the Concessioner 
     must be reduced to writing within 30 days therefrom 
     and submitted to the Secretary for a determination of 
     appropriate fees....  
     
J.A. at 32 (emphasis added).  Thus, the contract requires that 
if the parties cannot agree within 120 days from the date of 
the original written request, the concessioner must again 
reduce its position to writing within another thirty days and 
submit it to the Secretary.  It is conceded that no writing was 
submitted after the passage of the 120-day period.

     Plaintiff contends that its original request for a 4.25% fee 
for the third period--submitted in its June 14, 1996 letter--
should be sufficient to satisfy the requirement of a writing.  
As the district court noted, however, the contract plainly 
"includes reference to two separate writings:  a written re-
quest initiating the reconsideration process, and a written 
summary of the concessioner's position to be submitted some-
time after 120 days, but no more than 150 days after the 
original request, assuming the parties do not resolve the issue 
earlier."  FST III, slip op. at 17 (J.A. at 317).  At bottom, 
FST asks us to read the latter provision out of the contract--
a suggestion that is inconsistent with our general approach to 
contract interpretation.  See United States v. Insurance Co. 
of N. Am., 83 F.3d 1507, 1511 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (noting the 
"cardinal principle of contract construction:  that a document 
should be read to give effect to all its provisions") (quoting 
Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 514 U.S. 52, 
63 (1995));  see also YRT Servs. Corp. v. United States, 28 
Fed. Cl. 366, 389 (1993) ("When interpreting the language of 
a contract, a court must give reasonable meaning to all parts 
of the contract and not render portions of the contract 
meaningless.").

     Nor is the provision at issue unimportant to the contract.  
Section 9(e) channels fee disputes through a series of resolu-

tion points short of litigation.  The second writing require-
ment compels the concessioner to reconsider its own position 
and make a final offer, while at the same time ensuring that 
the Secretary will have a last clear chance to negotiate a 
settlement.  FST chose to ignore that contractual require-
ment and resort directly to the courts (for a second time).  
Like the district court, we find the contract unambiguous and 
plaintiff's failure to abide by its terms fatal to its cause.8  Nor 
do we find anything in the government's behavior inconsistent 
with its duty to act in good faith when enforcing its rights 
under a contract.  See Solar Turbines, Inc. v. United States, 
23 Cl. Ct. 142, 156-57 (1991).9

                                IV

     For the forgoing reasons, we reject plaintiff's challenges to 
the franchise fees the Park Service established for the second 

__________
     8 The district court further concluded that because NPS did not 
reconsider the third-period fee, "there was no 'final agency action' 
subject to review under the APA."  FST III, slip op. at 18 (J.A. at 
318).  The government does not press this point on appeal, see NPS 
Br. at 24, and we conclude that NPS' third-period decision is 
reviewable.  Notwithstanding the contract's use of the term "recon-
sideration" to describe the process for adjusting fees, the contract 
essentially grants the concessioner the right to a new agency 
decisionmaking for each five-year period, provided it follows the 
requisite procedures.  See J.A. at 32-33;  see also 16 U.S.C. 
s 20b(d).  NPS' decision is therefore reviewable, although FTS' 
appeal fails on the merits because plaintiff did not follow those 
procedures.

     9 This is not a case like Orange Cove Irrigation District v. 
United States, 28 Fed. Cl. 790 (1993), cited by plaintiff, in which the 
Court of Federal Claims held the government to have breached its 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing by insisting on adherence to 
an unreasonable deadline.  There, the two-week deadline imposed 
by the government was not contained in the contract, was imposed 
without notice to the contracting party, and was so short as to make 
it "almost certain" that compliance would be impossible.  Id. at 801.  
Moreover, the contracting party did comply "soon" after the dead-

and third periods of the concession contract.  The judgment 
with respect to the second contractual period is vacated and 
remanded with instructions to dismiss those claims for lack of 
jurisdiction.  In all other respects the judgment below is 
affirmed.

__________
line.  See id. at 802.  The situation here is different in every 
respect.

                                                                         