                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 13, 2001     Decided April 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-1325

       Halle Enterprises, Inc. and COMAR Management, Inc., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

                      Fidel Perez, et al., 
                           Intervenors

On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
Enforcement of an Order of the National 
Labor Relations Board

     Fred S. Sommer argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.  James E. McCollum, Jr. entered an appearance.

     Ruth E. Burdick, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent. With her on the 

brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Margaret A. Gaines, 
Supervisory Attorney.

     James E. McCollum, Jr. was on the brief for intervenors 
Fidel Perez, et al.

     Before:  Sentelle, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  The National Labor Relations 
Board issued an order requiring Halle Enterprises, Inc. to 
reinstate and make whole eleven employees whom the compa-
ny had fired for complaining about wages, hours, and working 
conditions.  The question before us is whether the company's 
voluntary offer of reinstatement to four of the employees 
tolled their right to backpay.  The Board held that it did not, 
because the offer was not firm, clear, and unconditional.  
Substantial evidence supports the Board's finding, and we 
therefore deny the company's petition for review and grant 
the Board's cross-application for enforcement of its order.

                               I

     Halle Enterprises is in the business of building homes and 
managing apartment complexes.  On the morning of Novem-
ber 4, 1997, eleven of the company's maintenance technicians 
complained to their supervisor about wages, hours, and work-
ing conditions, including the unavailability of safety equip-
ment.  Not long thereafter, Wayne Ellis, the company's 
property manager, arrived on the scene and fired all eleven 
workers.  The next day, November 5, Ellis told the employ-
ees that they could have their jobs back if they filled out new 
applications.  When the employees learned that Ellis' offer 
did not include their current benefits and seniority, they 
refused.

     The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) held that 
Halle Enterprises violated section 8(a)(1) of the National 
Labor Relations Act by firing the eleven employees on No-
vember 4.  Halle Enters., Inc., 330 N.L.R.B. No. 163, 2000 

WL 363063, at *1, 4 (March 31, 2000).1  The Board also found 
that on or about November 7, Warren Halle, the company's 
president, told Israel Flores, the employees' spokesman, that 
he wanted the four most senior technicians to come back to 
work without any conditions.  The Board further determined, 
however, that when the four attempted to return to work on 
or about November 10, they were met by Ellis, who told them 
they could retain their current benefits and seniority only if 
they signed a waiver agreeing not to participate in legal 
action against the company.  When the four senior employees 
refused to sign the waiver, Ellis told them they could not 
return to work.

     The NLRB's Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) had deter-
mined that Warren Halle's unconditional offer tolled the 
company's obligation to pay the four employees backpay as of 
November 7, despite Ellis' subsequent insistence that they 
sign a waiver as a condition of reinstatement.  The Board 
disagreed with the ALJ.  It held that Ellis' subsequent 
demand superseded Halle's initial offer and rendered the 
company's offer conditional.  Halle Enters., 2000 WL 363063, 
at *2 & n.8.  The Board found that at the time the employees 
reported for reinstatement, they had "every reason to con-
clude" that Ellis was stating the full terms of the company's 
offer, "including any amendments that might have been made 
to Halle's offer since it was originally made."  Id. at *2 n.8.  
The Board ordered reinstatement and full backpay for all 
eleven discharged workers.

                                   II

     When the NLRB determines that an employer has unlaw-
fully discharged an employee, its normal course is to issue a 
make-whole order requiring reinstatement and backpay.  See 
Darr v. NLRB, 801 F.2d 1404, 1407 (D.C. Cir. 1986);  Roma 

__________
     1  Section 8(a)(1), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), makes it an unfair labor 
practice "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the 
exercise of the rights guaranteed" in section 7 of the Act, which 
include the right to engage in concerted activities for the purpose of 
"mutual aid or protection," 29 U.S.C. s 157.

One Enters., 325 N.L.R.B. 851, 852, 853 (1998);  F.W. Wool-
worth Co., 90 N.L.R.B. 289, 291 (1950);  see also Sure-Tan, 
Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883, 902 (1984).  An employer's offer 
of reinstatement tolls the accrual of backpay, but only if the 
offer is "firm, clear, and unconditional."  Consol. Freightways 
v. NLRB, 892 F.2d 1052, 1056 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (quoting 
Lipman Bros., Inc., 164 N.L.R.B. 850, 853 (1967));  accord 
Krist Oil Co., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 108, 1999 WL 448441, at *5 
(June 28, 1999).  "It is the employer's burden to establish 
that it made a valid offer of reinstatement."  Roma One 
Enters., 325 N.L.R.B. at 852.

     Halle Enterprises concedes that it committed an unfair 
labor practice by discharging the eleven employees.  It chal-
lenges neither the Board's order requiring their reinstate-
ment, nor the mandate to provide full backpay for the seven 
junior technicians.  The company attacks the order only to 
the extent that it awards backpay to the four senior employ-
ees subsequent to the date of Halle's reinstatement offer.  
The company does not dispute that Ellis' offer was condition-
al, and that if his was the last offer received by the four 
senior technicians, it would have superseded Halle's offer and 
prevented tolling of their backpay.  The company contends, 
however, that it was Halle's offer that came last.

     According to company counsel, the only issue in this case is 
whether the Board was correct in finding that Ellis' condition-
al offer was the last one communicated to the employees.  We 
adopt this formulation of the issue on appeal with one caveat.  
Our role is not to determine de novo whether the Board's 
factual finding was correct.  Rather, we are limited to deter-
mining whether it is "supported by substantial evidence on 
the record considered as a whole."  29 U.S.C. s 160(e);  see 
Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 477, 488 
(1951).  To that end, we ask only "whether on this record it 
would have been possible for a reasonable jury to reach the 
Board's conclusion."  Capital Cleaning Contractors, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 147 F.3d 999, 1004 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (quoting Allen-
town Mack Sales & Serv., Inc. v. NLRB, 522 U.S. 359, 366-67 
(1998)).  And in making that determination, we give "substan-
tial deference to the inferences drawn by the NLRB from the 

facts."  Time Warner Cable v. NLRB, 160 F.3d 1, 3 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).

     We conclude that there is substantial evidence to support 
the Board's finding.  Israel Flores testified that Ellis' No-
vember 10 offer of reinstatement, which included the waiver 
condition, was the last offer the employees received from the 
company.  J.A. 66, 68-69.  Warren Halle himself testified 
that he "probably" made his unconditional offer two or three 
days after the November 4 incident, J.A. 187, which the ALJ 
concluded put it on or about November 7--several days 
before Ellis' conditional offer of November 10.  Halle Enters., 
2000 WL 363063, at *5.

     The company's only response is that, notwithstanding 
Halle's testimony, it was logically impossible for him to have 
made his unconditional offer until after Ellis insisted upon a 
waiver on November 10.  The company notes that Halle 
testified he told Flores that the employees would not have to 
sign anything in order to return to work, and that the ALJ 
credited that testimony.  Id. at *5.  It would not have been 
logical for Halle to have referred to the signing of a docu-
ment, the company argues, unless Ellis' insistence upon a 
waiver had come before.

     This purported inconsistency within the testimony of the 
employer's own president is a weak reed upon which to base a 
claim that the NLRB lacks substantial evidence to support its 
factual finding.  In any event, there is no logical conundrum 
here.  The company's argument assumes that November 10 
was the first time Ellis told the employees they would have to 
sign a waiver in order to regain their jobs.  But one of the 
fired employees, Jose Alfaro, testified that Ellis first made 
that demand the day after the firings--November 5--when 
he offered all eleven employees reinstatement, but without 
benefits or seniority.  See J.A. 93 (Alfaro Tr.) ("[H]e told us 
... that we were going to lose all of our benefits, and that he 
wanted us to sign a note stating that there was nothing that 
we could do against the company.").  The company did not 
cross-examine Alfaro on the point, and offered no rebuttal.  
Moreover, Halle did not testify as to how or when he learned 
of the waiver requirement, nor even expressly associate it 
with Ellis.

     In light of the above, Halle's testimony plainly does not 
render it impossible "for a reasonable jury to reach the 
Board's conclusion" that Ellis' conditional offer of November 
10 was the last one the employees received.  Allentown 
Mack, 522 U.S. at 367.  Accordingly, we have no cause to 
displace this finding of fact.  Indeed, that is particularly so 
since it is undisputed that "the burden is on the [employer] to 
communicate to its employees an offer that is firm, clear, and 
unconditional."  Halle Enters., 2000 WL 363063, at *2.

                              III

     One final loose end remains to be secured.  In addition to 
Halle and Ellis, a third manager--Vice President Joe Dod-
son--also made an offer of reinstatement to the four senior 
employees.  The ALJ found, however, that Dodson's offer 
was conditional, and was made after Halle's unconditional 
offer and before Ellis' conditional one.  Halle Enters., 2000 
WL 363063, at *4, 5 & n.7.  The Board affirmed.  Id. at *1, 2.

     The company disputes the ALJ's findings on both counts, 
contending that Dodson's offer was unconditional and that it 
came after Ellis'.  But even if Dodson intended his offer to be 
unconditional, its wording hardly met the employer's burden 
of communicating an offer that was "firm, clear, and uncondi-
tional."  Consol. Freightways, 892 F.2d at 1056;  Roma One 
Enters., 325 N.L.R.B. at 852.2  We need not belabor the 
point, however, as there is substantial evidence to support the 
Board's finding that Ellis' offer was the last one the employ-
ees received.3  Since it is undisputed that under Ellis' offer, 

__________
     2  According to Dodson, he told the employees:  "You would 
return under the same conditions that you left insofar as salary, 
benefits.  The only thing that they would not receive is any money 
for time away from their job.  No other conditions were made."  
J.A. 177 (emphasis added).

     3  See J.A. 65-69 (Flores Tr.) (testifying that, although Dodson 
said the four senior employees should go back to work, when they 
arrived Ellis insisted upon a waiver, and that thereafter the compa-
ny did not again offer reinstatement);  J.A. 162 (Medina Tr.) 
(testifying that, although Dodson said he wanted the four to go back 

reinstatement was improperly conditioned upon the signing of 
a waiver, Dodson's earlier offer simply does not affect the 
employees' right to backpay.

                              IV

     Substantial evidence supports the NLRB's determination 
that the ultimate offer of reinstatement made by Halle Enter-
prises to its unlawfully discharged employees was conditional.  
As a consequence, that offer did not toll the employees' 
entitlement to backpay.  We therefore deny the petition for 
review and grant the Board's cross-application for enforce-
ment.

__________
to work, when they came to the office Ellis required them to sign 
the waiver document before starting).

              