                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 13, 2000      Decided May 19, 2000 

                           No. 99-5065

                        Bruce E. Gardner, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv03075)

     Bruce E. Gardner, appearing pro se, argued the cause and 
filed the briefs for appellant.

     Annette M. Wietecha, Attorney, United States Department 
of Justice, argued the cause for appellee.  With her on the 
brief were Gilbert S. Rothenberg, Attorney, and Mary Lou 
Leary, United States Attorney at the time the brief was filed.  

Loretta C. Argrett, Assistant Attorney General, and Edward 
T. Perelmuter, Attorney, entered appearances.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  Bruce Gardner, appearing pro se, 
appeals the District Court's dismissal of his complaint for 
failure to prosecute and for lack of subject matter jurisdic-
tion.  Mr. Gardner alleges that the Internal Revenue Service 
("the Service") unlawfully levied his property without first 
sending a notice of federal tax deficiency to his last known 
address.  The District Court dismissed this complaint sua 
sponte for failure to prosecute under Fed. R. Civ. P. 41(b) 
("Rule 41(b)") and, upon defendant's motion, for lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction.  On appeal, the Service defends 
only the Rule 41(b) dismissal, abandoning any claim that 
federal courts lack subject matter jurisdiction over Mr. Gard-
ner's cause of action.

     The District Court understandably sought to sanction Mr. 
Gardner for failing to appear at a motions hearing.  Given 
applicable Supreme Court and D.C. Circuit precedent, howev-
er, the District Court's dismissal in the context of the instant 
case constitutes an abuse of discretion.  Mr. Gardner's nonap-
pearance, while arguably irresponsible, did not justify a Rule 
41(b) dismissal.  In addition, the District Court erroneously 
found that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the 
complaint.  Accordingly, we reverse and remand for further 
proceedings on the merits.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     Mr. Gardner formerly worked as an attorney in the Office 
of Chief Counsel to the Service at the Treasury Department.  
He was terminated for his alleged failure to comply with 
federal and state tax laws.  Mr. Gardner filed three com-
plaints before the District Court, all related to his compliance 
with federal and state tax laws;  all were dismissed by the 
District Court.  One of the complaints was a tax refund 
action, the dismissal of which this court summarily affirmed 

on October 8, 1999.  The second complaint, appealed along 
with the instant case, seeks damages from a variety of 
defendants for allegedly unlawful disclosures of Mr. Gard-
ner's private tax information.  The instant case involves Mr. 
Gardner's pro se complaint, filed December 23, 1997, claiming 
that the Service unlawfully levied Mr. Gardner's bank account 
for an alleged 1990 tax deficiency of almost $4,000 without 
sending him a notice of deficiency and an opportunity to 
challenge the assessment in the United States Tax Court.  
Mr. Gardner, seeking to enjoin the Service from levying his 
property, bases his complaint on 26 U.S.C. s 6213(a) (Supp. 
IV 1998).  Actions based on s 6213(a) to enjoin the Service's 
assessment of a tax deficiency before the Service mails a 
notice of deficiency to the taxpayer are exempt from the 
Anti-Injunction Act of Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 
s 7421(a) (Supp. IV 1998).

     On February 18, 1998, the Service filed a motion to dismiss 
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 12(b)(1) ("Rule 12(b)(1)"), arguing that Mr. Gardner must 
meet traditional equitable requirements (i.e., demonstrate 
irreparable injury and the lack of an adequate remedy at law) 
as a prerequisite to obtaining injunctive relief under 
s 6213(a).  On the day the Service filed its motion, Mr. 
Gardner filed an amended complaint affirmatively pleading 
grounds for equitable relief.  The District Court struck the 
amended complaint from the record, because Mr. Gardner 
had not sought leave to file.

     After delays that no one attributes to Mr. Gardner, the 
District Court scheduled a hearing on January 27, 1999, to 
consider the motion to dismiss, along with motions to dismiss 
filed in Mr. Gardner's other two cases.  On January 21, Mr. 
Gardner moved to continue the motions hearing, contending 
that a continuance was necessary because he had the flu and 
he had suffered burns during a fire in his home.  The District 
Court, after a teleconference held on January 22, denied Mr. 
Gardner's motion.  The District Court indicated that it would 
accommodate Mr. Gardner's physical condition during the 
hearing.  Mr. Gardner failed to appear in court on January 27 
and he telephoned the court later that evening to state that 
he had slept through the hearing.

     On January 28, Mr. Gardner filed a motion to reschedule 
the hearing;  the motion also offered an explanation for his 
absence from the January 27 hearing.  He included a doctor's 
note stating that, on January 21, his physician treated him for 
syncope and bronchitis, prescribed antibiotics, and instructed 
Mr. Gardner to get bed rest.  He also made several claims to 
the effect that his illness, the fire in his home, and his intense 
preparation for the motions hearing had combined to deprive 
him of necessary sleep and stamina.  According to plaintiff, 
he was so disoriented that, until he heard the evening news 
on January 27, he was under the impression that it was 
January 26.

     On January 29, the District Court denied Mr. Gardner's 
motion to reschedule the hearing.  The court also granted 
defendant's motion to dismiss on two grounds.  First, the 
District Court dismissed the complaint under Rule 41(b) for 
failure to prosecute the complaint.  See Gardner v. United 
States, Civ. Act. No. 97-3075, Mem. Op. & Order at 2 (D.D.C. 
Jan. 29, 1999).  The court noted that it previously had denied 
Mr. Gardner's motion for continuance and that Mr. Gardner 
had stated that he would appear on January 27.  See id. at 1-
2.  The court also declared that it had not intended to hear 
argument on January 27, because it already had decided to 
issue orally its ruling dismissing Mr. Gardner's complaint for 
lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  See id. at 2.  The District 
Court found that it lacked jurisdiction because Mr. Gardner 
had failed to demonstrate irreparable injury and a lack of an 
adequate remedy at law.  See id. at 4.  The court dismissed 
as moot Mr. Gardner's motion for reconsideration of the 
order striking his first amended complaint from the record.

     Mr. Gardner moved for reconsideration, further detailing 
the events leading up to his absence from the hearing.  He 
stated that on January 12, 1999, he began taking Nyquil and 
Chlortrimeton, an antihistamine, and that he was without 
heat for one day in January because his house lost electricity 
during an ice storm, exacerbating his illness.  Mr. Gardner 
also revealed that, on January 18, a fire had broken out in his 
children's room and he had sustained third-degree burns to 
his hands while dragging a burning mattress from the house.  

The court denied Mr. Gardner's motion for reconsideration.  
This appeal followed.

                          II. DISCUSSION

A.   Rule 41(b) Dismissal

     Under Rule 41(b), a court may dismiss an action "[f]or 
failure of the plaintiff to prosecute or to comply with ... any 
order of court."  In the instant case, the District Court 
dismissed the complaint because Mr. Gardner failed to attend 
the January 27, 1999, motions hearing.  We review for abuse 
of discretion.  See Bristol Petroleum Corp. v. Harris, 901 
F.2d 165, 167 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  While this is a deferential 
standard, we have made it clear that, "under certain circum-
stances, dismissal may be an unduly severe sanction for a 
single episode of misconduct."  Id.  A District Court may 
dismiss under Rule 41(b) "only after less dire alternatives 
have been explored without success."  Trakas v. Quality 
Brands, Inc., 759 F.2d 185, 187 (D.C. Cir. 1985).

     The Supreme Court established the framework for review-
ing a sua sponte dismissal for failure to prosecute in Links v. 
Wabash Railroad Co., 370 U.S. 626 (1962).  In Links, plain-
tiff's counsel missed a pretrial conference but did not inform 
the court of his impending nonattendance until the day of the 
conference.  See id. at 627-28.  The District Court, after 
reviewing the history of the case (including plaintiff's re-
peated untimely responses to defendant's interrogatories), 
found that plaintiff's counsel did not provide a reasonable 
explanation for his nonappearance and dismissed the com-
plaint for failure to prosecute.  See id. at 628-29.

     The Court affirmed the dismissal, failing to find an abuse of 
discretion because:  (1) the District Court relied only in part 
on counsel's nonappearance;  (2) the excuse offered by counsel 
was inadequate;  and (3) "it could reasonably be inferred from 
his absence, as well as from the drawn-out history of the 
litigation, that petitioner had been deliberately proceeding in 
dilatory fashion."  Id. at 633 (footnote and citation omitted).  
The Court did not reach "whether unexplained absence from 

a pretrial conference would alone justify a dismissal with 
prejudice if the record showed no other evidence of dilatori-
ness on the part of the plaintiff."  Id. at 634 (first emphasis 
added).

     As we previously have noted, it is important to recall that 
the "lawyer's default [in Links] ... was merely the culmina-
tion of a protracted course of dilatory tactics and other 
improper behavior in litigation that had dragged on for six 
years."  Camps v. C & P Tel. Co., 692 F.2d 120, 122 (D.C. Cir. 
1982) (footnote omitted).  In contrast, this court has held 
"that dismissal is rarely if ever appropriate when there is but 
a single instance of attorney-misconduct," as in the instant 
case.  Id.  This is because the sua sponte dismissal of a 
lawsuit on the merits is " 'a drastic step, normally to be taken 
only after unfruitful resort to lesser sanctions.' "  Id. at 123 
(quoting Jackson v. Washington Monthly Co., 569 F.2d 119, 
123 (D.C. Cir. 1978));  see also Bristol Petroleum Corp., 901 
F.2d at 167 ("[D]ismissal is in order only when lesser sanc-
tions would not serve the interests of justice.").

     There are three basic justifications for dismissal because of 
attorney misconduct:  (1) prejudice to the other party;  (2) 
failure of alternative sanctions to mitigate the severe burden 
that the misconduct has placed on the judicial system;  and (3) 
deterrence of future misconduct.  See Shea v. Donohoe 
Constr. Co., 795 F.2d 1071, 1074 (D.C. Cir. 1986).  These 
justifications are not easily met.  Prejudice, for instance, 
must be "so severe[ ] as to make it unfair to require the other 
party to proceed with the case."  Id.  Similarly, a malfeasant 
party places a severe burden on the judicial system if "the 
court [is required] to expend considerable judicial resources 
in the future in addition to those it has already wasted, 
thereby inconveniencing many other innocent litigants in the 
presentation of their cases."  Id. at 1075-76.  The final 
rationale, deterrence, justifies dismissals when there is some 
indication that the client or attorney consciously fails to 
comply with a court order cognizant of the drastic ramifica-
tions.  See id. at 1078.

     Defendants have alleged no prejudice from Mr. Gardner's 
failure to appear at the January 27 conference.  And given 
the District Court's observation that it would not hear argu-
ment at the hearing and its intention to resolve the case on 
jurisdictional grounds despite Mr. Gardner's failure to ap-
pear, his nonappearance cannot be said to have interfered 
with the orderly administration of the trial court's business.  
Cf. id. at 1076-77 (concluding that "repeated failure to attend 
status conferences" in that case did not constitute prejudice 
to the judicial system).  Of the enumerated justifications for 
sua sponte dismissal, then, only the last, deterrence, has any 
application to the instant case.

     Mr. Gardner's situation, however, is not one to which the 
deterrence rationale speaks with great eloquence.  There are 
three reasons for this:  first, this was Mr. Gardner's only 
failure to comply with an order of the District Court;  second, 
there is no evidence that Mr. Gardner acted in bad faith by 
failing to appear at the hearing;  and third, the trial court 
provided no warning to Mr. Gardner of the consequences of 
nonappearance.  We also note that there is nothing in the 
record to indicate that the District Court considered alterna-
tive sanctions for Mr. Gardner's misbehavior.

     The District Court did not identify any prior instance of 
misconduct on Mr. Gardner's part.  Indeed, the court ob-
served that Mr. Gardner's absence was "atypical."  That Mr. 
Gardner had never before failed to comply with the District 
Court's orders argues in favor of reversal.  See Trakas, 759 
F.2d at 188.  In addition, as in Trakas, there is no evidence in 
the record of "bad faith, deliberate misconduct, or tactical 
delay."  Id.  In fact, Mr. Gardner provided a supportable 
explanation for why he failed to attend the hearing.  Finally, 
the trial court did not warn Mr. Gardner that the case would 
be dismissed if he failed to appear.  "Absent such advance 
warning [of the consequences], dismissal to drive a lesson 
home, we think, is more akin to overkill than judicial discre-
tion."  Camps, 692 F.2d at 125.  In short, dismissal in this 
case was unwarranted.

     We appreciate the difficulty faced by the District Court in 
this case.  Mr. Gardner had filed three complaints before the 
court.  One of the complaints consisted of 44 counts and 
named as defendants the United States, the Service, the State 
of California, and several individual Service employees, 
among others.  Prior to dismissing the complaint in the 
instant case, the District Court had denied Mr. Gardner's 
motion for a continuance, and had been assured that Mr. 
Gardner would attend the January 27 hearing.  In this cir-
cumstance, we cannot doubt that Mr. Gardner's failure to 
appear was an annoying occurrence.  Nonetheless, given that 
this was Mr. Gardner's only "failure ... to prosecute or to 
comply with ... any order of court," Fed. R. Civ. P. 41(b), we 
find that the District Court abused its discretion in dismissing 
his case.  Here we do not have a case of an unexplained 
absence from the motions hearing, or any evidence that Mr. 
Gardner deliberately sought to delay adjudication of the 
merits of his complaints.  Moreover, the record does not 
show that the District Court considered the availability of a 
lesser sanction.  While the District Court's decision in the 
instant case may not " 'comprehend[ ] a pointless exaction of 
retribution,' " Camps, 692 F.2d at 123 (quoting Jackson, 569 
F.2d at 123), it does cross the line to abuse of discretion.  See, 
e.g., Berry v. District of Columbia, 833 F.2d 1031, 1037 (D.C. 
Cir. 1987) (reversing dismissal where attorney failed to file a 
pretrial brief by specified date, failed to attend a status 
conference, and failed to file a pleading specifically requested 
by the court);  Tolbert v. Leighton, 623 F.2d 585, 587 (9th Cir. 
1980) (finding abuse of discretion where the only evidence of 
dilatoriness was attorney's failure to attend a pretrial confer-
ence, the court had not warned that nonappearance would 
result in a dismissal, and the case was still "young").

     We emphasize that we do not call into question the District 
Court's denial of both Mr. Gardner's motion for a continuance 
and his motion to reschedule the hearing, because those 
decisions are not before us.  Nor does our disposition of this 
case revive Mr. Gardner's tax refund complaint, the dismissal 
of which this court summarily affirmed on October 8, 1999.  
We hold only that, given the particular facts of this case, the 

District Court abused its discretion in dismissing Mr. Gard-
ner's complaint for failure to prosecute.

B.   Subject Matter Jurisdiction

     The District Court also dismissed Mr. Gardner's complaint 
under Rule 12(b)(1), holding that Mr. Gardner was required 
to plead equitable grounds for relief in order to obtain an 
injunction under 26 U.S.C. s 6213(a).  Before this court, the 
Government does not defend the District Court's Rule 
12(b)(1) dismissal.  Accordingly, there is no longer any dis-
pute between the parties as to whether a federal court may 
entertain jurisdiction over Mr. Gardner's complaint.  This 
does not moot the issue, however.  We are a court of limited 
jurisdiction and must be satisfied through our own inquiry of 
our power to hear this dispute.  See Mansfield, Coldwater & 
Lake Michigan Ry. v. Swan, 111 U.S. 379, 382 (1884).  In 
contrast to the issue of personal jurisdiction, parties may not 
waive or concede a federal court's subject matter jurisdiction.  
See Jackson v. Ashton, 33 U.S. (8 Peters) 148, 148-49 (1834) 
(reversing for lack of subject matter jurisdiction even though 
appellee had "no objection to the court's proceeding in the 
case.").

     Mr. Gardner seeks an injunction preventing the Service 
from levying his bank account to assess an alleged deficiency 
in his 1990 federal tax return.  The Anti-Injunction Act, a 
provision of the Internal Revenue Code, states that, "[e]xcept 
as provided in section[ ] ... 6213(a), ... no suit for the 
purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax 
shall be maintained in any court by any person, whether or 
not such person is the person against whom such tax was 
assessed."  26 U.S.C. s 7421(a).  The District Court must 
dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction any suit that 
does not fall within one of the exceptions to the Anti-
Injunction Act.  Mr. Gardner seeks to bring his suit within 
one of s 7421(a)'s exceptions, arguing that the Service violat-
ed s 6213(a) by levying his bank account without first mailing 
him a notice of deficiency.  For the purposes of deciding 
whether we have jurisdiction over Mr. Gardner's complaint, 

we will accept as true his allegation that the notice of 
deficiency was never mailed to him.

     Section 6213(a) establishes the Service's authority and re-
sponsibility to send a notice of deficiency to a taxpayer prior 
to initiating proceedings to assess the deficiency.  With a 
notice of deficiency in hand, a taxpayer may file suit in Tax 
Court challenging the assessment, and the Service is prohibit-
ed from enforcing the assessment until the Tax Court's 
decision regarding the petition for review becomes final.  See 
id. s 6213(a).  If the taxpayer does not file suit in Tax Court 
in the time allotted after receipt of the notice of deficiency, 
the Service may, among other things, impose a levy upon the 
taxpayer's property, after notice, to recover unpaid taxes.  
See id. s 6331(a) (1994).

     There is some dispute among the circuits whether a taxpay-
er must allege traditional grounds for equitable relief to 
establish a prima facie claim under s 6213(a) (i.e., irrepara-
ble harm and lack of an adequate remedy at law).  The 
District Court, following the Ninth Circuit, dismissed the 
complaint, because Mr. Gardner failed to allege any equitable 
grounds for relief.  See Mem. Op. & Order at 4 (citing Elias 
v. Connett, 908 F.2d 521, 523 (9th Cir. 1990)).  The Ninth 
Circuit is in the lead among those circuits that imply this 
requirement in s 6213(a) claims, with the circuit's reasoning 
set out in Cool Fuel, Inc. v. Connett, 685 F.2d 309, 313 (9th 
Cir. 1982).

     In Cool Fuel, the District Court had granted summary 
judgment for the Service where a taxpayer alleging a viola-
tion of s 6213(a) had not met the requirements for equitable 
relief.  The Ninth Circuit affirmed, finding both a presump-
tion that equitable grounds be met for a court to issue an 
injunction and "that section 6213 does not abolish equitable 
tenets to support injunctive relief."  Id. (relying on Wein-
berger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U.S. 305 (1982)).  The court 
emphasized s 6213(a)'s permissive language.  See Cool Fuel, 
685 F.2d at 313 (noting that s 6213(a) provides that an 
assessment based on a notice of deficiency "may be enjoined" 
by a court).  Because a taxpayer retains the right to institute 

a refund suit after payment of taxes, and the taxpayer in Cool 
Fuel could afford to pay the disputed tax prior to an adjudica-
tion of the alleged deficiencies, the court found that an 
equitable remedy was not available.  The Third and Eleventh 
Circuits have followed the Ninth Circuit's rule.  See Flynn v. 
Eggers, 786 F.2d 586, 591 (3rd Cir. 1986);  Lovell v. United 
States, 795 F.2d 976, 977 (11th Cir. 1986).

     The Tenth Circuit, in Guthrie v. Sawyer, 970 F.2d 733, 736-
37 (10th Cir. 1992), reached a different result.  Having re-
viewed the circuits' competing opinions, we think that the 
Tenth Circuit clearly has the best of the argument.  Accord-
ingly, we hold, in accord with Guthrie, that

     [t]he purpose of the statutory exception [in s 6213(a)] is 
     to preserve the taxpayer's right to litigate his tax liability 
     in Tax Court before paying the tax.  If the availability of 
     a refund suit after payment prohibits the taxpayer from 
     obtaining an injunction to protect his right to litigate 
     first, that right is virtually meaningless.  Under this 
     approach, this right would be available only upon a 
     showing that the taxpayer could not pay the tax.  We 
     have difficulty believing that Congress intended to give 
     with one hand and take back with the other.
     
970 F.2d at 736.

     The result that we reach is not contrary to the principles 
announced in Romero-Barcelo.  In that case, the Supreme 
Court merely observed that courts should "not lightly assume 
that Congress has intended to depart from established [equi-
table] principles."  456 U.S. at 313.  In Romero-Barcelo, 
however, the Court expressly distinguished Tennessee Valley 
Authority v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978), in which the Court 
held that "Congress had foreclosed the exercise of the usual 
discretion possessed by a court of equity" when it passed the 
Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. ss 1531-1544.  Romero-
Barcelo, 456 U.S. at 313 (citing Tennessee Valley Authority, 
437 U.S. at 173).  According to the Romero-Barcelo Court, 
the difference was that in Hill, the statute providing the basis 
for the challenge "contain[ed] a flat ban" on the challenged 
activity.  456 U.S. at 314.  Similarly, here s 6213(a) flatly 

prohibits the activity challenged by Mr. Gardner.  See 26 
U.S.C. s 6213(a) (providing that the Service shall begin "no 
levy or proceeding" to collect on a notice of deficiency until a 
period after the notice has been mailed to the taxpayer).  
This statutory scheme, in combination with the Guthrie 
Court's reasoning, convinces us that Congress did not intend 
that litigants need establish equitable grounds for injunctive 
relief under s 6213(a).

     We decline to follow Cool Fuel for a third reason.  The 
Cool Fuel court cited Bob Jones University v. Simon, 416 
U.S. 725, 742 n.16 (1974), to support its finding that "congres-
sional history [of s 6213(a)] is barren of indicated intent to 
abandon historical principles of equity jurisprudence."  685 
F.2d at 313.  Bob Jones University involved an interpretation 
of the Anti-Injunction Act, however, not s 6213(a).  In fact, 
the Court explicitly noted that "[n]one of the exceptions in 
s 7421(a) is relevant to this case."  Bob Jones University, 
416 U.S. at 732 n.6.  Therefore, it is of no moment that the 
Court in Bob Jones University held that traditional equitable 
principles were applicable to an action under the Anti- 
Injunction Act that did not fall into any of the enumerated 
exceptions.  Of greater note, we think, is the Supreme 
Court's failure to discuss traditional grounds for equity juris-
diction when holding that taxpayers to whom the Service had 
not mailed notices of deficiency are entitled to bring suit 
under s 6213(a).  See Laing v. United States, 423 U.S. 161, 
183-85 & 184 n.27 (1976).

                         III. CONCLUSION

     For the reasons articulated herein, we reverse the District 
Court's decision and remand for proceedings on the merits.

                                       