                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 4, 2001      Decided July 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-5172

                        Lisa K. Russell, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

       Anthony J. Principi, Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 
                             Appellee
                                 

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00749)

     Mark G. Chalpin argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     David J. Ball, Jr., Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney at the time the brief was filed, and R. 
Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Williams, Ginsburg and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  The principal issue in this appeal is 
whether Lisa K. Russell presented a prima facie case of 
reverse discrimination by alleging an adverse employment 
action under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 
U.S.C. s 2000e et seq.  Russell alleged that the Department 
of Veterans Affairs engaged in reverse discrimination in 
violation of Title VII by awarding her a lower performance 
rating and a smaller cash bonus than her similarly-situated 
coworker.  In Brown v. Brody, 199 F.3d 446, 452 (D.C. Cir. 
1999), the court rejected the argument that "poor perfor-
mance evaluations are necessarily adverse actions."  Relying 
on Brown, the district court granted the Department's motion 
for summary judgment on the ground that Russell had not 
shown that she suffered an adverse employment action.  We 
hold that the loss of a bonus can constitute an adverse 
employment action under Title VII and, therefore, reverse 
the grant of summary judgment.  As to Russell's challenges 
to certain orders as abuses of discretion, we affirm in part 
and remand in part.  We deny Russell's belated request to 
plead a new cause of action for bad faith litigation abuse.

                                I.

     Lisa K. Russell, a GS 13 procurement analyst, sued the 
Department of Veterans Affairs for reverse discrimination 
after her work performance for the period 1992-93 was rated 
"excellent" and she received a bonus of $807, while Sherry 
Patton, her coworker, was rated "outstanding" and received a 
bonus of $1,355.  Russell is Caucasian;  Patton is African 
American.  "Outstanding" was the highest of five possible 
ratings;  "excellent" was the second highest rating.  The size 
of the bonus was tied to the rating.  Russell alleged that her 
work performance and qualifications were superior to those of 
Patton, and that her supervisors had engaged in a pattern of 
preferential treatment of Patton based on her race.  Russell 
further alleged that her "excellent" rating was adverse be-
cause it damaged her chances for promotion and provided her 

with less protection "against being laid off during a govern-
ment 'reduction in force,' or RIF, pursuant to a formula 
outlined by the Office of Personnel Management."  The par-
ties filed cross motions for summary judgment, and the 
district court granted summary judgment for the Department 
on the ground that Russell had not made out a prima facie 
case of disparate treatment discrimination under Title VII, as 
stated in Brown.  The district court ruled that neither Rus-
sell's performance rating nor her bonus, even if lower than 
she allegedly deserved, could be considered adverse actions.  
As to her promotion claim, the district court noted that 
Russell had not offered any evidence that she was denied a 
promotion opportunity or that the performance rating would 
have affected her current grade and step position.  The 
district court also rejected Russell's RIF argument as moot 
as of the time of its ruling on summary judgment, because 
only Russell's last three performance evaluations could affect 
how she would fare during a RIF.

                               II.

     Applying the familiar test of McDonnell Douglas v. Green, 
411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973), the court in Brown stated that to 
establish a prima facie case for disparate treatment discrimi-
nation "[i]n federal as in private employment cases ... the 
plaintiff must establish that (1) she is a member of a protect-
ed class;  (2) she suffered an adverse employment action;  and 
(3) the unfavorable action gives rise to an inference of dis-
crimination."  Brown, 199 F.3d at 452;  see also McDonnell 
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802.  A plaintiff who alleges reverse 
discrimination must, in addition, demonstrate "additional 
'background circumstances [that] support the suspicion that 
the defendant is that unusual employer who discriminates 
against the majority.' "  Harding v. Gray, 9 F.3d 150, 153 
(D.C. Cir. 1993) (quoting Parker v. Baltimore & Ohio R.R., 
652 F.2d 1012, 1017 (D.C. Cir. 1981)).  In Brown, the court 
observed that a "thick body of precedent ... refutes the 
notion that formal criticism or poor performance evaluations 
are necessarily adverse actions."  Brown, 199 F.3d at 458.  
The court held that a " 'fully satisfactory' performance rating 

[was not] an adverse employment action ... [because al-
though it] may have been lower than normal, it was not 
adverse in an absolute sense."  Id.  Russell contends that the 
district court erred in granting summary judgment to the 
Department both because Brown did not hold that perfor-
mance evaluations can never constitute adverse actions and 
because her case is distinguishable as she consequently re-
ceived a lower bonus than her similarly situated coworker and 
was subjected to a greater risk of being RIFed than her 
coworker.  The Department responds that Russell's " 'excel-
lent' rating cannot be characterized as adverse because her 
rating was favorable, not negative or even neutral as in 
Brown." Our review of the grant of summary judgment is de 
novo.  See id.

     The Supreme Court has described the concept of a "tangi-
ble employment action" as "a significant change in employ-
ment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote, reas-
signment with significantly different responsibilities, or a 
decision causing a significant change in benefits."  Burling-
ton Indus., Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 761 (1998).  Thus, 
"[w]hile adverse employment actions extend beyond readily 
quantifiable losses, not everything that makes an employee 
unhappy is an actionable adverse action.  Minor and even 
trivial employment actions that 'an irritable, chip-on-the-
shoulder employee did not like would otherwise form the 
basis of a discrimination suit.' "  Smart v. Ball State Univ., 89 
F.3d 437, 441 (7th Cir. 1996) (quoting Williams v. Bristol-
Myers Squibb Co., 85 F.3d 270, 274 (7th Cir. 1996)).  We take 
no issue with the "objectively tangible harm" requirement, 
which guards against both "judicial micromanagement of 
business practices," Mungin v. Katten, Muchin & Zavis, 116 
F.3d 1549, 1556 (D.C. Cir. 1997), and frivolous suits over 
insignificant slights.  Performance evaluations are likely to be 
"[i]nterlocutory or mediate decisions having no immediate 
effect upon employment."  Id. at 1555.  The result of an 
evaluation is often speculative, making it difficult to remedy.  
For example, a single poor evaluation may drastically limit an 
employee's chances for advancement, or it may be outweighed 
by later evaluations and be of no real consequence.  This 

reasoning is reflected in Brown where the court suggested 
that performance evaluations should not be considered ad-
verse actions if they did not "affect[ ] the [employee's] grade 
or salary," and analogized performance evaluations to lateral 
transfers, which are not actionable injuries unless they "af-
fect[ ] the terms, conditions, or privileges of [an employee's] 
employment or her future employment opportunities such 
that a reasonable trier of fact could conclude that the plaintiff 
has suffered objectively tangible harm."  Brown, 199 F.3d at 
457.  In contrast, a bonus is a tangible, quantifiable award, 
more analogous to one's salary or to a benefit of one's 
employment than to a performance evaluation. It has a more 
direct, measurable, and immediate effect.  Furthermore, the 
loss of a bonus that is worth hundreds of dollars is not a petty 
detriment.

     The Department nonetheless suggests that Brown controls 
because Russell's "excellent" rating and $807 bonus, although 
both lower than Russell believed she deserved, were "not 
adverse in an absolute sense."  Id. at 458.  Because we do 
not equate performance evaluations and monetary bonuses, 
the Department's reasoning fails.  Furthermore, the logic of 
an action that is "adverse in an absolute sense" fits poorly 
with employment decisions involving bonuses.  The denial of 
a bonus, or the award of a lesser bonus for discriminatory 
reasons, could never be considered "adverse in an absolute 
sense."  A performance evaluation can drop below an aver-
age, but a bonus cannot be negative.  The perverse logical 
conclusion of the Department's reasoning is that an employer 
could award $500 bonuses to all white employees and $1 
bonuses to all similarly situated black employees without 
running afoul of Brown, because under such a discriminatory 
scheme no employee would be worse off in an absolute sense.  
We decline to extend Brown in this manner.  Rather, we view 
Brown's language about absolute deprivations as simply stat-
ing that in most circumstances performance evaluations alone 
at the satisfactory level or above should not be considered 
adverse employment actions.

     The Department also urges us to rely on Rabinovitz v. 
Pena, 89 F.3d 482 (7th Cir. 1996), a case cited with approval 

in Brown.  In Rabinovitz, the plaintiff claimed that he was 
given a "fully successful" rather than an "exceptional" perfor-
mance appraisal, which "prevented him from receiving a $600 
bonus."  Id. at 488.  The Seventh Circuit held that "the loss 
of a bonus is not an adverse employment action in a case such 
as this where the employee is not automatically entitled to the 
bonus."  Id. at 488-89.  The Department maintains in its 
brief that Russell "actually received more favorable treat-
ment" than Rabinovitz because "she received a higher 'excel-
lent' rating" and an award that was "only $548 less than that 
received by her co-worker with the highest possible rating."

     In Brown, the court had no occasion to address whether a 
performance rating accompanied by a bonus differential was 
actionable.  Brown can properly be understood, therefore, as 
citing Rabinovitz only to "refute[ ] the notion that formal 
criticism or poor performance evaluations are necessarily 
adverse actions."  Brown, 199 F.3d at 458.  As for the precise 
holding of Rabinovitz, the phrase "not automatically entitled 
to the bonus" is not entirely clear but appears to mean that 
the amount of the bonus Rabinovitz could have received was 
entirely discretionary.  By contrast, the Department con-
ceded at oral argument that the size of Russell's bonus was 
directly tied to her performance rating;  a higher rating would 
have automatically meant a larger bonus.  Regardless of the 
factual differences between the two cases, however, we reject 
the notion that a denial of a monetary bonus is not a 
cognizable employment action under Title VII.

     For these reasons, we hold that summary judgment was 
inappropriate because Russell presented a prima facie case of 
reverse discrimination under Title VII based on an adverse 
employment action.  To the extent, however, that Russell 
relies on her temporary exposure to a higher risk of RIF, we 
hold that such an unrealized risk of a future adverse action, 
even if formalized, is too ephemeral to constitute an adverse 
employment action;  as the district court noted, "while the 
disputed rating might have affected [Russell's] chances of 
being '[RIF]ed' at an earlier date, it cannot affect her chances 
now."

                               III.

     Russell also challenges a series of orders by the district 
court for which our review is for abuse of discretion.  See 
Shepherd v. Am. Broad. Cos., 62 F.3d 1469, 1475 (D.C. Cir. 
1995) (sanctions);  Carey Canada, Inc. v. Columbia Cas. Co., 
940 F.2d 1548, 1559 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (discovery).  We find 
either no abuse of discretion or no need to make such a 
finding inasmuch as the discovery issues will need to be 
addressed on remand, in light of our reversal of the grant of 
summary judgment.  Much of Russell's brief and the record 
she supplied on appeal address her claims that the Depart-
ment mishandled and destroyed evidence that would show 
that her coworker was not entitled to the outstanding perfor-
mance rating and larger bonus, and that she was entitled to 
attorneys fees.  We are unable to determine on the basis of 
this record whether some of the district court's rulings deny-
ing Russell's motion for sanctions and certain discovery re-
quests were influenced by its interpretation of Brown.  Fur-
thermore, some of the district court's rulings appear to rely 
on its earlier dismissal of Russell's Bivens claims;  the rele-
vance of that dismissal is unexplained.

     Insofar as Russell contends that the district court erred in 
not awarding costs and attorneys fees after directing the 
Department not to destroy records, she has misconstrued the 
district court's ruling.  The district court's statements pro-
vide no basis to conclude that the district court made the 
necessary predicate finding of bad faith.  The district court 
judge stated:  "Although I don't think it is necessary, I will 
direct the Government not to destroy any documents that are 
relevant to this case."  Russell's counsel indicated that he was 
satisfied with this ruling.  On appeal, Ms. Russell interprets 
the judge's remark as a sanction against the Department 
under the district court's inherent powers.  Hardly.  By 
saying "I don't think it is necessary," the judge was indicating 
that he found little or no merit to the motion and that he did 
not believe that the Department was destroying evidence.  
The district court did not find that the Department had acted 
in bad faith in destroying records, and absent such a finding, 
there was no basis for the award of monetary sanctions.  See 

Shepherd, 62 F.3d at 1475;  United States v. Wallace, 964 
F.2d 1214, 1219 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  Thus, Russell provides no 
ground on which the court could conclude that the district 
court abused its discretion in denying costs and attorneys 
fees.

     Russell's contention that the district court abused its dis-
cretion in denying her motion for sanctions for bad faith 
litigation abuses without an evidentiary hearing fares no 
better.  She presents no basis for concluding that the district 
court abused its discretion in proceedings without such a 
hearing.  See LaPrade v. Kidder Peabody & Co., Inc., 146 
F.3d 899, 904 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  Indeed, she argued in the 
district court that no hearing was needed because the evi-
dence was clear.  To the extent that Russell also contends 
that the district court erred in failing to impose sanctions, we 
remand this issue.  The district court gave no reasons in its 
order denying the motion for sanctions, and thus this court 
cannot determine how the district court resolved the parties' 
disputed claims of material fact.  See Lyles v. United States, 
759 F.2d 941, 942 (D.C. Cir. 1985).

     Regarding discovery, the district court will need to reas-
sess, in light of our reversal of the grant of summary judg-
ment, the relevance of Russell's motion to compel discovery 
responses to five interrogatories, which pertained to the 
handling of a letter that she sent concerning the safeguarding 
of records, the disposition of telephone records, alleged docu-
ment destruction by Department attorneys, Department ac-
tion to preserve telephone records, and Department policies 
and procedures to preserve records.  To the extent relevant 
to Russell's claim of disparate treatment, the discovery re-
quests may be meritorious.  To the extent they relate to her 
motion for sanctions for litigation abuse that the district court 
properly denies, there may be no basis for granting the 
requests.  We leave these matters to the district court on 
remand, to proceed as is appropriate, recognizing that the 
district court may ultimately conclude that its prior discovery 
rulings should stand.

     Finally, Russell's effort to pursue an independent cause of 
action for bad faith litigation abuse against the Department 
fails.  As Russell acknowledges, to date no circuit court has 
held that a federal cause of action exists.  Because she did 
not raise this issue in the district court and does not show on 
appeal that "a manifest injustice might otherwise result," 
Herbert v. National Academy of Sciences, 974 F.2d 192, 196 
(D.C. Cir. 1992), we decline to decide now whether such a 
federal cause of action exists.

     Accordingly, we reverse the grant of summary judgment 
for failure to present a prima facie case under Title VII, and 
remand the case for further proceedings;  we deny the re-
quest to plead a new cause of action.

          