                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 30, 2001   Decided February 26, 2002 

                           No. 00-1390

            National Association of Letter Carriers, 
                      AFL-CIO, Branch 3126, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Thomas N. Ciantra argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Keith E. Secular.

     James M. Oleske, Jr., Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 

Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Sharon I. Block, 
Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  Because union stewards prevented 
a non-union postal employee from filing a grievance, the 
National Labor Relations Board required the union not only 
to process the grievance but also to pay for the employee to 
be represented throughout the grievance proceedings by 
counsel of his own choosing.  The union now petitions for 
review insofar as the Board required it to pay legal fees for 
independent representation, and the Board cross-applies for 
enforcement of its order.  We deny the petition for review 
and grant the application for enforcement.

                          I. Background

     Joe Pitlanish, a letter carrier for the post office in Troy, 
Michigan, is not a member of the local union, Branch 3126, an 
affiliate of the National Association of Letter Carriers.  In 
January, 1997 Pitlanish tried to file a grievance about the 
distribution of overtime opportunities, but the Union stewards 
thwarted his efforts.  The principal obstacle was steward 
Greg Swindall, who referred to Pitlanish as "Scablanish" and 
who refused to process the grievance.

     The General Counsel issued a complaint alleging the Union 
had violated s 8(b)(1)(A) of the National Labor Relations Act.  
After a hearing, an Administrative Law Judge agreed and 
ordered the Union to process Pitlanish's grievance.  Upon 
review the Board upheld the ALJ but modified the recom-
mended remedy by requiring the Union to "bear the reason-
able costs of an attorney of Pitlanish's choosing to represent 
him at any grievance proceedings, including arbitration, that 
may take place."  Nat'l Ass'n of Letter Carriers, 330 
N.L.R.B. No. 85, at 2 n.3.  The Union sought and the Board 
denied reconsideration of that part of its decision.

                           II. Analysis

     The National Labor Relations Act expansively authorizes 
the Board to remedy unfair labor practices by "tak[ing] such 
affirmative action ... as will effectuate the policies of [the 
Act]."  29 U.S.C. s 160(c).  Hence, the Board's remedial 
discretion is "subject only to limited judicial review."  Sure-
Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883, 898-99 (1984).  This court 
"will not disturb a remedy ordered by the Board unless it can 
be shown that the order is a patent attempt to achieve ends 
other than those which can fairly be said to effectuate the 
policies of the Act."  Petrochem Insulation, Inc. v. NLRB, 
240 F.3d 26, 34-35 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

     For nearly thirty years the Board has required unions to 
pay for independent legal representation of employees who 
were treated unfairly when they tried to file grievances.  See, 
e.g., Teamsters Local 186, 203 N.L.R.B. 799, 805 (1973);  Am. 
Postal Workers Union, 327 N.L.R.B. 759, 770 (1999).  The 
Second and Ninth Circuits have expressly endorsed this 
remedy.  S.F. Web Pressmen and Platemakers' Union No. 4 
v. NLRB, 794 F.2d 420, 423 (9th Cir. 1986) ("[A] union may 
be liable for the expense of outside representation if it has 
failed to process a nonfrivolous grievance fairly");  NLRB v. 
Local 485, 454 F.2d 17, 22 n.9 (2d Cir. 1972).

     The Union accuses the Board of imposing the remedy in 
this case arbitrarily, offering no justification for it and never 
"explain[ing] why such a remedy is appropriate in some cases 
but not in others."  A standard remedy, however, does not 
have to be explained anew in every case;  it is the norm.  
Only a departure from the norm requires explanation.  See 
Henry J. Kaiser Co., 259 N.L.R.B. 1, 3 n.5 (1981) (explaining 
that independent representation was unnecessary because 
liability for backpay gave union incentive to "process the 
grievance in good faith and with due diligence").

     According to the Union, the Ninth Circuit has required the 
Board to "link the attorney's fee remedy to the circumstances 
of the particular case" in which it is used.  Yes and no.  In 
NLRB v. Local Union 396, 509 F.2d 1075, 1079 (9th Cir. 
1975), the court ruled that although an "order compelling the 

Union to pay counsel fees was within the [Board's] zone of 
discretion," the Board needed to explain why, in the circum-
stances there presented, it ordered the union to pay "attor-
ney's fees as opposed to fees for a paraprofessional."  Id.  
The issue was whether a lawyer was needed, not whether the 
union should pay if the need was there.  In a later case where 
the need for a lawyer was not in doubt, the court treated the 
order requiring the union to pay as routine.  S.F. Web 
Pressmen, 794 F.2d at 423.

     The Union next maintains that it could have provided 
Pitlanish with unbiased in-house representation;  but the 
Board surely acted within its discretion in deciding that the 
Union stewards' mistreatment of Pitlanish rendered indepen-
dent counsel the more prudent remedial choice.  See id. at 
423 n.5 ("Exclusive representation by the Union is the rule, 
and privately retained counsel the exception.  Given the 
Union's breach of [its duty to process a nonfrivolous griev-
ance], the Board's order is within the exception").  Similarly, 
the Union to the contrary notwithstanding, the Board had the 
discretion not to limit its independent counsel remedy to the 
first two steps of the grievance process.  Although the third 
step involves the national rather than the local union, the 
Board reasonably doubted the NALC would provide Pitlanish 
with vigorous representation in light of its relation to Branch 
3126.

     The Union also argues that the Board here imposed a 
penalty in the guise of a remedy, something clearly beyond its 
authority.  See Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers v. Foust, 442 U.S. 
42, 52 (1979).  Providing for independent representation at 
the Union's expense was not punitive, however;  it merely put 
Pitlanish in the position he would have occupied but for the 
Union's unfair labor practice.  As the Ninth Circuit said of 
this type of situation:

     If the Union had not violated its duty of fair representa-
     tion by its discriminatory refusal to process the griev-
     ances, the issues would have been resolved by litigation 
     or arbitration in which the aggrieved employees would 
     have enjoyed vigorous representation at no added cost to 
     
     themselves.  They cannot be restored to that position 
     unless they are relieved of the expenses they will incur in 
     securing the independent representation to which they 
     are concededly entitled.
     
Local Union 396, 509 F.2d at 1079.

     Finally, the Union argues that bringing outside counsel into 
the processing of a grievance will undermine the Union as the 
exclusive representative of the employees in the bargaining 
unit.  As the Board points out, the Union forfeited this 
argument by failing to raise it when it moved the Board for 
reconsideration.  See 29 U.S.C. s 160(e) ("No objection that 
has not been urged before the Board ... shall be considered 
by the court").  The Union did there characterize the remedy 
as a "wholly unwarranted intrusion on the NALC's right to 
administer the collective bargaining agreement," but that was 
in support of its argument that an independent counsel is 
simply "not necessary ... to ensure the independent and 
adequate representation to which [Pitlanish] is entitled."  The 
Union did not give the Board an opportunity to rule upon the 
institutional argument it would now advance.  In any event, 
the Union's role as the exclusive representative for collective 
bargaining does not inoculate it against liability to make 
whole an individual employee whom it has wronged.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is denied 
and the cross-application for enforcement is granted.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                           