                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 3, 2002   Decided October 22, 2002 

                           No. 99-1255

                       Ethyl Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Environmental Protection Agency and 
             Christine Todd Whitman, Administrator, 
                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                           Respondents

             Association of International Automobile 
                  Manufacturers, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                         00-1515, 01-1464

         On Petitions for Review of Final Action of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

                            ---------

     Kevin L. Fast argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Douglas S. Burdin and Andrew J. Turner.

     Alan D. Greenberg, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the brief was 
John T. Hannon, Attorney, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency.  Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, Chris-
topher S. Vaden and Eric G. Hostetler, Attorneys, U.S. 
Department of Justice, and Mark M. Kataoka, Attorney, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, entered appearances.

     Mitchell H. Bernstein argued the cause for intervenors 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and Association of 
International Automobile Manufacturers, Inc.  With him on 
the brief were Richard A. Penna, Charles R. Sensiba, Julie 
C. Becker and Charles H. Lockwood II.

     Before:  Edwards and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  Title II of the Clean Air 
Act, 42 U.S.C. s 7521 et seq. (1955), sets up a program for 
the regulation of both motor vehicles and their fuels in order 
to reduce harmful emissions.  Section 206 charges the Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency with testing new motor vehicles 
to ensure that each vehicle's emissions will comply with 
federal emissions standards throughout its "useful life."  42 
U.S.C. s 7525(a)(1).  Section 206(d) says that the agency 
"shall by regulation establish methods and procedures for 
making tests under this section."  Id. s 7525(d) (emphasis 
added).

     In a rulemaking pursuant to s 206, the EPA adopted a 
Compliance Assurance Program or "CAP 2000."  64 Fed. 
Reg. 23,906 (1999).  CAP 2000 does not, however, set out 
"methods and procedures for making tests."  Rather, it es-
tablishes a framework for automobile manufacturers to devel-
op their own tests, to be used once the EPA gives approval, 

case-by-case, after private proceedings with each manufactur-
er.

     Petitioner Ethyl manufactures and markets fuel and lubri-
cant additives for use in motor vehicles.  It argues that CAP 
2000 violates the Act because it provides for test procedures 
and methods to be vetted in individual closed proceedings 
rather than in a notice-and-comment rulemaking.  And it 
claims to be injured because the mechanism adopted by the 
EPA deprives it of the opportunity to observe the rulemaking 
process and thus gain information useful in its efforts both to 
develop and improve its products and to key them to the 
certification tests.  For the reasons given below we grant the 
petition.

                             *  *  *

     Before a manufacturer may introduce a new motor vehicle 
into commerce, it must obtain an EPA certificate indicating 
compliance with the requirements of the Act and applicable 
regulations.  It submits an application containing test data 
and other information specified by the EPA, which issues a 
certificate if the manufacturer has shown, among other 
things, that the vehicle's emissions control systems will 
achieve compliance with emissions standards over the vehi-
cle's full useful life.  See 40 CFR s 86.1848-01.

     Critical here is the question of the control systems' possible 
deterioration over time.  Before 1993 EPA had had a durabil-
ity test that called for prototype vehicles to be driven over a 
50,000-mile course known as the Automobile Manufacturers 
Association ("AMA") driving cycle.  58 Fed. Reg. 3994, 3995/1 
(1993).  In 1993 it adopted a "revised durability program" or 
"RDP" that retained that test "as the standard EPA-defined 
procedure."  Id.  But the RDP regulations also permitted 
automobile companies to develop alternative test methods and 
procedures provided that they (a) obtained EPA approval for 
each such test and (b) performed in-use testing to verify the 
accuracy of the emissions deterioration predictions made by 
their tests.  See id. at 3995.  The EPA did not adopt these 

tests through rulemaking but simply approved them on a 
case-by-case basis.

     In May 1999 the EPA replaced RDP with CAP 2000.  
These regulations eliminate the AMA driving cycle as an 
EPA-defined test method.  Instead, the program available as 
an alternative in 1993-99, under which manufacturers are to 
develop their own emissions durability test methods and 
procedures, has become the sole method.  Thus, rather than 
promulgating methods and procedures for durability testing 
itself, the EPA now requires, through CAP 2000, that "[t]he 
manufacturer shall propose" a durability program.  40 C.F.R. 
s 86.1823-01.  Each manufacturer is required to obtain EPA 
approval for its tests, and must verify its results through in-
use testing.

     Manufacturer-proposed tests under CAP 2000 must (a) 
"effectively predict the expected deterioration of candidate in-
use vehicles over their full and intermediate useful life," and 
(b) be "consistent with good engineering judgment." 
40 C.F.R. s 86.1823-01(a).  Within these criteria, the  
manufacturer-developed mileage accumulation procedures are 
to be

     based upon whole-vehicle full-mileage accumulation, 
     whole-vehicle accelerated mileage accumulation (e.g., 
     where 40,000 miles on a severe accumulation cycle is 
     equivalent to 100,000 miles of normal in-use driving), 
     bench aging of individual components or systems, or 
     other approaches approved by the Administrator.
     
40 C.F.R. s 86.1823-01(a)(1)(ii).  The "bench aging" referred 
to is a system whereby components are removed from the 
vehicle and tested for durability separately.  40 C.F.R. 
s 86.1823-01(a)(1)(B).

     In adopting this system of individualized test approval, the 
EPA explicitly found that "rulemaking for each durability 
program is not required."  64 Fed. Reg. at 23,914/3.  It also 
said, in a response to petitions for reconsideration by Ethyl, 
that public participation in the certification process would 
interfere with the process of reviewing manufacturers' sub-
missions "because of the large amount of information claimed 

confidential" and that, because the process was annual, the 
use of notice-and-comment procedures would be "administra-
tively burdensome."  August 23, 2001 Response to Ethyl 
Corporation Petitions Denying Reconsideration of Three EPA 
regulations:  CAP 2000, Heavy Duty Gasoline, and OBD/IM, 
EPA Air Docket A-96-50, No. VI-C-03, 39.

     Ethyl challenges not only CAP 2000 but also regulations 
governing the certification of heavy duty vehicles and en-
gines, 65 Fed. Reg. 59,896 (2000), which incorporate the CAP 
2000 regulations by reference, and EPA's denial of its various 
petitions for reconsideration, 66 Fed. Reg. 45,777 (2001).

                             *  *  *

     The EPA argues that we need not reach the merits be-
cause, it says, Ethyl lacks both Article III and "prudential" 
standing.  We think it has both.

     As is well known, Article III requires a party seeking 
judicial relief to show (1) that it has suffered an "injury in 
fact";  (2) that the injury is caused by or fairly traceable to 
the challenged actions of the defendant;  and (3) that it is 
likely that the injury will be redressed by a favorable deci-
sion.  Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-561 
(1992).

     Ethyl's assertions of injury fall into two categories.  First, 
as we've already mentioned, it says that as a manufacturer of 
additives for motor vehicle fuels it has an interest in under-
standing the test methods and procedures by which the EPA 
certifies new motor vehicles.  CAP 2000's provision for 
closed-door adoption of emission test procedures deprives 
Ethyl of information that might well help it develop and 
improve its products with an eye to conformity to emissions 
needs.

     Second, Ethyl says that CAP 2000 deprives it of informa-
tion that might be useful for securing EPA approval for its 
own fuel additive products under the Act.  It points in 
particular to s 211(f), which prohibits use of any fuel or fuel 
additive that is not "substantially similar" to the fuels used to 

certify vehicles under s 206, unless a waiver is obtained from 
EPA.  See 42 U.S.C. s 7545(f).

     EPA's response to this focuses almost entirely on Ethyl's 
asserted interest in the s 211(f) waiver process, completely 
ignoring its interest in obtaining information about vehicle 
certification for present-day research and development of 
products that will be judged (by both the government and 
consumers) according to their effect on vehicle emissions.  
The Supreme Court has made clear, however, that a denial of 
access to information can work an "injury in fact" for stand-
ing purposes, at least where a statute (on the claimants' 
reading) requires that the information "be publicly disclosed" 
and there "is no reason to doubt their claim that the informa-
tion would help them."  Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 
524 U.S. 11, 21 (1998).  Here, against Ethyl's fairly detailed 
description of how the information that open rulemaking 
proceedings provide would prove useful to it, the EPA offers 
little more than a vague shrug of skepticism.

     Because Article III standing is clear from Ethyl's informa-
tional and market interests in the vehicle-testing program, we 
need not address the interest based on its need to seek 
variances under s 211(f).

     To show "prudential" standing, Ethyl must fall within the 
"zone of interests" protected or regulated by the Act.  See 
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 162 (1997).  The test is not a 
particularly demanding one, Clarke v. Securities Industry 
Association, 479 U.S. 388, 399 (1987), and includes not only 
those challengers expressly mentioned by Congress, but also 
unmentioned potential challengers that Congress would have 
thought useful for the statute's purpose (whose challenges 
thereby support an inference that Congress would have in-
tended eligibility).  See Hazardous Waste Treatment Council 
v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 283 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  It excludes 
parties whose interests are not consistent with the purposes 
of the statute in question.  See Clarke, 479 U.S. at 399.  As a 
manufacturer of fuel additives seeking an open process for 
testing the emissions control systems whose character may 
affect the efficacy of its products, Ethyl's interests appear 

congruent with those of the statute, i.e., the development of 
products that will reduce harmful air pollutants.  Indeed, this 
court has long recognized the interdependence between motor 
vehicle certification under the Act (the process at stake here) 
and fuel regulations (under which Ethyl is a direct regulatee).  
See e.g., Lubrizol Corp. v. EPA, 562 F.2d 807, 810 (D.C. Cir. 
1977);  Amoco Oil Co. v. EPA, 501 F.2d 722, 737 (D.C. Cir. 
1974).  The case is not unlike National Cottonseed Products 
Association v. Brock, 825 F.2d 482, 489-492 (D.C. Cir. 1987), 
where we found standing for a manufacturer whose respira-
tors had been assigned a low rating by an agency supervising 
conditions in a workplace for which the respirators were a 
potential means of compliance.  We treated the respirator 
seller's interest, and that of the regulated firms, as " 'two 
sides of the same coin.' "  Id. at 491 (quoting FAIC Sec., Inc. 
v. United States, 768 F.2d 352, 359 (D.C. Cir. 1985)).

     On to the merits:  As we said, s 206(d) of the Act states 
that the administrator "shall by regulation establish methods 
and procedures for making tests under this section."  42 
U.S.C. s 7525(d).  Although special provisions govern review 
under the Act, here the relevant provisions are the same as 
under the Administrative Procedure Act.  We are to reverse 
the challenged EPA actions if they are "arbitrary, capricious, 
an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with 
law" or "in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or 
limitations."  42 U.S.C. s 7607(d)(9)(A), (C).

     CAP 2000 does not, as s 206 directs, "establish methods 
and procedures for making tests," and it is the only "regula-
tion" in the picture.  Instead, it provides criteria for individu-
al automobile manufacturers to develop their own test meth-
ods and procedures, which the EPA approves in a process 
that does not involve rulemaking.

     Conceivably s 206(d)'s requirement that EPA use regula-
tion to "establish methods and procedures for making tests" 
could be squared with the record by reading "making tests" 
as referring to devising the tests rather than conducting 
them.  Thus Congress would be mandating that the EPA use 
regulations merely to set up a system for picking tests (which 

might then be picked any old way) rather than mandating the 
use of regulations to decide how the tests themselves should 
be conducted.  But nothing in the context of the provision 
suggests that the "establish[ment]" under s 206(d) is to be so 
remote from the actual process of conducting tests, and it is 
hard to see any congressional purposes that would be served 
by such a requirement.  Indeed, neither in the administrative 
proceedings nor before us has the EPA invoked such a 
reading.

     Rather, the EPA seeks to defend CAP 2000 by treating the 
issue as involving simply the level of specificity or generality 
at which it was supposed to act, citing American Trucking 
Associations v. Department of Transportation, 166 F.3d 374 
(D.C. Cir. 1999) (agency to promulgate by regulation safety 
rating "requirements" and means to determine whether carri-
ers had met the requirements), and New Mexico v. EPA, 114 
F.3d 290 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (agency to promulgate "criteria" for 
a certification process).  In those cases, as Congress had not 
specified the level of specificity expected of the agency, we 
held that the agency was entitled to broad deference in 
picking the suitable level.  See American Trucking, 166 F.3d 
at 379-80;  New Mexico, 114 F.3d at 294.  But here Ethyl's 
challenge is not that the EPA was too general in establishing 
test procedures by regulation, but that it didn't establish 
them by regulation at all.

     EPA's failure to act by regulation is thus similar to, and 
controlled by, our decision in MST Express v. Department of 
Transportation, 108 F.3d 401 (1997), which preceded Ameri-
can Trucking and involved the same statutory requirement of 
proceeding by regulation in setting safety requirements for 
common carriers.  Rather than promulgate regulations stat-
ing the means for determining whether carriers met the 
safety fitness requirements, the agency had simply required a 
carrier to "demonstrate that it has adequate controls in place" 
to ensure compliance with the substantive requirements, and 
had developed a "safety fitness rating methodology."  Id. at 
402, 403.  This methodology provided agency inspectors with 
detailed guidelines for evaluating a motor carrier's safety 
rating--but it was not the product of notice-and-comment 

rulemaking.  See id. at 403.  We found that the agency had 
"failed to carry out its statutory obligation to establish by 
regulation a means of determining whether a carrier has 
complied with the safety fitness requirements."  Id. at 406.  
EPA's error here is similar.

     There may, of course, be cases in which it is hard to 
distinguish between promulgations of (1) vaguely articulated 
test procedures (which would be reviewed deferentially under 
such cases as American Trucking) and (2) procedures for 
later development of tests (invalid under MST Express).  
Both, after all, necessarily imply a later (or at least different) 
proceeding in which the agency will fill in details.  In this 
case, however, one can distinguish on the basis of the lan-
guage used by the agency.  With CAP 2000, the EPA does 
not claim to have itself articulated even a vague durability 
test.  Rather, CAP 2000 requires that "[t]he manufacturer 
shall propose a durability program" for EPA approval.  40 
C.F.R. s 86.1823-01(a).  It thus falls on the forbidden side of 
the line.

     The EPA also defends CAP 2000 on grounds that seem to 
flout the evident congressional purpose.  First, it argues that 
because it has chosen to approve test procedures only for one 
model year at a time, proceeding by regulation would be 
administratively burdensome.  Obviously this cannot over-
come a clear congressional command.  Further, it is true only 
in the sense that an open procedure--the very thing mandat-
ed by Congress--is less convenient than a closed one.  It may 
be.  Other parties may raise questions or find fault in proce-
dures that look fine to the agency and the auto makers.  But 
Congress has already made the trade-off.  Nothing in our 
opinion requires that EPA use only a "one-size-fits-all" test 
method.  All that is required is that it establish its proce-
dures, no matter how variegated, "by regulation."

     Finally, both EPA and the auto manufacturers who inter-
vene on its behalf argue that the approach of CAP 2000 is 
necessary because of the presence of what the manufacturers 
believe to be "confidential business information" ("CBI").  If 
the EPA were to establish test methods and procedures by 

regulation, they say, important CBI might become public, 
allowing competitors to "back engineer" their products.  See 
Tr. of Oral Argument at 29-30.  Moreover, they argue that 
the sheer "amount of claimed confidential business informa-
tion would significantly reduce the usefulness of public notice 
and an opportunity to comment upon manufacturers' durabili-
ty programs."  EPA Br. at 44.

     It is hard to know what to make of this argument.  First 
and foremost, s 208(c) provides that the administrator may 
protect the confidentiality of "methods or processes entitled 
to protection as trade secrets."  42 U.S.C. s 7542(c).  Espe-
cially given this available remedy, it seems to us a complete 
non sequitur to suggest that because a procedure (the rule-
making mandated by s 206(d)) may involve some protectable 
CBI, the entire procedure should be short-circuited and re-
placed with a cluster of closed bargaining sessions between 
the EPA and each manufacturer.  Congress obviously expect-
ed that rulemakings would proceed despite the existence of 
CBI that would require protection under s 208(c).  Plainly 
the theory provides no basis for disregarding the congression-
al command.

                             *  *  *

     CAP 2000, rather than constituting an EPA establishment 
"by regulation" of "methods and procedures for making 
tests," as required by s 206(d), is instead a promulgation of 
criteria for the later establishment of such methods and 
procedures by private negotiation between the EPA and each 
regulated auto maker.  So it is "not in accordance with law."  
We therefore vacate the CAP 2000 program and remand the 
case to the EPA with instructions to establish test methods 
and procedures by regulation.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                           