                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 8, 2002        Decided May 3, 2002 

                           No. 01-5150

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

              TDC Management Corporation, Inc. and 
                        T. Conrad Monts, 
                            Appellants

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 89cv01533)

     Stephen L. Braga argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs was Mark A. Miller.

     Michael D. Taxay, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were 
Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, Douglas N. Letter, and 
Michael F. Hertz, Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  This case is before the court for a 
second time.  In the first appeal, the court reversed in part 
the grant of summary judgment to TDC Management Corpo-
ration, Inc. and its president, Theodore Monts.  The court 
held that the decision of the Department of Transportation 
Board of Contract Appeals ("the Board") on TDC's appeal 
from cost disallowances collaterally estopped the government 
from relitigating the accuracy of TDC's monthly progress and 
expenditure reports, but did not estop the government from 
bringing False Claims Act charges based on information that 
was omitted from those reports.  United States v. TDC 
Mgmt. Corp., 24 F.3d 292 (D.C. Cir. 1994) ("TDC I").  In this 
second appeal, from the grant of summary judgment to the 
government, TDC contends correctly that the district court 
erred by granting preclusive effect to factual findings by the 
Board.  This contention is waived, however, because TDC did 
not raise it in the district court and no occasion is presented 
for the exercise of our discretionary review in order to 
prevent a manifest injustice.  Accordingly, because TDC's 
other challenges are unpersuasive, we affirm.

                                I.

     The background to this appeal appears in TDC I.  Suffice it 
to say, the litigation arose in connection with a Demonstration 
Bonding Program ("Program") of the Urban Mass Transit 
Authority ("UMTA") of the Department of Transportation.  
The Program was designed to assist minority enterprises in 
securing bonding from sureties when bidding on large trans-
portation construction projects.  TDC I, 24 F.3d at 294.  
TDC agreed to identify private investors willing to provide 
collateral and management assistance to the minority enter-
prises in return for a share of the profits;  for its part, UMTA 
agreed to match the collateral that investors provided.  Id.  
By the terms of the Program, TDC was to serve as ombuds-
man between the parties, with no financial interest in Pro-

gram operations.  Id.  On July 6, 1983, TDC and UMTA 
entered into a cost-reimbursement contract in which TDC 
was to use its "best efforts" to locate investors and sureties 
and obtain their tentative agreement to participate in the 
Program.  Id. at 296.

     When the Program failed to progress as expected, UMTA 
terminated the contract for convenience and disallowed nearly 
half of TDC's claimed contract-related expenses, which to-
taled $928,916.  Id. at 296.  TDC appealed to the Board.  
Before the Board rendered its decision, the United States in 
May 1989 sued TDC under the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. 
s 3729 (1982), for misrepresenting its actual progress in its 
monthly reports to UMTA and concealing deviations from the 
Program terms.  Id.  The Board ruled in TDC's favor and 
reversed the disallowances, finding that TDC had not breach-
ed the contract for nonperformance and that its monthly 
reports had notified UMTA of the categories and types of 
expenses that UMTA sought to disallow.  Id.  Viewing its 
jurisdiction under the Contract Dispute Act, 41 U.S.C. s 605, 
as limited to the costs that had been disallowed by the 
contracting officer, the Board declined to consider UMTA's 
claim that TDC was not entitled to any monies under the 
contract due to fraudulent omissions.  Id. at 295.  The 
Board's decision was affirmed by the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Federal Circuit.  Skinner v. TDC Mgmt. 
Corp., 975 F.2d 869 (Fed. Cir. 1992) (unpublished order).

     Based on the collateral estoppel effect of the Board's 
findings, TDC moved on April 19, 1991, for summary judg-
ment on the False Claims Act charges.  TDC I, 24 F.3d at 
294.  The district court granted the motion on August 17, 
1992.  Following a partial reversal by this court in TDC I on 
June 3, 1994, the district court on remand granted the 
government's motion for summary judgment on March 29, 
2000, and on February 6, 2001, awarded the government 
damages.  On April 10, 2001, the district court denied TDC's 
motion and granted the government's cross-motion, pursuant 
to Fed. R. Civ. P. 60, to clarify or correct the judgment.

                               II.

     On appeal, TDC challenges the grant of summary judg-
ment on several grounds, only one of which requires extended 
discussion.  That contention is that the district court relied on 
an erroneous application of the doctrine of collateral estoppel.

                                A.

     On remand, the district court ruled that collateral estoppel 
prevented TDC from relitigating factual issues decided by the 
Board with regard to omissions in TDC's monthly reports 
because "the issue of omissions was squarely addressed by 
the Board in its prior review of the contract termination."  
Remand Opinion at 7.  Relying on the Board's findings, the 
district court concluded there were no genuine issues of fact 
with regard to the alleged omissions.  Id. at 14.  The district 
court recited at length the Board's findings that TDC had 
departed from the terms of the Program by, inter alia:  (1) 
planning to use interest generated by short-term investment 
of the UMTA contribution to underwrite the costs of provid-
ing services to disadvantaged business enterprises;  (2) pro-
posing to investors that such businesses be charged a 3% fee 
for management services;  and (3) intentionally failing to 
disclose to UMTA its plans to hold a financial stake in 
Program operations in order to keep UMTA from learning of 
activities that it would insist be terminated;  and that with 
such investment TDC could no longer act objectively as 
ombudsman for the Program.  On the basis of the Board's 
findings, the district court concluded that the omissions were 
either intentional or resulted from reckless disregard of the 
Program terms, causing the monthly reports submitted by 
TDC in support of its invoices for payment to be false.  In 
granting summary judgment to the government on liability, 
the district court also relied on the unrebutted declarations of 
UMTA officials, including that of UMTA Administrator Ralph 
L. Stanley stating that had he known that TDC or Monts 
tried to obtain an equity stake or other financial interest in 
the Program, he would have directed that the contract be 
immediately terminated for cause.  The district court thus 

found that the omissions were material because had UMTA 
known of the omitted information, it would have either re-
quired TDC to cease those activities or terminated the con-
tract for cause.  Id. at 15.

     In TDC I, this court explained that a party is not collateral-
ly estopped from relitigating a disputed issue of fact unless 
that issue "was actually litigated and necessarily decided by a 
final disposition on the merits."  24 F.3d at 295;  see also 
Nasem v. Brown, 595 F.2d 801, 805 (D.C. Cir. 1979);  18 
Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice 
and Procedure s 4421 (1981);  id. s 4475 at 764-70.  Or, as 
stated in the Restatement (Second) of Judgments s 27 (1982), 
a prior determination can only preclude relitigation of the 
same issue if it was "essential to the [prior] judgment."  TDC 
prevailed before the Board and was awarded $778,613 for 
expenses incurred under the contract.  TDC I, 24 F.3d at 294.  
The Board found that "[t]here [was] no evidence in the record 
that the Program failed for any reason other than [UMTA] 
electing not to fund the balance of the contract, but to 
terminate TDC's performance."  Board Opinion at 133.  
Thus, TDC maintains, the Board's findings regarding the 
omissions in TDC's progress reports were not necessary to 
the result that the Board ultimately reached, and a factual 
finding by the Board that is adverse to the prevailing party 
cannot be "essential to the judgment" because by definition it 
could not have affected the outcome of the case.  TDC 
contends, therefore, that in considering TDC to be bound by 
the Board's findings regarding the omissions, the district 
court plainly erred.

     In TDC I, this court stated that the Board "expressly 
reserved for the district court the legal determination of 
whether TDC's failure to report its financial stake in Program 
operations constituted fraud," and that "[i]n disposing of 
TDC's contract claim, the Board made no necessary findings 
about UMTA's reliance on TDC's reports."  TDC I, 24 F.3d 
at 296.  Notwithstanding the instruction in TDC I and what 
TDC now correctly contends is clear error by the district 
court, TDC did not alert the district court to its error.  On 
remand, TDC never argued that it should not be precluded 

from relitigating UMTA's reliance on the omissions because 
those findings were not necessary to the Board's decision.  
Rather, as the district court noted, in opposing the govern-
ment's motion for summary judgment TDC "fail[ed] to ad-
dress, let alone dispute, the collateral estoppel effect of the 
[Board's] opinion with regards to omissions from its monthly 
reports to UMTA.  Instead, TDC suggest[ed] that the False 
Claims Act claim based on omissions [wa]s a new claim which 
require[d] further discovery."  Remand Opinion at 6.  Nor 
in its motion for clarification under Rule 60 did TDC argue 
that the district court's collateral estoppel ruling as to the 
omissions was erroneous.  On appeal, TDC points to nothing 
that would indicate that it presented an appropriate objection 
in the district court.  TDC suggests, for example, that in 
opposing the government's motion for summary judgment, 
TDC identified several factual issues relating to the omissions 
that would be inconsistent with the application of collateral 
estoppel;  again, however, the record shows that TDC was 
addressing the issue of whether TDC's omissions were mate-
rial, i.e., whether UMTA relied on TDC's monthly reports, 
and not whether it was appropriate to afford collateral estop-
pel effect to the Board's findings.  To the extent that TDC 
now focuses on the salient error, it argues that the issue of 
collateral estoppel vel non was placed squarely before the 
district court in the government's motion for summary judg-
ment.  But as the district court's opinion makes clear, this is 
hardly the same as joining the government's argument on 
collateral estoppel.  TDC itself moved for summary judgment 
on the basis of the collateral estoppel effect of the Board's 
findings;  further, it argued in opposing the government's 
calculation of damages that collateral estoppel operated in 
TDC's favor, on the ground that the Board had already 
determined the government could not prove that TDC's ac-
tions were the proximate cause of the Program's demise.  
Thus, far from challenging the district court's application of 
collateral estoppel in its liability determination, TDC's argu-
ment reinforced the notion that the district court's invocation 
of the doctrine was appropriate.  TDC's reliance on Butera v. 
District of Columbia, 235 F.3d 637, 645 n.6 (D.C. Cir. 2001), 

and AFGE v. FLRA, 841 F.2d 1165, 1168 (D.C. Cir. 1988), is 
misplaced;  in Butera, the court addressed only those issues 
raised in the district court, and in AFGE the court bound the 
FLRA to the implicit premise of its argument in the district 
court.  Here, by contrast, TDC neither explicitly nor implicit-
ly raised a "necessity" argument in the district court.  We 
hold that TDC, therefore, has waived the contention that the 
district court erred in ruling that TDC was precluded from 
relitigating UMTA's reliance on the omissions in TDC's 
monthly reports.

                                B.

     The question remains whether this court should exercise its 
discretion to consider TDC's contention notwithstanding its 
waiver.  In District of Columbia v. Air Florida, 750 F.2d 
1077 (D.C. Cir. 1984), the court stated the general rule:  "It is 
well settled that issues and legal theories not asserted at the 
District Court level ordinarily will not be heard on appeal."  
Id. at 1084-85.  The Supreme Court has long instructed, 
however, that appellate courts must "not lose sight of the fact 
that such appellate practice should not be applied where the 
obvious result would be a plain miscarriage of justice."  Hor-
mel v. Helvering, 312 U.S. 552, 558 (1941).  In United States 
v. Atkinson, 297 U.S. 157 (1936), the Supreme Court de-
scribed "exceptional circumstances" when appellate courts on 
their own motion may, in the public interest, "notice errors to 
which no exception has been taken, if the errors are obvious, 
or if they otherwise seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or 
public reputation of judicial proceedings."  Id. at 160.

     This court thus acknowledged in Air Florida that in "ex-
ceptional circumstances, where injustice might otherwise re-
sult, we have the discretion to consider questions of law that 
were neither raised below nor passed upon by the District 
Court."  750 F.2d at 1085.  In that case, reviewing dismissal 
of a complaint for failure to state a cause of action, the court 
declined to exercise its discretion because to do so would have 
engaged the court in deciding whether to create new federal 
common law where the United States was not a party to the 

case and Congress may have preempted some or all of the 
field.  Id. at 1085-86.  On the other hand, in Mulligan v. 
Andrews, 211 F.2d 28 (D.C. Cir. 1954), the court exercised its 
discretion to depart from the general rule;  in that case the 
loss of the plaintiff's livelihood was at issue due to what he 
claimed was his unlawful removal from the classified Civil 
Service, and the court deemed that an "injustice might other-
wise result" if the court did not consider whether his employ-
er had failed to comply with the statutory requirement that 
written reasons be given for his removal.  Id. at 29.

     TDC accordingly asserts in its brief that "[s]omething went 
horribly wrong here to turn this case upside down from [the] 
point" where TDC prevailed before the Board, and "it is up to 
this Court to correct that wrong."  Appellant's Br. at 16.  In 
support of its position, TDC makes two arguments why this 
court should address its collateral estoppel contention:  first, 
the issue is purely a question of law subject to de novo 
review;  and second, "the district court's error was plain -- if 
not egregious," as the overwhelming weight of authority 
demonstrates that collateral estoppel operates in only one 
direction.  Reply Br. at 14.  However, these reasons sweep 
far too broadly and address only some of the relevant consid-
erations.  Neither of TDC's arguments necessarily demon-
strates that a manifest injustice will occur unless this court 
addresses the "necessity" of the Board's findings to its hold-
ing and remands the case for a trial.  Although TDC's 
counsel may have failed to alert the district court to an 
obvious error, we decline to exercise our discretion for three 
reasons.

     First, culpability.  The False Claims Act complaint alleged 
that TDC's reports overstated its progress and failed to 
disclose that, contrary to the Program terms, TDC sought to 
obtain a financial interest in Program operations.  See TDC I, 
24 F.3d at 294.  "The withholding of such information -- 
information critical to the decision to pay -- is the essence of 
a false claim."  Ab-Tech Constr., Inc. v. United States, 31 
Fed. Cl. 429, 434 (1994).  TDC does not contest that certain 
information was not included in its progress reports and that 
some of the omitted information would have revealed that 

TDC was proposing to take an investor position in the 
Program.  TDC thus defrauded the government by present-
ing reports in support of payment that omitted information 
indicating that it was acting in a manner that was contrary to 
the core terms of the Program.  Although TDC contends 
there are material disputed issues regarding, for example, 
UMTA's failure to make reasonable inquiries into TDC's 
activities, changes that UMTA made to the Program mid-
stream, and the source of the proposals that TDC take equity 
stakes in the joint ventures with private investors, the record 
evidence remains dispositive.  Likewise, TDC's contention 
that it could not execute final agreements with investors or 
sureties because only UMTA had that authority under the 
terms of the Program is unavailing.  TDC sought payment in 
connection with its efforts to obtain agreements that were 
contrary to Program terms.  The undisputed evidence shows 
there were omissions that UMTA officials deemed to be 
material, and TDC presented no evidence to dispute UMTA 
Administrator Stanley's declaration that he would have imme-
diately terminated the contract had he been aware of TDC's 
unreported activities.

     Second, prejudice to the government.  The considerable 
delay in this litigation creates problems with regard to wit-
nesses' memories and document retention regarding events 
that occurred almost two decades ago.  These problems 
would presumably affect both parties at a trial.  But they are 
exacerbated for the government, for at oral argument the 
parties informed the court of the death of Ralph L. Stanley.  
Stanley's term as UMTA Administrator, from November 21, 
1983 to May 31, 1987, spanned the period just after the 
Program's inception in July 1983 until its termination in April 
1985.  He was directly in charge of what he described in his 
April 1996 declaration as a "high priority project," and he 
claimed in his declaration that he first learned at meetings 
with Monts and TDC's legal consultant in December 1984 and 
January 1985 that TDC was deviating from the Program in 
significant ways.  Although other UMTA officials were in-
volved in the management of the Program, Stanley was the 

person in charge and, due to his death, there would be 
obvious prejudice to the government at a trial.

     Third, TDC recovered its contract costs.  Pursuant to the 
Board's decision, TDC recovered $778,613 of the $928,916 
that it claimed over the life of the contract as "allowable, 
allocable, and reasonable" costs associated with its work on 
the Program.  TDC I, 24 F.3d at 294;  see Skinner, 975 F.2d 
at 869.  Our holding does not disturb this result.  Rather, 
any False Claims Act damages awarded to the government 
"would merely offset the payments to which the Board ... 
has already determined TDC is entitled under the terms of 
its UMTA contract."  TDC I, 24 F.3d at 298.  Under the 
version of the False Claims Act then in effect, the govern-
ment recovered as damages a civil penalty of $2,000 for each 
false claim plus twice the amount of damages sustained as a 
result of the false claim and costs.  31 U.S.C. s 3729 (1982);  
see also TDC I, 24 F.3d at 298.  The district court found that 
TDC filed 18 false payment vouchers due to material omis-
sions from January 4, 1984, until the Program's termination, 
and entered judgment against TDC in the amount of 
$1,285,198.31:  doubling the $621,466.11 in vouchers paid by 
the government plus $36,000 in penalties and $6,266.09 in 
costs.  Hence, although TDC will owe money to the govern-
ment, it does not face an exacerbated "triple" penalty, i.e., the 
loss of its contract costs over and above what it owes as 
damages under the False Claims Act.

     In sum, in light of the undisputed record evidence of TDC's 
culpability, the prejudice to the government, and TDC's re-
covery of its contract costs, remanding for a trial would 
simply prolong the closure date of this litigation without, in 
all likelihood, advancing the interests of either party.  Ac-
cordingly, we decline to exercise our discretion to address the 
collateral estoppel contention that TDC waived.

                               III.

     We address briefly TDC's two other contentions, regarding 
damages and Monts' liability.

                                A.

     TDC contends that in light of the Board's ruling, the 
government's net damages were zero because it "got what it 
paid for" under the "best efforts" agreement.  TDC further 
contends that the government failed to prove that TDC 
proximately caused its damages because it may have termi-
nated the contract for reasons unrelated to the omissions in 
the progress reports, and that at the very least, an evidentia-
ry hearing into the causation issue was required.  These 
claims are meritless.

     The Supreme Court pointed out long ago that "the chief 
purpose of the statutes [which formed the basis for the False 
Claims Act] ... was to provide for restitution to the govern-
ment of the money taken from it by fraud, and that the device 
of double damages plus a specific sum was chosen to make 
sure that the government would be made completely whole."  
United States ex rel. Marcus v. Hess, 317 U.S. 537, 551-52 
(1943).  In United States ex rel. Schwedt v. Planning Re-
search Corp., 59 F.3d 196, 200 (D.C. Cir. 1995), this court 
stated that if the government can show it relied on represen-
tations in a contractor's progress reports in deciding to make 
payments, "those payments may constitute damages under 
the Act."  TDC relies on United States v. Bornstein, 423 U.S. 
303, 317 n.13 (1976), holding that the government is entitled 
to receive damages "equal to the difference between the 
market value [of the item] it received and retained, and the 
market value it would have received if they had been of the 
specified quality."  The Program at issue, however, did not 
call for TDC to produce a tangible structure or asset of 
ascertainable value, as occurred in Ab-Tech Construction, Inc. 
v. United States, 31 Fed. Cl. 429 (1994), and United States v. 
Woodbury, 359 F.2d 370, 379 (9th Cir. 1966).  Rather, the 
evidence allowed the district court to find that the value of 
the "best efforts" provided by TDC was vitiated by TDC's 
fraudulent concealment of its rent-seeking behavior.  Once 
TDC deviated from its contracted role as impartial ombuds-
man by seeking a financial stake in joint ventures with 
private investors and by charging fees for the provision of 
material assistance to minority entrepreneurs, the district 

court then could properly find that the Program no longer 
had any value to the government.  Cf. United States ex rel. 
Compton v. Midwest Specialties, Inc., 142 F.3d 296, 304 (6th 
Cir. 1998).

     TDC's contention that the government terminated the con-
tract for convenience and failed to prove that TDC's omis-
sions proximately caused its damages is also unavailing.  
UMTA initially terminated the contract for convenience but 
changed this to a termination for cause after learning about 
the omissions in TDC's progress reports.  No court has ever 
found the termination for cause to be unwarranted.  Further, 
TDC failed to rebut the declarations of UMTA officials that 
UMTA relied on TDC's monthly reports and would not have 
continued to make payments on TDC's vouchers but for the 
omissions.  TDC's alternative contention that the district 
court erroneously characterized the question of materiality by 
failing to ask whether UMTA officials would have acted 
differently if the omitted information had been included in the 
reports, as opposed to whether they knew of such informa-
tion, was not raised in the district court and is not properly 
before this court.  See Air Florida, 750 F.2d at 1084-85.  
Under the circumstances, there was no genuine issue of fact 
regarding causation and reliance, nor any need for an eviden-
tiary hearing.  Thus, TDC fails to show that the district court 
erred in adopting a "but for" measure of damages, based on 
what the government would have paid out had it known of the 
information that TDC omitted from its monthly progress 
reports.

                                B.

     Finally, TDC's contention that the district court improperly 
extended the judgment to include Monts as a defendant is 
frivolous.  The government sued both TDC and Monts as 
named defendants.  TDC I, 24 F.3d at 294.  In granting the 
government's motion for summary judgment as to liability, 
the district court in its March 2000 memorandum opinion and 
order referred only to TDC and neglected to mention Monts 
by name.  However, in its February 2001 memorandum 

opinion awarding damages, the district court referenced its 
March 2000 memorandum and order on liability as granting 
summary judgment "against defendants TDC Management 
Corporation ('TDC') and T. Conrad Monts."  Further, in 
granting the government's cross-motion in response to TDC's 
Rule 60 motion, the district court stated that the final judg-
ment applied to both TDC and Monts, "each of whom shall be 
jointly and severally liable to the United States."

     Accordingly, we affirm the grant of summary judgment to 
the government.

                                                    