                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 7, 2000    Decided October 24, 2000 

                           No. 99-5305

            James V. Hurson Associates, Incorporated, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                          Dan Glickman, 
    Secretary of the United States Department of Agriculture, 
                               and 
           The United States Department of Agriculture
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02120)

     Robert J. Brooks argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Charles W. Scarborough, Attorney, U.S. Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellees.  With him on the 

brief were David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral, Barbara C. Biddle, Attorney, and Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. 
Attorney.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  James V. Hurson Associates 
appeals from a District Court judgment upholding a United 
States Department of Agriculture ("USDA") rule that con-
trols the manner in which the agency receives requests for 
the approval of food labeling.  Appellant contends that the 
USDA violated the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), 5 
U.S.C. s 551 et seq. (1994), by promulgating that rule without 
first engaging in notice-and-comment rulemaking.  It also 
claims that the District Court erred in denying its motion to 
amend its complaint to include claims that the USDA's new 
rule both is arbitrary and capricious and violates the Consti-
tution's Interstate Commerce Clause.

     We hold that the District Court properly concluded that 
USDA was not required to engage in notice-and-comment 
rulemaking, since its new rule falls within the APA's proce-
dural-rules exception.  We also conclude that the court erred 
in refusing to allow Appellant to amend its complaint to 
include an arbitrary-and-capricious claim and a Commerce-
Clause claim, as it had an absolute right to do so until the 
USDA filed a responsive pleading.  We therefore remand 
with instructions that Appellant be permitted to amend its 
complaint to include its arbitrary-and-capricious claim.  We 
do not, however, remand with respect to Appellant's Com-
merce-Clause claim, because we conclude that it would not be 
able to survive a motion to dismiss.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     Appellee Daniel Glickman is the Secretary of the USDA, 
another appellee in this case (collectively, "USDA").  The 
USDA's Food Safety Inspection Service ("FSIS") is charged 
with reviewing the labels affixed to certain commercial food 
products to ensure that they are truthful, not misleading, and 

otherwise comply with relevant regulations.  Until recently, a 
commercial food producer could seek approval of a proposed 
label in several ways:  by mailing its application, by personal-
ly visiting the FSIS, or by hiring courier/expediter firms 
whose employees would meet with FSIS representatives dur-
ing office hours.  The latter method, colloquially known as 
"face-to-face," enabled producers to secure instant approval of 
their labels, whereas other methods could take days or even 
weeks.  See Meat, Poultry, and Egg Products Labeling Re-
view Process;  Elimination of Appointments With Label Cour-
ier/Expediting Firms, 63 Fed. Reg. 40,010, 40,011 (1998) 
[hereinafter elimination of face-to-face].

     On July 27, 1998, the USDA announced its intention to do 
away with "routine, daily, time-set, face-to-face appointments 
with courier/expediting firms," although FSIS employees 
would be available for irregular meetings with industry repre-
sentatives to discuss novel issues and provide regulatory 
guidance.  Id. at 40,010.  The USDA cited four reasons for 
its elimination of face-to-face review:  (1) FSIS's need for 
more time to evaluate labeling involving complex issues;  (2) 
FSIS's need for more time for consultation internally and 
with other agencies;  (3) the food industry's declining need for 
immediate label approval;  and (4) the unfairness of face-to-
face to food producers who submit by mail rather than 
through courier/expediter firms.  See id. at 40,011.

     On September 2, 1998, Hurson, a courier/expediter firm the 
livelihood of which was threatened by the USDA's new rule, 
filed a motion for a temporary restraining order against the 
agency in the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia.  In its initial complaint, Hurson alleged only that 
USDA had violated the APA by abolishing face-to-face with-
out engaging in notice-and-comment rulemaking.  That stat-
ute obliges agencies to publish in the Federal Register notice 
of a proposed rulemaking and to give interested parties the 
opportunity to submit comments.  See 5 U.S.C. s 553(b), (c) 
(1994).  USDA did not submit an answer, and simply moved 
to dismiss.  With the consent of both parties, the District 
Court regarded Hurson's motion for injunctive relief and 
USDA's motion to dismiss as motions for summary judgment.

     After the parties had fully briefed the notice-and-comment 
issue, but before the court had ruled on their cross-motions 
for summary judgment, Hurson submitted an amended com-
plaint (or, in the alternative, a motion seeking leave to amend 
its complaint).  Hurson proposed to add new allegations that 
the USDA's elimination of face-to-face both was "arbitrary 
and capricious" in violation of the APA and violated the 
Constitution's Commerce Clause.  The District Court denied 
Hurson's motion as untimely, citing "the fact that Plaintiff 
waited to amend his [sic] complaint until after full briefing of 
dispositive motions."  Having disposed of Hurson's substan-
tive objections to USDA's elimination of face-to-face, the 
District Court concluded that the agency's new rule was a 
procedural one.  It was, therefore, exempt from the APA's 
notice-and-comment requirement.

     This appeal followed.

                          II. DISCUSSION

A.   Notice and Comment

     Although federal agencies ordinarily must provide the pub-
lic with notice of a proposed rule and the opportunity to 
submit comments on it, see 5 U.S.C. s 553, the APA makes an 
exception for, among others, "rules of agency organization, 
procedure, or practice."  Id. s 553(b)(A).  This Court has 
stressed that the " 'critical feature' " of a rule that satisfies 
the so-called "procedural exception 'is that it covers agency 
actions that do not themselves alter the rights or interests of 
parties, although it may alter the manner in which the parties 
present themselves or their viewpoints to the agency.' "  
JEM Broad. Co. v. FCC, 22 F.3d 320, 326 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 
(quoting Batterton v. Marshall, 648 F.2d 694, 707 (D.C. Cir. 
1980)).

     Hence in JEM, we concluded that the Federal Communica-
tion Commission's new "hard look" rules--under which the 
Commission summarily would dismiss any flawed license ap-
plication without allowing the applicant to correct its error, 
see id. at 322-23--were procedural ones.  "The critical fact 

here," we emphasized, "is that the 'hard look' rules did not 
change the substantive standards by which the FCC evalu-
ates license applications, e.g., financial qualifications, pro-
posed programming, and transmitter location."  Id. at 327.  
That the hard-look rules employed the same substantive 
criteria as their predecessors, we concluded, was "fatal to 
JEM's claim."  Id.;  accord National Whistleblower Ctr. v. 
Nuclear Regulatory Comm'n, 208 F.3d 256, 262 (D.C. Cir. 
2000) ("The disputed agency action in this case merely altered 
a standard for the enforcement of filing deadlines;  it did not 
purport to regulate or limit the Center's substantive rights."), 
petition for cert. filed, 69 U.S.L.W. 3234 (U.S. Sept. 13, 2000) 
(No. 00-422).

     The USDA's decision to eliminate face-to-face review is the 
very sort of procedural measure the JEM Court had in mind, 
for, by its very terms, the rule "will not change the present 
system of labeling review," even though the "new procedure 
will eliminate routine, daily, time-set, face-to-face appoint-
ments with courier/expediting firms."  Elimination of Face-
to-Face, 63 Fed. Reg. at 40,010.  The agency's abolition of 
face-to-face did not alter the substantive criteria by which it 
would approve or deny proposed labels;  it simply changed 
the procedures it would follow in applying those substantive 
standards.

     Because the rule is procedural on its face--which Hurson 
concedes, see Appellant's Reply Brief at 1 ("USDA devotes 
the argument to showing that the challenged rule does not 
change the substantive criteria for evaluating labels.  But 
appellant Hurson does not contend otherwise.")--appellant 
attempts to characterize it as effectively substantive by point-
ing to its putatively severe consequences and its origins in a 
"substantive value judgment."  Neither effort is persuasive.

     Hurson introduces some evidence that the elimination of 
face-to-face approvals will burden food producers.  (It also 
introduces evidence suggesting that the rule would devastate 
the courier/expediter industry, but the burden to couriers/ex-
pediters--which are not regulated parties under the rules--is 
irrelevant.)  Hurson repeatedly argues that food producers 
need to have their labels approved in "minutes and hours," 

not, as it suspects will be the case under the USDA's new 
rule, after waiting for "days, weeks, even months."  Appel-
lant's Brief at 24.  It also cites the 180 objections to the new 
rule lodged by entities representing the food industry, which, 
it proposes, illustrate that food processors regard speedy 
approval as "an essential cog in their output mechanism."  Id. 
at 25.

     Hurson's allegation that the elimination of face-to-face will 
produce a significant burden may or may not be empirically 
true.  As an initial matter, we question whether the food 
processing industry truly regards the USDA's new rule as 
especially burdensome.  After all, this challenge is brought 
not by a food processor, but by a courier/expediter firm.  
Still, the District Court, as it was required to do on a motion 
for summary judgment, properly viewed all factual inferences 
in favor of Hurson.  Cf. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c);  Taylor v. FDIC, 
132 F.3d 753, 762 (D.C. Cir. 1997).

     But even if the USDA's elimination of face-to-face did 
impose a substantial burden on food processors, that burden 
would not convert the rule into a substantive one that trig-
gers the APA's notice-and-comment requirement.  Appellant 
has cited no case in which this Court has required notice-and-
comment rulemaking for an especially burdensome procedur-
al rule.  Nor could it, for we recognize that "the impact of a 
rule has no bearing on whether it is legislative or interpreta-
tive...."  American Postal Workers Union v. United States 
Postal Serv., 707 F.2d 548, 560 (D.C. Cir. 1983);  accord 
Cabais v. Egger, 690 F.2d 234, 237 (D.C. Cir. 1982) ("Simply 
because agency action has substantial impact does not mean 
it is subject to notice and comment if it is otherwise expressly 
exempt under the APA.").  Indeed, "interpretative rules may 
have a substantial impact on the rights of individuals."  
American Postal Workers, 707 F.2d at 560.  The same is true 
of procedural rules.  We conclude, therefore, that an other-
wise-procedural rule does not become a substantive one, for 
notice-and-comment purposes, simply because it imposes a 
burden on regulated parties.

     Hurson's second argument--that notice-and-comment rule-
making is required given the rule's origin in a "substantive 
value judgment"--is equally unavailing.  The USDA's deci-
sion to eliminate face-to-face does, as Hurson alleges, encode 
the substantive value judgment that the new label-approval 
procedures will more readily promote its already-existing 
goals of fairness and efficiency.  But the fact that the agen-
cy's decision was based on a value judgment about procedural 
efficiency does not convert the resulting rule into a substan-
tive one.  All decisions, to the extent that they derive from 
reasons, necessarily are based on the value judgment that the 
chosen option is better, in some relevant way, than its alter-
natives.  We have, therefore, consistently recognized that 
" 'agency housekeeping rules often embody a judgment about 
what mechanics and processes are most efficient.'  This does 
not convert a procedural rule into a substantive one."  Na-
tional Whistleblower, 208 F.3d at 263 (quoting JEM, 22 F.3d 
at 328).

     Finally, Hurson proposes that this Court is bound by our 
prior holding in National Association of Home Health Agen-
cies v. Schweiker, 690 F.2d 932 (D.C. Cir. 1982), to conclude 
that the USDA could eliminate face-to-face only through 
notice-and-comment rulemaking.  In that case, we found that 
the Department of Health and Human Services was required 
to engage in notice-and-comment rulemaking when it elimi-
nated Medicare claimants' right to seek reimbursement di-
rectly from the agency's Secretary, and now required them to 
submit their claims to regional intermediaries.  See id. at 
949-50.

     Home Health Agencies is distinguishable.  Unlike the rule 
challenged in that case, which both eliminated claimants' 
access to the HHS Secretary and transferred his authority to 
issue reimbursements to other agency employees, the 
USDA's rule does not change the agency personnel who will 
be responsible for reviewing proposed labels.  Rather, "[t]he 
labeling review staff will continue to receive and approve 
labels," even though they will no longer do so in face-to-face 
meetings.  Elimination of Face-to-Face, 63 Fed. Reg. at 
40,010.  The crucial element of Home Health Agencies is not 

whether one has "face time" with agency staff members, but 
which staffers have decisionmaking authority.  Home Health 
Agencies is thus consistent with our holding here, for the 
same USDA staffers who reviewed labels under face-to-face 
continue to review labels after that procedure's abolition.

     Because the USDA's decision to eliminate face-to-face label 
review was a "rule[ ] of agency organization, procedure, or 
practice," 5 U.S.C. s 553(b)(A), we hold that the agency was 
not required to do so through notice-and-comment rulemak-
ing.

B.   Amended Complaint

     On November 10, 1998, Hurson attempted to amend its 
complaint to supplement its notice-and-comment claim with 
allegations that the USDA's elimination of face-to-face both is 
arbitrary and capricious and violates the Constitution's Com-
merce Clause.  The District Court disallowed the amend-
ment, citing the fact that Hurson had not filed its motion until 
after the parties had fully briefed their cross-motions for 
summary judgment.  USDA now proposes that the District 
Court's refusal was within its discretion, and cites our pro-
nouncement that, when a plaintiff seeks to amend "more than 
a year after the filing of [its] initial complaint and after 
dispositive motions had been filed and opposed," denying its 
motion "does not appear to be an abuse of discretion." 
Wilderness Soc'y v. Griles, 824 F.2d 4, 19 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  
We conclude that, while the decision whether to permit 
amendments ordinarily "is left to the discretion of the district 
court," Gaubert v. Federal Home Loan Bank Bd., 863 F.2d 
59, 69 (D.C. Cir. 1988), the District Court here erred because 
Hurson was entitled to amend its complaint as a matter of 
right.

     The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure guarantee a plaintiff 
an absolute right to amend its complaint once at any time 
before the defendant has filed a responsive pleading.  See 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a) ("A party may amend the party's 
pleading once as a matter of course at any time before a 
responsive pleading is served....").  In this case, the USDA 
filed no answer, but only a motion to dismiss.  We have 
repeatedly clarified that a motion to dismiss is not a respon-

sive pleading for the purposes of Rule 15.  See, e.g., Confeder-
ate Memorial Ass'n v. Hines, 995 F.2d 295, 299 (D.C. Cir. 
1993) ("As a motion to dismiss is not ordinarily considered a 
'responsive pleading' ... under Rule 15(a), appellants could 
have amended their complaint as of right prior to the court's 
decision on the motions." (citation omitted));  accord, Bowden 
v. United States, 176 F.3d 552, 555 (D.C. Cir. 1999) ("At the 
time Bowden sought to amend, the government had filed only 
a motion to dismiss or in the alternative for summary judg-
ment, which is not considered a responsive pleading.").  Be-
cause Hurson therefore was entitled as a matter of right to 
amend its complaint, it was error for the District Court to 
refuse to consider its added claims.

     But not all such errors require a remand.  See Bowden, 176 
F.3d at 555 ("Though erroneous, the district court's denial of 
Bowden's motion to amend does not require a new trial.").  
Rather, we recognize that a district court need not be made 
to reconsider an amended complaint that fails to state a claim 
upon which relief could be granted, or that would otherwise 
fail as a matter of law.  In other words, no remand is 
necessary if the amended complaint would not survive a 
motion to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
12(b)(6).  Thus, in Confederate Memorial, we declined to 
remand because the plaintiff's amended complaint "fail[ed] to 
state a civil RICO claim" in that it failed to allege two 
essential elements:  "the existence of an enterprise" and "that 
appellants suffered injury."  Confederate Memorial, 995 F.2d 
at 299, 300.  And in Bowden, we likewise refused to remand 
for a new trial based on the plaintiff's amended complaint, 
which added demands for fees, compensatory damages, and a 
jury trial, because the plaintiff was "not a prevailing party 
entitled to attorneys' fees or compensatory damages" and 
"had no right to trial by jury."  Bowden, 176 F.3d at 555, 556.

     As was true in Confederate Memorial, Hurson's Com-
merce-Clause claim would fail as a matter of law, because it 
fails to allege the claim's essential elements.  In order to 
articulate a cognizable Commerce-Clause challenge, a plaintiff 
must allege, at a minimum, that Congress has regulated an 
activity that falls within none of the following three catego-

ries:  (1) the channels of interstate commerce;  (2) the instru-
mentalities of interstate commerce;  or (3) activities that have 
a substantial relation to interstate commerce.  See United 
States v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549, 558-59 (1995).  Hurson's com-
plaint neither contains nor even suggests any such allegation.

     In fact, what Hurson styles as a Commerce-Clause claim is 
unlike any Commerce-Clause claim this Court has ever en-
countered.  Hurson does not allege that the statutes authoriz-
ing the USDA to regulate food labels exceed the scope of 
Congress's authority under the Commerce Clause.  (Nor 
could it, if it wishes to remain in business, for if Congress 
lacks the authority to regulate labeling, there is no need for 
courier/expediter firms.)  Instead, it alleges that the USDA's 
elimination of face-to-face transgresses the Commerce Clause 
because it imposes an undue burden on interstate commerce.  
See Appellant's Brief at 31-34.  Hurson's argument, in es-
sence, is that the federal government may exercise its Com-
merce-Clause powers only in ways that promote the free flow 
of interstate commerce.  No court has ever recognized any 
such claim for relief, nor do we now.  Therefore, we do not 
remand Hurson's Commerce-Clause claim as it would not 
withstand a motion to dismiss in any event.

     Hurson's arbitrary-and-capricious claim is a different mat-
ter.  A plaintiff can state a claim that an agency's action was 
"arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not 
in accordance with law," 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A) (1994), in a 
number of ways.  Those include alleging that the agency 
failed to articulate an adequate explanation for its new policy, 
see, e.g., AT&T v. FCC, 974 F.2d 1351, 1355 (D.C. Cir. 1992), 
and that it failed to consider factors made relevant by Con-
gress, see, e.g., Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. 
Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983).

     It seems to this Court that Hurson's arbitrary-and-
capricious claim is exceptionally weak.  We harbor grave 
doubts that it would be able to prevail on remand.  Still, it 

appears that Hurson has alleged all the elements necessary to 
state a claim.  In its amended complaint, it argued that:

     The reasons for the challenged action, as stated by 
     Defendants in the notice, are patently pretextual, implau-
     sible, counter to the attendant facts, and show a failure to 
     consider important factors;  and thus the defendants' 
     decision reflected by the Notice is arbitrary, capricious 
     and clearly erroneous.
     
Amended Complaint at 6.  Whatever its substantive flaws, 
Hurson's arbitrary-and-capricious claim would survive a 
12(b)(6) motion to dismiss.  If USDA did, in fact, fail to 
proffer an adequate explanation for its decision to eliminate 
face-to-face, or if it did in fact fail to consider factors deemed 
relevant by Congress, a court could conclude that the agency 
acted arbitrarily and capriciously.

     Because Hurson had an absolute right to add an arbitrary-
and-capricious claim to its complaint, we therefore have no 
alternative but to remand with instructions that it be permit-
ted to amend its complaint to include that claim.  The Court 
would have the USDA realize that it could have avoided this 
additional stage of litigation by doing no more than filing an 
answer, or other responsive pleading.

     In sum, the District Court erred in declining to allow 
Hurson to amend its complaint to allege that the USDA's 
elimination of face-to-face violates the Commerce Clause and 
is arbitrary and capricious, because Hurson was entitled to 
amend its complaint as a matter of right.  Although the 
Commerce-Clause claim would not survive a motion to dis-
miss, and therefore need not be remanded, Hurson alleges 
the necessary elements of an arbitrary-and-capricious claim.  
Hurson must, therefore, be permitted to amend its complaint 
to include the latter claim.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     We affirm the District Court's grant of summary judgment 
on Hurson's notice-and-comment claim.  We also affirm its 
denial of Hurson's motion to amend its complaint to include a 

Commerce-Clause claim.  We reverse the District Court's 
denial of Hurson's motion to include an arbitrary-and-
capricious claim in its complaint, and remand for further 
proceedings.

                                                It is so ordered.

                                                 