                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 20, 2001     Decided April 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-1136

                       Global NAPs, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                 Verizon Delaware, Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                            ---------

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

                            ---------

     Christopher W. Savage argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for petitioner. John D. Seiver entered an appearance.

     Lisa E. Boehley, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents. With her on the 
brief were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, John E. 
Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, A. Douglas Me-
lamed, Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, Catherine G. O'Sullivan and Robert J. Wiggers, Attor-
neys.  Laurel R. Bergold, Counsel, Federal Communications 

Commission, and Nancy C. Garrison, Attorney, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, entered appearances

     Aaron M. Panner argued the cause for intervenors Verizon 
Telephone Companies.  With him on the brief were Mark L. 
Evans, Michael E. Glover, Edward H. Shakin and Lawrence 
W. Katz.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner Global NAPs, Inc. 
("GNAPs") seeks review of a Federal Communications Com-
mission ("FCC") ruling that GNAPs' tariff for Internet-bound 
traffic was facially invalid under FCC regulations.  GNAPs 
raises both procedural and substantive challenges to the 
FCC's order.  Specifically, GNAPs contends that the FCC 
violated its own rules and due process requirements in void-
ing the tariff, misconstrued the tariff terms, and improperly 
invalidated the tariff retroactively.  We hold that the FCC 
did not deprive GNAPs of due process, did not exceed its 
authority by invalidating the tariff, and reasonably declared 
GNAPs' tariff unlawful.  Therefore we uphold the FCC's 
order and deny the petition for review.

                    I. Background

A.   Statutory & Regulatory Context

     1.   Reciprocal Compensation
          
     Under Section 251(b) of the Telecommunications Act of 
1996, local exchange carriers ("LECs") are required to "es-
tablish reciprocal compensation arrangements for the trans-
port and termination of telecommunications."  47 U.S.C. 
s 251(b)(5).  This means that when a customer of Carrier X 
calls a customer of Carrier Y who is within the same local 
calling area, Carrier X pays Carrier Y for completing, or 
"terminating," the call.  The FCC interprets this requirement 
to apply only to local calls--that is, calls that originate and 
terminate within a local area.  The reciprocal compensation 
requirement "do[es] not apply to the transport or termination 

of interstate or intrastate interexchange traffic."  In re Im-
plementation of the Local Competition Provisions in the 
Telecom. Act of 1996, 11 F.C.C.R. 15,499, 16,013 p 1034 (1996) 
(subsequent history omitted).

     Under the Act, carriers are expected to negotiate the rate 
and terms of reciprocal compensation.  If the carriers are 
unable to reach agreement, they may submit the contested 
issues to arbitration by the relevant state public utility com-
mission ("PUC").  47 U.S.C. s 252(e)(1).  Once the PUC 
approves an interconnection agreement, it is charged with 
interpreting and enforcing the agreement, but the PUC's 
determinations are subject to review in federal court for 
consistency with the Act.  See 47 U.S.C. s 252(e)(6).

     In February 1999, the FCC published an order holding that 
Internet-bound calls to Internet Service Providers ("ISPs") 
are not local on the theory that such traffic does not originate 
and terminate in the same local calling area, and is therefore 
not covered by the reciprocal compensation obligation.  See 
In re Implementation of the Local Competition Provisions in 
the Telecom. Act of 1996, Inter-carrier Compensation for 
ISP-Bound Traffic, 14 F.C.C.R. 3689 (1999) ("Reciprocal 
Compensation Ruling").  While the call to the ISP may be 
local, the FCC concluded that the terminating end of the call 
is actually the site reached by the Internet connection.  The 
FCC noted that there was no federal rule governing inter-
carrier compensation for Internet-bound traffic, but held that 
carriers would be bound to provide compensation as provided 
under their respective interconnection agreements as inter-
preted by state PUCs.  Id. at 3704 p 24.  The FCC also 
initiated a rulemaking on an appropriate federal inter-carrier 
compensation mechanism.  Id. at 3707 p 28.  While this rule-
making was underway, the affected LECs petitioned this 
court for review of the FCC's decision.  We vacated and 
remanded the order for the Commission's failure to provide 
an adequate explanation as to why Internet-bound calls were 
not treated as local calls.  See Bell Atlantic Tel. Cos. v. FCC, 
206 F.3d 1 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

     2.   Tariff Requirements
          
     Under Section 201(b) of the Telecommunications Act, all 
interstate communications "charges, practices, classifications, 
and regulations" must be "just and reasonable."  47 U.S.C. 
s 201(b).  Carriers must publish rate tariffs before they go 
into effect.  Published tariffs "must contain clear and explicit 
explanatory statements regarding the rates and regulations."  
47 C.F.R. s 61.2 (a).  Tariffs may not "make reference to any 
other tariff publication or to any other document or instru-
ment."  Id. at s 61.74(a).  Tariffs filed by nondominant carri-
ers, such as GNAPs, take effect on only one day's notice.  
Such tariffs receive streamlined review and are presumed 
lawful by the Commission.  Failure to comply with the rele-
vant regulatory provisions "may be grounds for rejection" of 
the tariff.  Id. at s 61.1(b).

B.   Relevant Facts

     GNAPs is a competitive local exchange carrier ("CLEC") in 
several states.  GNAPs and Intervenor Verizon, an LEC 
formerly known as Bell Atlantic, have interconnection agree-
ments in several states.  In April 1997, the two carriers 
entered into an interconnection agreement including a provi-
sion that "[r]eciprocal compensation only applies to the trans-
port and termination of Local Traffic" defined as "a call which 
is originated and terminated within a given [Local Access and 
Transport Area or "LATA"]" in Massachusetts.  The parties 
did not agree as to whether the agreement's reciprocal com-
pensation provisions covered Internet-bound traffic, but 
agreed to abide by the interpretation of the Massachusetts 
Department of Telecommunications and Energy ("DTE")--
the Massachusetts PUC--of either the GNAPs-Verizon 
agreement or identical language in other agreements to which 
Verizon was a party.

     On October 21, 1998, DTE ruled that Verizon was required 
to pay reciprocal compensation for the delivery of Internet-
bound traffic by MCI WorldCom.  Complaint of MCI World-
Com, Inc., D.T.E. 97-116 (Mass. D.T.E. Oct. 21, 1998).  At 
the time, DTE directed Verizon to pay reciprocal compensa-
tion to other LECs with which it had similar agreements 

within the state.  Shortly thereafter, however, the FCC pub-
lished the Reciprocal Compensation Ruling declaring that 
Internet-bound traffic is interstate, not local.  DTE respond-
ed on May 19, 1999 by vacating its October decision and 
declaring that Verizon was not required to pay reciprocal 
compensation for Internet-bound traffic, but may be required 
to pay compensation under the interconnection agreement.  
Complaint of MCI WorldCom, Inc., D.T.E. 97-116-C (Mass. 
D.T.E. May 19, 1999).  On February 25, 2000, after this 
Court vacated the FCC's order, DTE reaffirmed its May 1999 
ruling, but this ruling is the subject of ongoing litigation.  
Complaint of MCI WorldCom, Inc., D.T.E. 97-116-D (Mass. 
D.T.E. Feb. 25, 2000).

     On April 14, 1999, while the DTE proceedings were under-
way (and before the DTE vacated its initial decision) GNAPs 
filed a tariff imposing an $0.008 per minute charge on the 
delivery of all Internet-bound calls for which GNAPs "does 
not receive compensation ... under the terms of an intercon-
nection agreement."  The tariff further provided that a carri-
er's "[f]ailure ... to actually compensate [GNAPs] for ISP-
bound traffic as local traffic under the terms of an Intercon-
nection Agreement shall constitute an election to compensate 
[GNAPs] under the terms of this Tariff."  On May 27, 1999, 
GNAPs billed Verizon under this tariff over $1.7 million for 
fifteen days of service.  Verizon refused to pay.

C.   The FCC Proceedings

     On July 8, 1999 Verizon filed a complaint against GNAPs' 
tariff under Section 208 of the Communications Act.  Verizon 
alleged that 1) the tariff was inconsistent with FCC rules 
insofar as the FCC exempted ISPs from access charges and 
provided for joint provision of access service to interexchange 
carriers, 2) the tariff preempted state determination of inter-
carrier compensation for interstate Internet-bound traffic, 3) 
the tariff made Verizon an involuntary GNAPs customer, and 
4) the tariff imposed excessive rates.  Specifically, Verizon 
alleged "GNAPs has no right to circumvent the negotiation 
and arbitration process that the DTE and this Commission 
have directed it to follow by unilaterally filing a federal 

tariff."  After a status conference, the FCC directed briefing 
on ten issues concerning the legality of the tariff and the 
applicability of specific FCC rules, including "why Global 
NAPs filed a federal tariff and whether that was reasonable."  
In re Bell Atlantic-Delaware, Inc., E-99-22 (Aug. 19, 1999).

     On December 2, 1999, the FCC declared GNAPs' tariff 
unlawful under section 201(b) and void ab initio.  In re Bell 
Atlantic-Delaware, Inc., et al. v. Global NAPs, Inc., Memo-
randum Opinion and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. 12,946 (1999) ("Or-
der").  The FCC found that the challenged tariff provisions 
violated the requirement of 47 C.F.R. s 61.2 that tariffs be 
"clear and explicit" because "those tariff provisions condition 
the imposition of charges on circumstances that were indeter-
minate when the tariff took effect and remain indeterminate 
today."  Id. p 2.  Additionally, the FCC found that the tariff 
impermissibly cross-referenced another document--in this 
case the interconnection agreement between GNAPs and 
Verizon--in violation of 47 C.F.R. s 61.74(a).  The Commis-
sion noted that at the time the tariff was filed, the parties did 
not know whether GNAPs would receive reciprocal compen-
sation from Verizon for Internet-bound traffic because the 
DTE proceedings were still underway.

     On January 3, 2000, GNAPs petitioned for reconsideration 
of the FCC's order.  GNAPs raised several arguments.  
First, GNAPs argued that in basing its decision on grounds 
not raised by Verizon or briefed by either party, the FCC 
denied GNAPs its right to notice and due process and illegal-
ly relieved Verizon of its burden of proof.  GNAPs further 
argued that the FCC, by voiding the tariff retroactively, 
illegally denied GNAPs just compensation for the interstate 
services it provided to Verizon.  Finally, GNAPs claimed that 
the FCC's order was wrong on the merits and the tariff was 
legal under the Act and applicable FCC regulations.

     The FCC denied GNAPs' petition on March 22.  In re Bell 
Atlantic-Delaware, Inc., et al. v. Global NAPs, Inc., Order on 
Reconsideration, 15 F.C.C.R. 5,997 (2000) ("Reconsideration 
Order").  The FCC rejected GNAPs procedural claims, ex-

plaining that its initial Order was based on issues that were 
antecedent to those raised by Verizon's complaint, and there-
fore could be considered.  The FCC further rejected GNAPs' 
contentions that the tariff was lawful and that GNAPs was 
due compensation for services rendered to Verizon.

     On March 24, 2000, GNAPs petitioned for review of both 
orders.

                         II. Notice

     Petitioner GNAPs contends the FCC violated both its own 
rules and GNAPs' due process rights by basing its ruling on 
legal arguments that were not presented by either party nor 
raised by the FCC in its August 1999 briefing order.  Accord-
ing to GNAPs, only those issues pled to the Commission are 
properly before it.  Therefore, GNAPs claims, the Commis-
sion was precluded from basing its decision on any other 
grounds.  By doing otherwise, GNAPs claims the FCC violat-
ed its due process rights and the Order must be set aside.

     The FCC's rules require that a petitioner plead "[a]ll 
matters concerning a claim ... fully and with specificity."  47 
C.F.R. s 1.720(a).  As interpreted by the FCC, these rules 
bar a complainant from amending or otherwise "introducing 
new issues late in the development of the case."  In re 
Implementation of the Telecom. Act of 1996, 12 F.C.C.R. 
22,497, 22,597 p 241 (1997).  GNAPs claims that any depar-
ture from those rules violates GNAPs' due process rights.  
Specifically, GNAPs alleges that the FCC's conduct contra-
dicts the Administrative Procedure Act's ("APA") require-
ment that a party "shall be timely informed of ... the 
matters of fact and law asserted."  5 U.S.C. s 554(b).  See 
Amoco Prod. Co. v. Fry, 118 F.3d 812, 819 (D.C. Cir. 1997) 
("Notice and a meaningful opportunity to challenge the agen-
cy's decision are the essential elements of due process.").  
The lack of notice, GNAPs claims, made it impossible for it to 
respond to the arguments upon which the FCC ultimately 
made its decision.  Proper notice, GNAPs claims, would have 
enabled it "to cut its losses early on by amending its tariff."  
Brief for Petitioner at 27.

     The FCC responds to GNAPs' procedural claims by argu-
ing that it voided GNAPs' tariff based on legal theories that 
were "antecedent" to those raised by Verizon.  The FCC 
could not determine the reasonableness of the tariff without 
determining what it covered, and that question was indeter-
minate given the ongoing DTE proceedings.  We agree.  
Though the precise legal theories relied upon by the Commis-
sion were different than those raised by Verizon, GNAPs 
cannot credibly argue that the effect of the ongoing state 
proceeding on GNAPs' tariff and Verizon's payment obli-
gations was not squarely before the agency.  GNAPs cites 
Virginia State Corp. Comm'n v. MCI, 14 F.C.C.R. 4744 
(1999), for the proposition that in a Section 208 proceeding, 
the FCC may only consider those issues briefed by the 
complainant.  While the FCC declined to consider issues 
raised sua sponte by Commission staff in Virginia State 
Corp., it was not because the Commission lacked the authori-
ty to do so.  Rather, the FCC concluded that "[i]n the 
particular circumstances" of that case the unbriefed issues 
"raised difficult and important issues warranting extensive 
analysis by the parties and the Commission."  Id. at 4753 p 24 
n.65.  It was these "particular circumstances," and not the 
complainant's failure to raise particular issues standing alone, 
that would have deprived the parties "a full and fair opportu-
nity" to address the issues.  Id.

     There is no dispute that the FCC declared GNAPs' tariff 
unlawful "for reasons other than those asserted" by Verizon.  
Order at p 14.  This does not, however, mean that GNAPs 
was deprived due process.  Even assuming that the FCC 
violated its own rules, GNAPs had adequate opportunity to 
meet the charges on reconsideration.  GNAPs addressed the 
substance of the FCC's findings in its petition for reconsider-
ation (while claiming not to), and identified no significant 
evidence that might have changed the FCC's conclusions.  
Unless we are given concrete reason to believe otherwise, we 
will trust that an agency properly discharged its obligation to 
reconsider those issues presented in a petition for reconsider-
ation;  "we cannot consider the reconsideration to have been a 
sham."  U.S. Satellite Broad. Co. v. FCC, 740 F.2d 1177, 1186 

(D.C. Cir. 1984).  We therefore proceed to review the merits 
of the FCC's decision.

                         III. Merits

A.   Standard of Review

     Under the APA, a reviewing court must uphold an FCC 
order unless it is found to be "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse 
of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law."  5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).  This is a "deferential standard" that 
"presume[s] the validity of agency action."  Southwestern 
Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 168 F.3d 1344, 1352 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  
The FCC is due substantial deference in its implementation 
of the Communications Act, and "even greater deference" 
when interpreting its own rules and regulations.  Capital 
Network Sys. v. FCC, 28 F.3d 201, 206 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  A 
similar standard applies to the FCC's interpretation of tariffs.  
Such interpretations should be upheld where they are "rea-
sonable [and] based upon factors within the Commission's 
expertise."  American Message Centers v. FCC, 50 F.3d 35, 
39 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (citation omitted).  Reversing an FCC 
tariff interpretation should only occur where it "is not sup-
ported by substantial evidence, or the [Commission] has made 
a clear error in judgment."  Id. (citation omitted).

B.   The Tariff

     The FCC found GNAPs' tariff to be ambiguous and to 
contain an impermissible cross-reference.  Either is a suffi-
cient ground to declare the tariff illegal.  GNAPs maintains 
that a proper reading of its tariff shows that it is not 
ambiguous and does not contain an impermissible cross-
reference.  Whereas the FCC and Verizon contend that the 
tariff is conditional on another document--the referenced 
interconnection agreement--GNAPs maintains that the tariff 
is conditional on whether GNAPs was actually paid for carry-
ing the traffic, irrespective of the reason.  GNAPs claims the 
tariff is not unclear or ambiguous, as carriers will know 
whether they paid GNAPs and therefore will know whether 
the tariff applies.  For the same reason, GNAPs claims, the 

tariff should not be read to contain an impermissible cross-
reference in violation of 47 C.F.R. s 61.74(a).

     The FCC clearly has the better of this argument.  47 
C.F.R. s 61.74(a) provides that "no tariff publication filed 
with the Commission may make reference to any other tariff 
publication or to any other document or instrument."  The 
relevant portion of the tariff reads:  "This tariff applies to all 
ISP-bound traffic for which [GNAPs] does not receive com-
pensation from the Delivering LEC under the terms of an 
interconnection agreement."  (Emphasis added.)  From 
these words it is unmistakable that the application of the 
tariff is contingent upon whether GNAPs is paid "under the 
terms of an interconnection agreement."  If GNAPs receives 
payment for some other reason, this would not satisfy the 
condition, and payment would still be due under the tariff.  
The tariff, on its face, violates the FCC's rule.  Any reason-
able construction of the tariff's language would require a 
customer to consult the interconnection agreement to deter-
mine whether the tariff applied.

     The FCC also reasonably concluded that the tariff violates 
47 C.F.R. s 61.2(a) which provides that tariffs must be clear 
and explicit "[i]n order to remove all doubt as to their proper 
application."  When GNAPs filed the tariff, the DTE pro-
ceedings were still underway.  As a result, it remained un-
clear whether the GNAPs-Verizon interconnection agreement 
required compensation for Internet-bound traffic.  If a party 
could not know whether compensation was due under the 
agreement, it could not know whether any payment to 
GNAPs was "under the terms of an interconnection agree-
ment."  If a party could not reasonably ascertain the "proper 
application" of the tariff at the time it was filed, the tariff was 
unclear and therefore was invalid.

     DTE's subsequent dismissal of GNAPs' claim for compen-
sation under the agreement did not "cure" its ambiguity for 
several reasons.  First, the FCC's Order focused on whether 
the tariff was valid at the time it was filed.  GNAPs revised 
its tariff on February 14, 2000, eliminating the provisions 
found unlawful by the FCC.  DTE's subsequent ruling could 

not retroactively cure the deficiency of the tariff in effect 
prior to February 14 or affect the validity of charges GNAPs 
sought to assess Verizon prior to that point.  In addition, 
because GNAPs appealed the DTE finding, that matter was 
not resolved when the FCC made its determination.  Finally, 
even had the DTE ruling cured the tariff's indeterminacy, it 
did not eliminate the impermissible cross-reference.

C.   Statutory Structure

     In a final effort to avoid the inevitable, GNAPs argues that 
the FCC does not have the authority to invalidate tariffs 
under Section 208, but only acts as an "adjudicator of private 
rights."  AT&T v. FCC, 978 F.2d 727, 732 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  
In GNAPs' view, it would be proper for the FCC to award 
damages to one party or another, but not to declare a tariff 
unlawful on its face.  Challenges to tariffs themselves, 
GNAPs claims, must proceed under Sections 204 and 205, 
which relate to modifying or invalidating tariffs.

     This argument is no more successful than GNAPs' creative 
reading of its own tariff.  As we noted just last year, Section 
204 grants the FCC "quasi-legislative authority to evaluate a 
carrier's proposals for new or revised rates."  Hi-Tech Fur-
nace Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 224 F.3d 781, 786 (D.C. Cir. 2000). 
Section 208, on the other hand, grants "authority, upon 
complaint by an injured party, to adjudicate the lawfulness of 
a carrier's past and present rates and practices."  Id.  It is 
difficult to conceive of this case as other than an adjudication 
of "the lawfulness of a carrier's ... present rates and prac-
tices."

D.   Relief

     GNAPs argues, in the alternative, that even if the FCC was 
correct to declare the tariff unlawful, the FCC erred by 
"retroactively invalidating" the tariff.  Whatever the deficien-
cies of the tariff in this case, GNAPs argues, it is not so 
deficient as to justify retroactive invalidation under the stan-
dards set forth in ICC v. American Trucking Assn's, 467 U.S. 
354 (1984).  The retroactive invalidation is not, in GNAPs' 
view, "legitimate, reasonable, and direct[ly] adjunct to the 
Commission's explicit statutory power."  Id. at 365 (internal 

quotation omitted).  While acknowledging that the FCC has 
the authority to order a complete refund of tariff overcharges, 
GNAPs argues that the Commission must consider the equi-
ties before ordering such a result.  See Virgin Islands Tel. 
Co. v. FCC, 989 F.2d 1231, 1240 (D.C. Cir. 1993);  Las Cruces 
TV Cable v. FCC, 645 F.2d 1041, 1047-48 (D.C. Cir. 1981).  
Not only did the FCC not award GNAPs any compensation, 
but it did not even bother to consider whether to exercise its 
discretion.  Thus, even if the Court sides with the FCC on 
the merits, GNAPs argues that a remand is necessary for the 
FCC to consider whether payment to GNAPs for services 
rendered is due.

     GNAPs' argument that relief under Section 208 of the Act 
cannot be retroactive in effect is clearly wrong.  Section 208 
is designed to enable parties to obtain redress for a carrier's 
violation of the Act or the FCC's regulations.  Yet insofar as 
Section 208 authorizes the award of damages or other reme-
dies, it is always "retroactive" in its application in that it will 
always be changing the economic consequences of a carrier's 
prior conduct.  The remedy here--complete invalidation of 
GNAPs' tariff--may be more severe than consequential dam-
ages, but it is no more backward-looking.

     The FCC notes that it may be inappropriate for GNAPs to 
have filed its tariff in the first place.  The FCC has not 
authorized, let alone required, carriers to file tariffs for local 
Internet-bound traffic.  Instead, the Commission expected 
carriers to enter into interconnnection agreements that would 
set compensation subject to state commission approval.  
Merely because a tariff is presumed lawful upon filing does 
not mean that it is lawful.  Such tariffs still must comply with 
the applicable statutory and regulatory requirements.  Those 
that do not may be declared invalid.  Indeed, GNAPs ac-
knowledges that "[a] tariff that is so plainly defective as to be 
a legal nullity may be declared retroactively invalid--void ab 
initio--in order to ensure that an injustice is not worked on 
the affected customers."  Brief for Petitioner at 36.  That 
was the case here.  The FCC found that the tariff, on its face, 
violated the plain meaning of the FCC's tariff regulations and 
therefore was unlawful from the date of issuance.  This is 

sufficient to satisfy the test laid out in American Trucking 
Ass'ns as the FCC voided a tariff in furtherance of a "specific 
statutory mandate" to which the action was "directly and 
closely tied."  467 U.S. at 367.  The other cases cited by 
GNAPs--Virgin Islands Tel. Co. and Las Cruces TV Cable-- 
are distinguishable, as they involved refunds for unreasonable 
rates, and not a patently unlawful tariff.

     While we uphold the FCC's conclusion that the tariff was 
void ab initio and invalid from the date it was published, we 
have not left GNAPs without opportunity to seek redress.  
Our holding today does not foreclose GNAPs' ability to seek 
compensation under the interconnection agreement before the 
DTE as well as to seek a negotiated compensation settlement 
with Verizon.  If this route is unsuccessful or impractical, and 
the FCC's rules make it difficult for GNAPs and other 
carriers to obtain compensation for Internet-bound traffic, 
they may petition the FCC for a change in the Commission's 
rules.  That GNAPs sought to game the existing rules, and 
lost, does not mean the FCC was arbitrary and capricious in 
its application of its own rules.

                         IV. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is

                                                            Denied.

                              