                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 10, 2001   Filed November 2, 2001 

                           No. 00-7203

              Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                     Antoinette Richardson, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv01322)

                            ---------

                CERTIFICATION OF QUESTION OF LAW 
              by the United States Court of Appeals 
             for the District of Columbia Circuit to 
            the District of Columbia Court of Appeals 
              pursuant to D.C. Code s 11-723 (2001)

                            ---------

     David P. Sutton argued the cause for appellant.  With him 
on the brief was Robert J. Pleshaw.

     Catherine M. Colinvaux argued the cause for appellee.  
With her on the brief was David P. Durbin.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  The disposition of this appeal 
depends upon the proper application of District of Columbia 
law to resolve a dispute over the scope of a pollution exclu-
sion clause in a liability insurance policy.  The contested 
provision, which is common in commercial comprehensive 
general liability insurance policies, excludes liability coverage 
for injuries or damage arising out of events involving the 
release or escape of "pollutants."  Courts around the country 
have divided in construing the scope of the pollution exclusion 
clause.  Some courts read the clause expansively and thereby 
give broad reach to the exclusion, and others find the clause 
ambiguous and construe it narrowly in favor of insured 
parties seeking coverage.

     The District of Columbia Court of Appeals has yet to 
consider the scope of the pollution exclusion clause under 
District of Columbia law.  We are mindful that a "federal 
court ... should normally decline to speculate on ... a 
question of local doctrine."  East v. Graphic Arts Indus. 
Joint Pension Trust, 107 F.3d 911, 911 (D.C. Cir. 1997) 
(quoting Delahanty v. Hinckley, 845 F.2d 1069, 1070 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988)).  In deciding whether to certify such a question to 
the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, we ask whether 
District of Columbia law is "genuinely uncertain" with respect 
to the dispositive question, Dial A Car, Inc. v. Transp., Inc., 
132 F.3d 743, 746 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing Tidler v. Eli Lilly & 
Co., 851 F.2d 418, 426 (D.C. Cir. 1988)), and whether the case 
"is one of extreme public importance," id. (citing Joy v. Bell 
Helicopter Textron, Inc., 999 F.2d 549, 563-64 (D.C. Cir. 
1993)).  Where there is a "discernable path for the court to 
follow," we do not avoid deciding the question.  Id.  District 
of Columbia law presents no such path in this case, and, while 
the scope of the pollution exclusion clause has been the 
subject of extensive litigation in other jurisdictions, we can 
find no common ground of opinion among the courts that have 
construed the clause.  Finally, the question is one of signifi-

cant import to the public.  Because the pollution exclusion 
clause appears in the standard commercial comprehensive 
general liability policy, it potentially affects the insurance 
coverage of most businesses in the District of Columbia.  See, 
e.g., Doerr v. Mobil Oil Corp., 774 So.2d 119, 123 n.1 (La. 
2000) ("Some form of this pollution exclusion is part of the 
standard [commercial general liability] policy purchased by 
almost all large and small businesses since the mid-1980s.") 
(citation omitted).

     Given the extreme public importance of the question, the 
likelihood of its recurrence in future cases, and the absence of 
a discernable answer within local law, we certify the following 
question of law to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals 
pursuant to D.C. Code s 11-723:

     In light of the facts set forth below, does the pollution 
     exclusion clause apply to injuries arising from alleged 
     carbon monoxide poisoning?
     
                          I. Background

A.   Procedural and Factual Background

     The parties to this litigation have included Antoinette Rich-
ardson, an intervenor before the District Court and now the 
appellant;  REO Management, Inc. ("REO"), the defendant 
before the District Court;  and Nationwide Mutual Insurance 
Co. ("Nationwide"), the plaintiff before the District Court and 
now the appellee.

     The facts in this case are largely undisputed.  Ms. Richard-
son worked in the District of Columbia as a security guard in 
an apartment complex managed by REO Management.  REO 
is organized under the laws of the District of Columbia, where 
it has its principal place of business.  At the time of the 
events in question, REO held a comprehensive general liabili-
ty insurance policy (Policy No. 52PR-147-539-0001M) ("the 
policy"), which it had purchased from Nationwide, an Ohio 
corporation.  The policy provided liability protection for the 
apartment complex where Ms. Richardson worked.

     In February, 1995, a gas furnace or furnaces in the apart-
ment complex where Ms. Richardson worked allegedly began 
to leak carbon monoxide.  Ms. Richardson and another per-
son in the apartment complex claimed to have been overcome 
and disabled by carbon monoxide fumes.  Ms. Richardson 
sued REO and two other defendants in District of Columbia 
Superior Court, alleging negligent maintenance of the fur-
naces and failure to supervise and train properly the people 
who worked on them.  In her complaint, she stated that she 
was at all relevant times a resident of Maryland.

     In May, 1999, Nationwide filed an action for a declaratory 
judgment in the United States District Court for the District 
of Columbia seeking a declaration that it was not obligated to 
defend or indemnify REO in Ms. Richardson's underlying 
Superior Court lawsuit.  Nationwide asserted that the pollu-
tion exclusion clause in REO's insurance policy barred cover-
age for damages arising out of Ms. Richardson's claims.  The 
policy provides, in relevant part:

     This insurance does not apply to:  ...  f. Pollution (1) 
     "Bodily injury" or "property damage" arising out of the 
     actual, alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal, seep-
     age, migration, release or escape of pollutants....  Pol-
     lutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irri-
     tant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, 
     acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste.
     
     Nationwide moved for summary judgment based, in part, 
on the pollution exclusion clause.  In December 1999, Ms. 
Richardson filed a motion to intervene in the declaratory 
judgment action in the District Court.  She alleged, inter 
alia, that the defendant REO was a "shell corporation," 
lacking any assets except the insurance policy.  She further 
alleged that her interests could not adequately be represent-
ed by REO, because her negligence suit in Superior Court 
against REO gave rise to a conflict of interest.

     The District Court issued an Order and Memorandum 
Opinion denying Ms. Richardson's motion to intervene as of 
right pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 24(a) on 
the grounds that she lacked a sufficient interest relating to 

the subject of the action, because she had yet to receive an 
enforceable judgment in her underlying Superior Court suit.  
Instead, the District Court allowed her to intervene permis-
sively pursuant to Rule 24(b), on the condition that she 
advance only those arguments that the defendant REO had 
failed to make.  At the same time, the District Court granted 
Nationwide's motion for summary judgment, holding that the 
pollution exclusion clause "clearly and unambiguously" barred 
coverage for Ms. Richardson's alleged injuries.  The District 
Court determined that District of Columbia law governed the 
case and that no court in the District of Columbia had 
interpreted the relevant language.  While it acknowledged 
that courts in other jurisdictions have taken different ap-
proaches to interpreting pollution exclusion clauses, the Dis-
trict Court held that to find the clause ambiguous in this case 
"would be to seek out ambiguities in the contract where none 
exist."  Ms. Richardson appealed.

B.   History of the Pollution Exclusion Clause.

     The pollution exclusion clause that appears in REO's insur-
ance policy is part of a standard form commercial comprehen-
sive general liability policy.  The clause's history is well-
known.  Before 1966, the standard comprehensive general 
liability form provided coverage for property damage and 
bodily injury caused by "accident."  Jeffrey W. Stempel, 
Interpretation of Insurance Contracts s T1.1, at 826 (1994).  
Courts often interpreted the standard policy to cover injuries 
related to environmental pollution.  Am. States Ins. Co. v. 
Koloms, 687 N.E.2d 72, 79 (Ill. 1997) (detailing the history of 
the pollution exclusion clause).  The insurance industry re-
sponded by changing the policy to cover "occurrences" and 
attempting to define occurrences to exclude long-term envi-
ronmental pollution.  See id. at 79-80.  Courts nonetheless 
continued to interpret the policy to cover damages resulting 
from such pollution.  Id. at 80 (citing New Castle County v. 
Hartford Accident & Indem. Co., 933 F.2d 1162, 1197 (3d Cir. 
1991)).

     Beginning in 1970, insurers began adding an endorsement 
to the standard-form policy excluding coverage for damage 

arising out of "the discharge, dispersal, release or escape of 
smoke, vapors, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, 
liquids or gases, waste materials or other irritants, contami-
nants or pollutants into or upon land, the atmosphere or any 
water course or body of water."  Stempel, supra, s T1.1, at 
826-27 (citation omitted).  The clause contained an exception 
for discharges that were "sudden and accidental."  Id. at 826.  
The clause was incorporated into the standard comprehensive 
general liability policy itself in 1973.  Koloms, 687 N.E.2d at 
80.  Much litigation ensued over the meaning of the "sudden 
and accidental" exception.  See generally Stempel, supra, 
s T1.2 (describing the litigation).

     Insurance companies responded to the litigation by adopt-
ing a new version of the exclusion in the mid-1980s, known as 
the "absolute" or "total" pollution exclusion clause.  See Ko-
loms, 687 N.E.2d at 81.  This version is virtually identical to 
the one that appears in the REO insurance policy.  The new 
version eliminated the "sudden and accidental" exception and 
the requirement that the discharge be "into or upon land, the 
atmosphere or any water course."  Stempel, supra, ss T1.1, 
T1.3, at 826, 828-29 (quoting both versions).  The amended 
clause was intended by the insurance industry to bar cover-
age for the costs of environmental cleanups.  See W. Am. Ins. 
Co. v. Tufco Flooring E., Inc., 409 S.E.2d 692, 699 (N.C. Ct. 
App. 1991), overruled on other grounds by Gaston County 
Dyeing Mach. Co. v. Northfield Ins. Co., 524 S.E.2d 558, 565 
(N.C. 2000);  see also Essex Ins. Co. v. Tri-Town Corp., 863 
F. Supp. 38, 39-40 (D. Mass. 1994) ("[T]he insurance industry 
reacted with lightning speed to the possibility that ... it 
could find itself indemnifying industries facing the staggering 
retroactive pollution clean-up costs imposed by the 1980 
enactment of the Comprehensive Environmental Response 
Compensation and Liability Act [citation omitted].").

                           II. Analysis

A.   Intervention

     On appeal, Ms. Richardson argues that the District Court 
erred in denying her the opportunity to intervene as of right 

and without conditions.  However, before this court, Nation-
wide does not oppose Ms. Richardson's request that she be 
permitted to argue all issues on appeal that were raised below 
concerning the scope of the pollution exclusion clause.  Ms. 
Richardson has therefore not claimed that she was prejudiced 
in her appeal before this Court by the District Court's ruling 
on her motion to intervene.

     If the District of Columbia Court of Appeals determines 
that the pollution exclusion clause does not foreclose liability 
coverage of a claim of the sort raised by Ms. Richardson, it 
may be necessary for this court to remand the case to the 
District Court for further proceedings.  In that event, it will 
be up to the District Court to determine in the first instance 
whether Ms. Richardson may develop facts in support of the 
argument that the clause is inapplicable to the carbon monox-
ide leak that allegedly caused her injuries.  It is unnecessary 
for us to decide at this point whether, if the case is remanded, 
the District Court will be required to permit Ms. Richardson 
to present arguments outside the scope of the conditions set 
forth by the District Court in its Memorandum Opinion and 
Order.  Instead, we merely find that since Ms. Richardson 
was not prejudiced in her appearance before this court, we 
need not now resolve her claim that she should have been 
allowed to intervene as of right.

B.   The Pollution Exclusion Clause

     1.   District of Columbia Law Governs the Policy's Inter-
          pretation
          
     The District Court correctly determined that District of 
Columbia law governs the interpretation of the insurance 
policy.  The District Court sat in diversity because the 
amount in controversy exceeded $75,000 and the parties were 
completely diverse.  "A federal court sitting in diversity 
jurisdiction applies the choice of law rules of the forum state 
(or district or territory)...."  Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Trav-
elers Indem. Co., 78 F.3d 639, 642 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (citing 
Klaxon Co. v. Stentor Elec. Mfg. Co., 313 U.S. 487, 496 
(1941)).  District of Columbia courts apply the law of the 
state with the more substantial interest in the matter.  Blair 

v. Prudential Ins. Co. of Am., 472 F.2d 1356, 1359 (D.C. Cir. 
1972) (citing Fowler v. A & A Co., 262 A.2d 344, 348 (D.C. 
1970)).  In this case, the District of Columbia has the most 
substantial interest, since it is both the location where the 
underlying events occurred and the place of the insured's 
headquarters.  See Greycoat Hanover F St. Ltd. P'ship v. 
Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 657 A.2d 764, 768 (D.C. 1995);  Poto-
mac Elec. Power Co. v. Cal. Union Ins. Co., 777 F. Supp. 968, 
973 (D.D.C. 1991).  Thus, the insurance policy must be inter-
preted in accordance with District of Columbia law.

     2.   Legal Approaches to the Pollution Exclusion Clause
          
     The District of Columbia Court of Appeals has never 
directly addressed the scope of the pollution exclusion clause 
as applied to an event, such as residential carbon monoxide 
poisoning, that does not involve typical forms of environmen-
tal pollution.  Under District of Columbia law, an insurance 
policy is a contract whose construction is based on its lan-
guage.  Cameron v. USAA Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co., 733 A.2d 
965, 968 (D.C. 1999).  The burden is on the insurer to spell 
out in "terms understandable to the man in the street" any 
provisions that would exclude coverage.  Id. (quoting Holt v. 
George Washington Life Ins. Co., 123 A.2d 619, 621 (D.C. 
1956)).  Unless the language of such a provision is unambigu-
ous, doubts are to be resolved in favor of the insured.  Id. 
(citations omitted).  This is because insurers draft the con-
tracts, with the help of experts and lawyers.  Id. (citing 
Hayes v. Home Life Ins. Co., 168 F.2d 152, 154 (D.C. Cir. 
1948)).  The doctrine of contra preferentum, however, does 
not permit "forced constructions" or otherwise strained read-
ings in order to create obligations against insurers.  See id. 
(citing Boggs v. Motors Ins. Corp., 139 A.2d 733, 735 (D.C. 
1958)).  Nor does mere disagreement among parties as to the 
meaning of a term constitute ambiguity.  Byrd v. Allstate 
Ins. Co., 622 A.2d 691, 693-94 (D.C. 1993) (citations omitted).

     Under District of Columbia law, where a provision in an 
insurance policy is unambiguous, it must be enforced as 
written unless contrary to public policy.  See Smalls v. State 
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 678 A.2d 32, 35 (D.C. 1996).  Only 

when a provision's meaning is ambiguous is it interpreted in a 
manner consistent with the "reasonable expectations" of the 
insured.  See id.  This rule stands in contrast to the law in 
some other states, in which courts apply the doctrine of the 
insured's "reasonable expectations" to construe even unam-
biguous provisions in favor of the insured.  See, e.g., Reg'l 
Bank of Colo., N.A. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 35 
F.3d 494, 497 (10th Cir. 1994) (stating that, under Colorado 
law, even if an insurance policy is unambiguous, it is con-
strued in light of the reasonable expectations of the ordinary 
policyholder).

     The question, therefore, is whether the District of Colum-
bia Court of Appeals would find the pollution exclusion clause 
ambiguous as applied to the facts of this case.  In attempting 
to determine how the District of Columbia Court of Appeals 
would rule on this issue, the District Court gave some weight 
to the fact that the Fourth Circuit applied District of Colum-
bia law in finding the pollution exclusion clause unambiguous 
when applied to the release of manganese fumes.  Nation-
wide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Nat'l REO Mgmt., Inc., Civ. Action No. 
99-1322, Mem. Op. at 14 (D.D.C. July 26, 2000) (citing Nat'l 
Elec. Mfrs. Ass'n v. Gulf Underwriters Ins. Co., 162 F.3d 821 
(4th Cir. 1998)).  While we take the Fourth Circuit's efforts 
to determine how the Court of Appeals would rule into 
account, we do not find its conclusion decisive in this case.  
The Fourth Circuit found the pollution exclusion provision to 
be unambiguous based on its plain language.  Nat'l Elec. 
Mfrs. Ass'n, 162 F.3d at 825.  It then considered whether to 
apply the "reasonable expectations" doctrine to restrict the 
provision to environmental pollution.  Id.  The court correct-
ly found that District of Columbia law forbids application of 
the reasonable expectations doctrine to alter an otherwise 
clear policy provision.  Id.  We remain uncertain, however, 
whether the provision is, in fact, unambiguous under District 
of Columbia law, and the Fourth Circuit's determination on 
that point is not conclusive.

     Courts across the nation are hopelessly divided over wheth-
er the clause is ambiguous as applied to carbon monoxide, 
other fumes, and substances such as lead paint.  Because so 

many courts have addressed the issue, several approaches 
have emerged.  A number of courts have found the provision 
ambiguous and have construed it in favor of insured parties in 
cases that do not involve typical forms of environmental 
pollution.  Some have done so because the clause uses words, 
such as "dispersal," "discharge," "irritant," and "contami-
nant," that are recognizable as terms of art in environmental 
law.  See, e.g., Nautilus Ins. Co. v. Jabar, 188 F.3d 27, 30 (1st 
Cir. 1999) (finding the provision ambiguous in a case involving 
fumes from roofing products, because it uses terms of art and 
because, if read literally, its scope would be "virtually bound-
less");  Kenyon v. Sec. Ins. Co. of Hartford (DPIC Cos.), 626 
N.Y.S.2d 347, 350 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1993) (finding the provision 
ambiguous in a case involving residential carbon monoxide 
poisoning, because it uses words recognized as terms of art in 
environmental law), aff'd, 616 N.Y.S.2d 133 (N.Y. App. Div. 
1994).  Other courts have found that the clause's general 
purpose - shielding insurers from the costs of environmental 
cleanups - prevents it from barring coverage for everyday 
industrial and residential accidents.  See, e.g., Stoney Run Co. 
v. Prudential-LMI Commercial Ins. Co., 47 F.3d 34, 36-37 
(2d Cir. 1995) (finding the provision ambiguous in a case 
involving residential carbon monoxide poisoning, because it is 
reasonable to interpret it as applying only to environmental 
pollution in light of its general purpose);  Sullins v. Allstate 
Ins. Co., 667 A.2d 617, 620 (Md. 1995) (finding a similar 
version of the provision ambiguous as applied to lead paint 
because it could reasonably be interpreted to apply only to 
environmental pollution).  Some courts have reasoned that 
the pollution exclusion clause must be ambiguous if so many 
courts have given it conflicting interpretations.  See, e.g., 
Meridian Mut. Ins. Co. v. Kellman, 197 F.3d 1178, 1183 (6th 
Cir. 1999) (finding the provision ambiguous in light of "the 
disarray that characterize[s] this area of law");  Motorists 
Mut. Ins. Co. v. RSJ, Inc., 926 S.W.2d 679, 681 (Ky. Ct. App. 
1996) (finding the provision ambiguous as applied to carbon 
monoxide poisoning because of its conflicting judicial interpre-
tations and because of its use of "environmental law terms of 
art").

     Other courts have found that a strictly literal reading of the 
provision could yield absurd results.  The Seventh Circuit, in 
an oft-quoted case, analyzed the problem as follows:

     The terms "irritant" and "contaminant," when viewed in 
     isolation, are virtually boundless, for "there is virtually 
     no substance or chemical in existence that would not 
     irritate or damage some person or property."  Westches-
     ter Fire Ins. Co. v. City of Pittsburgh, 768 F. Supp. 1463, 
     1470 (D. Kan. 1991).  Without some limiting principle, 
     the pollution exclusion clause would extend far beyond its 
     intended scope, and lead to some absurd results.  To 
     take but two simple examples, reading the clause broadly 
     would bar coverage for bodily injuries suffered by one 
     who slips and falls on the spilled contents of a bottle of 
     Drano, and for bodily injury caused by an allergic reac-
     tion to chlorine in a public pool.  Although Drano and 
     chlorine are both irritants or contaminants that cause, 
     under certain conditions, bodily injury or property dam-
     age, one would not ordinarily characterize these events 
     as pollution.
     
Pipefitters Welfare Educ. Fund v. Westchester Fire Ins. Co., 
976 F.2d 1037, 1043 (7th Cir. 1992).  The court noted that, to 
avoid absurd results, many courts have taken a "common 
sense approach" when determining the scope of pollution 
exclusion clauses, holding that the clauses do not apply to 
"injuries resulting from everyday activities gone slightly, but 
not surprisingly, awry."  Id. at 1043-44 (citations omitted);  
see also Am. States Ins. Co. v. Kiger, 662 N.E.2d 945, 948 
(Ind. 1996) ("Clearly, [the pollution exclusion] clause cannot 
be read literally as it would negate virtually all coverage.  
For example, if a visitor slips on a grease spill then, since 
grease is a 'chemical,' there would be no insurance coverage. 
Accordingly, this clause requires interpretation.").

     Another group of courts has found the pollution exclusion 
clause not to preclude coverage for releases of carbon monox-
ide and other fumes, without finding the clause ambiguous.  
See, e.g., Reg'l Bank of Colo., N.A., 35 F.3d at 497 (finding 
that a carbon monoxide exposure incident was not excluded 

from insurance coverage, regardless of whether the policy's 
pollution exclusion clause was ambiguous);  W. Alliance Ins. 
Co. v. Gill, 686 N.E.2d 997, 999 (Mass. 1997) (finding that the 
clause did not bar coverage for carbon monoxide exposure 
because its use of environmental law terms of art suggested 
that it applied to industrial or environmental pollution and 
holding that the exclusion must be interpreted "in a common-
sense manner");  Thompson v. Temple, 580 So. 2d 1133, 1135 
(La. Ct. App. 1991) (finding that a similar pollution exclusion 
clause did not exclude coverage for injuries caused by a 
leaking heater where the intent of the insurance industry was 
to exclude coverage for entities that knowingly pollute the 
environment).

     On the other hand, a number of courts have found the 
pollution exclusion provision to be unambiguous and to bar 
coverage for incidents like the one underlying this suit.  At 
least one court has specifically found that the clause's lan-
guage does not reflect the specialized language of environ-
mental law.  See Nat'l Elec. Mfrs. Ass'n, 162 F.3d at 825 
(applying District of Columbia law and finding the provision 
unambiguous as applied to welders exposed to manganese 
fumes because it contains "neither technical terms nor terms 
of art").  In other cases, courts have focused on the clause's 
broad language, which does not explicitly exempt non-
environmental damage.  See, e.g., Assicurazioni Generali, 
S.p.A. v. Neil, 160 F.3d 997, 1000 (4th Cir. 1998) (finding that 
a similar provision's expansive language applies to carbon 
monoxide injuries);  Certain Underwriters at Lloyd's London 
v. C.A. Turner Constr. Co., 112 F.3d 184, 188 (5th Cir. 1997) 
(finding a similar provision unambiguous as applied to a 
welding accident because its plain language does not limit its 
application to environmental harm);  Reliance Ins. Co. v. 
Moessner, 121 F.3d 895, 901, 903-04 (3rd Cir. 1997) (finding 
the provision unambiguous in a case involving carbon monox-
ide poisoning because of its plain language, but finding that, 
under Pennsylvania law, the insured's reasonable expecta-
tions could override the plain meaning);  Essex Ins. Co., 863 
F. Supp. at 40-41 (finding the provision applicable to carbon 
monoxide poisoning caused by a Zamboni machine in an ice 

rink because of its plain language);  Bernhardt v. Hartford 
Fire Ins. Co., 648 A.2d 1047, 1050-51 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 
1994) (finding the provision unambiguous because its lan-
guage is "quite specific" and people of ordinary intelligence 
would not conclude that it was inapplicable to tenants' carbon 
monoxide poisoning).

     With so many courts coming to diametrically opposed con-
clusions about the clause's clarity and meaning, it is difficult 
to know which line of cases the District of Columbia Court of 
Appeals would follow.  Because the issue is important and 
likely to recur, and because courts have taken conflicting 
approaches to the clause's interpretation, we hereby certify 
the question to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals in 
accordance with D.C. Code s 11-723.  We append to this 
certification the relevant portions of the District Court rec-
ord.  In addition, the Clerk of the Court shall forward copies 
of all or such portion of the record, including the parties' 
briefs, that the Court of Appeals may require in order to 
answer the certified question.  See D.C. Code s 11-723(d) 
(2001).

        