                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                            ---------

                      Filed January 25, 2000

                           No. 98-5491

           Navegar, Incorporated, d/b/a Intratec, and 
                    Penn Arms, Incorporated, 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                            ---------

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Silberman, Williams, 
Ginsburg, Sentelle, Henderson, Randolph, Rogers, Tatel, 
and Garland, Circuit Judges.*

                            O R D E R

     Appellants' petition for rehearing en banc and the response 
thereto have been circulated to the full court.   The taking of 
a vote was requested.  Thereafter, a majority of the judges of 
the court in regular active service did not vote in favor of the 
petition.  Upon consideration of the foregoing, it is

     ORDERED by the Court that appellants' petition is de-
nied.

                                        Per curiam

                                         For the Court:

                                        Mark J. Langer, Clerk

__________
     * Circuit Judge Sentelle would grant the petition for rehearing 
en banc.  His opinion is attached.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, dissenting from the denial of 
petition for rehearing en banc:  By denying en banc review of 
the panel opinion, Navegar, Inc. v. United States, 192 F.3d 
1050 (D.C. Cir. 1999), this court perpetuates an approach to 
Commerce Clause jurisprudence hopelessly out of date under 
contemporary Supreme Court interpretations of the Constitu-
tion.

     In United States v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549 (1995), the Su-
preme Court carefully delineated limitations on the authority 
of the federal government to act under that enumerated 
power.  In his opinion for the five-Justice majority, Chief 
Justice Rehnquist identified "three broad categories of activi-
ty" within which the federal government may legitimately 
regulate under the commerce power.  514 U.S. at 558.  These 
three categories are:  (1) "the use of the channels of interstate 
commerce";  (2) the regulation and protection of "the instru-
mentalities of interstate commerce, or persons or things in 
interstate commerce, even though the threat may come only 
from intrastate activities";  and (3) "activities having a sub-
stantial relation to interstate commerce."  Id. at 558-59 (cita-
tions omitted).  Because the claimed justification for the 
statute before it, the Gun-Free School Zones Act, sheltered 
under the umbrella of the third area of activity, the Chief 
Justice wrote a further explication of "those activities that 
substantially affect interstate commerce."  Id. at 559 (citing 
Maryland v. Wirtz, 392 U.S. 183, 196 n.27 (1968)).  Briefly, 
under Lopez, to be the subject of constitutionally valid regula-
tion under the Commerce Clause, an activity not falling 
within categories 1 or 2 must substantially affect interstate 
commerce, not merely affect it.  Id. at 559.  To determine 
whether an activity substantially affects commerce, we under-
take another tripartite examination, asking whether:

     --the regulation controls a commercial activity, or an 
     activity necessary to the regulation of some commercial 
     activity;
     
     --the statute includes a jurisdictional nexus requirement 
     to ensure that each regulated instance of the activity 
     affects interstate commerce;  and
     
     --the rationale offered to support the constitutionality of 
     the statute (i.e., statutory findings, legislative history, 
     
     arguments of counsel, or a reviewing court's own attribu-
     tion of purposes to the statute being challenged) has a 
     logical stopping point so that the rationale is not so broad 
     as to regulate on a similar basis all human endeavors, 
     especially those traditionally regulated by the states.
     
National Ass'n of Home Builders v. Babbitt, 130 F.3d 1041, 
1064 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (Sentelle, J., dissenting) (analyzing 
Lopez, 514 U.S. at 559-65, and citing United States v. Wall, 
92 F.3d 1444, 1455-56 (6th Cir. 1996) (Boggs, J., dissenting in 
part)).

     In Lopez, the Court considered the constitutionality of a 
statute in which Congress had made it a federal offense "for 
any individual knowingly to possess a firearm at a place that 
the individual knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, is a 
school zone."  18 U.S.C. s 922(q)(1)(A) (Supp. V 1993).  The 
only justification the United States could offer among the 
enumerated powers for the constitutionality of the statute 
was the Commerce Clause.  Unsurprisingly, the Court held 
that the Gun-Free School Zones Act fit none of those three 
subcategories.  First, it did not regulate or control a commer-
cial activity or an activity necessary to the regulation of a 
commercial activity.  The Chief Justice acknowledged that 
Wickard v. Filburn, 317 U.S. 111 (1942), relied on by the 
panel in Navegar, 192 F.3d at 1056-57, had upheld federal 
regulation of home consumption of wheat, where it affected 
interstate commerce, but described that decision as "perhaps 
the most far reaching example of Commerce Clause authority 
over intrastate activity."  Lopez, 514 U.S. at 560.  The Lopez 
Court further recognized that at least the statute before the 
Court in Wickard involved the regulation of the wheat mar-
ket--interstate commerce.  Id. at 560-61.  In the view of the 
Congress, and subsequently the Court of that time, the 
regulation of consumable wheat, wherever grown, was neces-
sary to control the volume of wheat on that interstate market.  
The Gun-Free School Zones Act neither controlled nor pur-
ported to affect any market at all.

     Second, the statute included no jurisdictional nexus.  Un-
der this element of examination, the Chief Justice compared 
United States v. Bass, 404 U.S. 336 (1971), in which the Court 

had upheld the statute making it a crime for a felon "to 
receive, possess, or transport in commerce or affecting com-
merce ... any firearm."  Lopez, 514 U.S. at 561-62 (quoting 
Bass, 404 U.S. at 337 (brackets omitted)).  The Chief Justice 
noted that in upholding that statute the Court had expressly 
reserved the question of whether Congress could constitution-
ally regulate the "mere possession" of firearms without the 
jurisdictional nexus.  Id. at 562 (quoting Bass, 404 U.S. at 339 
n.4).  Even in Bass, where the statute had withstood constitu-
tional scrutiny, the Court set aside the conviction before it 
because the prosecution, while having proved that the defen-
dant possessed a firearm, "failed 'to show the requisite nexus 
with interstate commerce.' "  Id. (quoting Bass, 404 U.S. at 
347).  The statute the Court struck down in Lopez had no 
such jurisdictional requirement.  Congress had invaded the 
state-owned territory of mere possession with no connection 
to interstate commerce.

     Finally, the Lopez Court considered the implications of the 
government's argument that guns around schoolhouses might 
result in violent crime, and violent crime could be expected to 
affect the functioning of the national economy either through 
the mechanism of insurance or by reducing the willingness of 
individuals to travel to other parts of the country which they 
might consider unsafe.  The Court highlighted the govern-
ment's admission that, under this "costs of crime" reasoning, 
the federal government could regulate "not only all violent 
crime, but all activities that might lead to violent crime, 
regardless of how tenuously they relate to interstate com-
merce."  Id. at 564.  Indeed, the federal government "could 
regulate any activity that [Congress] found was related to the 
economic productivity of individual citizens:  family law (in-
cluding marriage, divorce, and child custody), for example."  
Id.  In other words, under the government's theory of consti-
tutionality for the Gun-Free School Zones Act, the words of 
the Commerce Clause were limitless, and Congress had the 
power to regulate anything at all.  There was no stopping 
point.  The statute was unconstitutional.

     As appellants argue in petitioning for en banc review, the 
Navegar panel's decision in the present case is inconsistent 

with the Supreme Court's decision in Lopez.  The Navegar 
panel had before it an appeal from a judgment denying a 
declaratory judgment declaring unconstitutional section 
110102 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103-322, 108 Stat. 1796, 1996-98 
(1994) (codified at 18 U.S.C. ss 921(a)(30), 922(v) (1994)).  
The disputed section makes it unlawful to "manufacture, 
transfer, or possess a semiautomatic assault weapon."  18 
U.S.C. s 922(v).  In upholding that judgment and the consti-
tutionality of the statute, the panel relied first on the 1942 
jurisprudence of Wickard v. Filburn, and then on our deci-
sion in Terry v. Reno, 101 F.3d 1412, 1417 (D.C. Cir. 1996), 
which upheld the constitutionality of a statute protecting an 
area of commerce, specifically health clinics.  See Navegar, 
192 F.3d at 1056-57.  Reno is not on point, but even if it 
were, the Supreme Court and not our precedent controls.  
Insofar as the Supreme Court's decision in Wickard retains 
any vitality after Lopez, it cannot control the ruling on the 
disputed statute.  Despite the panel's pains to align this 
statute with those in Reno and Wickard, ultimately the 
statute is indistinguishable from that before the Court in 
Lopez.  The panel laboriously attempts to fit this gun act into 
category 3 of the permissible areas of regulation under Lopez.  
To do so, it incorrectly paraphrases the Lopez holding.  The 
Lopez Court did not, as the panel declares, "conclude[ ] that 
Congress had no rational basis for finding that gun possession 
in a school zone had a substantial effect on interstate com-
merce and declare[ ] the statute unconstitutional."  Navegar, 
192 F.3d at 1055 (citing Lopez, 514 U.S. at 567).  Rather, the 
Court made an independent determination of the effect of the 
statute on interstate commerce, "ultimately a judicial rather 
than a legislative question," Lopez, 514 U.S. at 557 n.2.  The 
Court concluded that gun possession did not have a substan-
tial effect and declared the statute unconstitutional.  As one 
of our sister circuits recognized, Lopez "elevated to a majority 
opinion statements from previous concurring opinions that 
'simply because Congress may conclude that a particular 
activity substantially affects interstate commerce does not 
necessarily make it so.' "  Brzonkala v. Virginia Polytechnic 

Inst. and State Univ., 169 F.3d 820, 855 (4th Cir. 1999) (en 
banc) (quoting Lopez, 514 U.S. at 557 n.2) (brackets and other 
citations omitted), cert. granted sub nom. Brzonkala v. Mor-
rison, 120 S. Ct. 11 (1999).

     This statute, like the parallel firearms act stricken as 
unconstitutional in Lopez, regulates, under purported authori-
ty drawn from Congress's power to regulate interstate com-
merce, activity (or inactivity) that is neither commerce nor 
interstate.  The Supreme Court held the Gun-Free School 
Zones Act unconstitutional in Lopez.  Our panel decision 
upholding this statute as constitutional cannot be reconciled 
with Lopez, and we should review it en banc.

        