                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 17, 2002   Decided December 20, 2002 

                           No. 01-3052

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                          JoAnn McCoy, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00082-01)

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Elizabeth Trosman, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the briefs were Roscoe C. 
Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Roy W. McLeese 
III, and Suzanne G. Curt, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards, Sentelle, 
Henderson, Randolph, Rogers, Tatel, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges, and Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

    Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson, with 
whom Chief Judge Ginsburg and Circuit Judge Sentelle 
join.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  We here address the 
scope of resentencing after a remand from the court of 
appeals under the following conditions:  (1) the defendant 
seeks to raise a contention that was contingently relevant in 
the initial sentencing (but the contingency did not then mate-
rialize);  (2) defendant did not raise the contention in that 
sentencing;  and (3) the district court's action on remand 
renders the contention determinative (if it is allowable and 
correct).  The source of the contingency here is the Sentenc-
ing Guidelines' complex treatment of multiple "groups" of 
offenses.  See U.S.S.G. s 3D1.4.

     We conclude that the defendant's ability to raise her contin-
gent issue here depends upon whether she could establish 
"good cause," within the meaning of Rule 32(b)(6)(D) of the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, for not having raised it 
sooner.  The district court never considered the good cause 
issue.  Rather than remand to the district court, however, we 
remand to the panel.  If it finds that the merits claim is not a 
winner, there will be no need for the district court to take the 
matter up yet again.

                             *  *  *

     JoAnn McCoy was convicted on two charges of making 
false statements in a loan application and on one count of 
perjury.  Her case was referred to a probation officer, and 
the process of generating a Presentence Report ("PSR") 
proceeded along the lines prescribed by Rule 32(b)(6) (renum-
bered as Rules 32(e)-(g), per amendments effective December 
1, 2002).  The probation officer circulated a PSR (the "origi-

nal PSR") to the defendant and counsel on both sides, see 
Rule 32(b)(6)(A), and the prosecution and the defense both 
objected to various aspects, see Rule 32(b)(6)(B).  The most 
critical objection was the prosecution's request for an en-
hancement for obstruction of justice, to be applied to both the 
crime "groups" (false statements and perjury).  The proba-
tion officer added the enhancements and circulated a new 
version of the PSR (the "revised PSR") on January 22, 1999.  
See Rule 32(b)(6)(C).

     The revised PSR calculated a "combined" offense level of 
21.  Twenty levels derived from the two false statement 
counts--the false statement "group" for purposes of the 
multi-group adjustment.  U.S.S.G. s 3D1.4.  These 20 levels 
comprised 14 for the base offense and the size of the loss, 
plus three upward adjustments of two levels each--for 
McCoy's "managerial role" in directing other participants, for 
her "more than minimal planning," and for her obstruction of 
justice.

     The second "group" was for McCoy's perjury conviction 
and totaled 14 levels, 12 for the base offense and two for 
obstruction of justice, and to a term of supervised release.

     Finally, the revised PSR combined the two groups under 
"multiple count adjustment" provisions of U.S.S.G. s 3D1.4, 
adding one point to the false statement group for a "combined 
offense level" of 21.  Simplifying the arcane formula of 
s 3D1.4 for purposes of this case, we may say that it calls for 
no upward adjustment of the count for the more serious 
group if the difference between the two groups is nine or 
more levels, a one-point upward adjustment if the difference 
is five to eight levels, and a two-level adjustment if the 
difference is zero to four levels.  The logic of this is plainly 
that as the severity of the less serious group gets closer to 
that of the more serious, it becomes appropriate to add, and 
to add more, to the combined offense level.

     Once the revised PSR was circulated, both sides com-
mented on the probation officer's recommendation, through 
memoranda and at the sentencing hearing itself, as provided 
by Rule 32(c)(1).  McCoy objected to all the enhancements, 

including the ones for obstruction of justice.  She did not, 
however, object to the obstruction enhancement on a ground 
that was specific to the perjury group.  Application Note 7 of 
the Guidelines section governing obstruction, U.S.S.G. 
s 3C1.1, explains that for a limited number of crimes, includ-
ing perjury but not false statements, the obstruction bump 
should not be added unless "a significant further obstruction 
occurred during the ... prosecution ... of the obstruction 
offense [here perjury] itself."  Victory on a potential Applica-
tion Note 7 argument would have been useful if but only if 
other sentencing adjustments had occurred yielding a particu-
lar alignment of the two groups (as a practical matter, a gap 
of three or four levels, as opposed to the initial gap of six).

     The district court rejected all of McCoy's objections and 
sentenced her to concurrent terms of 37 months on the false 
statement charges and 24 months on the perjury charge.

     McCoy appealed her conviction, objecting to all the en-
hancements, see United States v. McCoy, 242 F.3d 399, 403 
(D.C. Cir. 2001) ("McCoy I"), but again not raising the 
perjury-specific attack on the obstruction enhancement.  Ab-
sent a change in the constellation of groups, lopping a couple 
of levels off the perjury calculation was of no moment.  As it 
turned out, she did prevail on one enhancement, persuading 
us that the district court might well have applied an incorrect 
standard in assessing the "managerial role" bump.  Id. at 
410.  Accordingly we remanded to the district court to recon-
sider that issue.  Id. at 411.

     On remand, the district court instructed the probation 
officer to update the PSR in light of McCoy I, and the 
probation officer read that decision as holding that no mana-
gerial role enhancement should apply.  The government ac-
quiesced in the elimination of that enhancement, and the 
probation officer prepared an updated version of the PSR 
(the "resentencing PSR") that reduced to 18 the sentencing 
level for the false statement offense.  But now the gap 
between the more serious and the less serious groups was 
four points instead of six, so the proper multi-group adjust-

ment was two points instead of one.  Absent further changes, 
the combined offense level would be 20.

     When the probation officer circulated the resentencing 
PSR reflecting the elimination of the managerial role bump 
and the higher multi-group adjustment, McCoy raised her 
perjury-specific attack on the obstruction enhancement.  Vic-
tory on this issue would now be determinative.  Overturning 
that enhancement would restore a six-point gap, causing the 
overall offense level to settle at 19 points.  The government 
does not deny that within the resentencing procedure 
McCoy's claim was timely and in compliance with Rule 32.

     The government objected, however, on the ground that 
McCoy had not raised the point in her first appeal.  McCoy 
responded that at the time of that appeal, victory on the 
perjury-specific issue would have had no direct consequence. 
The district court did not address either of these arguments, 
but ruled simply that "the only issue presently before the 
court" was to "resentence without the two-level [managerial 
role] enhancement."

     On McCoy's second appeal the major issue was how to 
apply our precedent, United States v. Whren, 111 F.3d 956 
(D.C. Cir. 1997), to these facts.  There we had said that on a 
remand for resentencing the district court "may consider only 
such new arguments or new facts as are made newly relevant 
by the court of appeals' decision--whether by the reasoning 
or by the result."  Id. At 960.  The panel divided over the 
question whether an argument that in the first sentencing 
had been potentially relevant, but never immediately so, 
qualified as "newly relevant."  See United States v. McCoy, 
280 F.3d 1058, 1062 (D.C. Cir. 2002) ("McCoy II").  We 
granted McCoy's petition for rehearing en banc to clarify the 
court's position on that issue.

                             *  *  *

     Before turning to the merits we note that the government 
objected to rehearing en banc on the ground that McCoy's 
completion of her prison sentence had mooted the issue.  But 
the controlling statutes explicitly make the Guidelines compu-

tation relevant to McCoy's supervised release, which persists 
to this day:

     Factors To Be Considered In Including a Term Of 
     Supervised Release.  The court, in determining whether 
     to include a term of supervised release, and, if a term of 
     supervised release is to be included, in determining the 
     length of the term and the conditions of supervised 
     release, shall consider the factors set forth in section 
     3553(a)(1), (a)(2)(B), (a)(2)(C), (a)(2)(D), (a)(4), (a)(5), and 
     (a)(6).
     
18 U.S.C. s 3583(c) (emphasis added).  The most obviously 
relevant cross-referenced section is s 3553(a)(4)(A), which 
refers to "the applicable category of offense committed by the 
applicable category of defendant as set forth in the guidelines 
issued by the Sentencing Commission...." Id. 
s 3553(a)(4)(A).  Resentencing under a revised Guidelines 
computation clearly could benefit McCoy.

                             *  *  *

     The government argues that McCoy should be barred by 
her failure to raise the Application Note 7 argument on her 
initial appeal.  But Whren was clearly directed to the defen-
dant's failure to raise an issue "at the original sentencing 
hearing," 111 F.3d at 959, not omission from a prior appeal.  
We see no basis for finding waiver from failure to raise before 
the appeals court an issue on which the district court never 
ruled and which never became determinative before the dis-
trict court.  Such a rule would require appellants to include a 
wide range of purely contingent arguments.  Since appeals 
are only rarely successful--in this circuit, only 12.9% of all 
appeals result in a reversal of the district court, and national-
ly, this figure falls to 9.5%, see Judicial Business of the U.S. 
Courts 102 tbl. B-5 (2000)--the resulting clutter of appellate 
briefs would be considerable.  Although not treating an omis-
sion as a waiver will occasionally cause the court to hear an 
otherwise unnecessary successive appeal, the gain in simplifi-
cation of initial appeals seems to us well worth it.

     Turning to the issue of the initial sentencing itself, the 
government argues that under Rule 32 of the Federal Rules 
of Criminal Procedure McCoy's failure to raise the Applica-
tion Note 7 argument there operated as an effective waiver of 
that argument.  Although the government didn't raise Rule 
32 earlier, the Whren test must be understood in light of that 
rule, and both parties have articulated their views of the 
Rule's role.  We therefore take it into account in resolving 
the case.

     The government specifically invokes Rule 32(b)(6)(B), but 
this is plainly wrong.  At that stage the defendant had before 
her only the original PSR, which did not propose any bump 
for obstruction at all.  Rule 32(b)(6)(B) only requires a party 
to "communicate ... any objections to ... sentencing classifi-
cations ... contained in or omitted from the presentence 
report," not objections to adverse classifications as yet un-
mentioned.

     But defendant still had an opportunity to raise her present 
objection to the obstruction bump.  Rule 32(c)(1) (renumber-
ed as Rule 32(i)) requires the district court to give the parties 
"an opportunity to comment on the probation officer's deter-
minations and on other matters relating to the appropriate 
sentence."  In fact McCoy exercised this opportunity as to 
many objections--between the filing of the revised PSR on 
January 22, 2000 and the actual sentencing on June 3, 2000.

     Rule 32(c)(1)'s language, quoted above, provides a broad 
opportunity to comment, and we think McCoy's perjury-
specific contention clearly qualified.  It had the potential to 
affect her sentence.  And we note that Rule 32(c)(1) antici-
pates that objections not immediately affecting the sentence 
will be made, for its third sentence instructs the district court 
that it must, "[f]or each matter controverted ... make either 
a finding on the allegation or a determination that no finding 
is necessary because the controverted matter will not be 
taken into account in, or will not affect, sentencing."  Id.

     But McCoy's failure to raise the claim in time for the 
sentencing hearing does not necessarily mean that she has 
lost the point forever.  Rule 32(b)(6)(D) (renumbered as Rule 

32(i)(1)(D)) provides that "[f]or good cause shown, the court 
may allow a new objection to be raised at any time before 
imposing sentence."  Although this subsection's location as a 
part of Rule 32(b)(6) might suggest that it refers only to 
points that parties failed to make at the Rule 32(b)(6)(B) 
opportunity, both common sense and the language "at any 
time" indicate a broader coverage.

     To be sure, it may be fairly uncommon for an omission at 
the Rule 32(c)(1) stage to be even susceptible to the possibili-
ty of relief under the "good cause" standard of Rule 
32(b)(6)(D).  Typically the next stage after that opportunity 
will be appeal, in which a party's previously omitted claims 
will be governed by the plain error standard.  But it is easy 
to imagine a case where the opportunity provided by Rule 
32(c)(1) involves multiple stages, e.g., a briefing schedule that 
follows the usual court of appeals pattern (opening-response-
reply).  And here, of course, a resentencing follows the 
defendant's neglect of her Rule 32(c)(1) opportunity.  We see 
no reason why omissions occurring at the Rule 32(c)(1) stage 
should be governed by a standard more severe than good 
cause, unless of course there is some affirmative reason for a 
more demanding standard.  Compare, e.g., Johnson v. Unit-
ed States, 520 U.S. 461 (1997) (applying plain error standard 
on appeal in reviewing a determination of the trial court to 
which defendant did not object, but which was declared 
erroneous between trial and appeal);  United States v. Dale, 
140 F.3d 1054, 1056 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("cause and prejudice" 
standard governs an argument raised for the first time on 
collateral review and based on a rule adopted after the 
conclusion of the direct appeal).

     Thus a proper application of Rule 32 required the district 
court in resentencing to decide whether McCoy's failure to 
raise her Application Note 7 argument was "for good cause 
shown."  We need not address how that standard would have 
applied if the issue had arisen in the initial sentencing, i.e., if 
the district court had initially accepted defendant's position 
on the managerial role bump.  We confine ourselves to the 
good cause issue as it arose at resentencing.

     Although the phrase "good cause" might suggest that the 
inquiry concerns only the grounds for the defaulting party's 
omission, in practice "good cause" inquiries typically range 
more broadly, addressing (for instance) adverse effects--
direct or systemic--on opposing parties or the judiciary.  See 
United States v. Cray, 47 F.3d 1203, 1206-07 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(holding that the inquiry for the withdrawal of a guilty plea, 
characterized as an issue of "good cause," includes consider-
ation of "whether the Government would have been substan-
tially prejudiced");  cf. Yesudian ex rel. United States v. 
Howard Univ., 270 F.3d 969, 971 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (assessment 
of "excusable neglect" takes into account the "potential im-
pact on judicial proceedings").  In the present context, at 
least the following factors--many pressed by the parties, 
though to be sure primarily as arguments in the interpreta-
tion of Whren--would seem relevant to the court's exercise of 
discretion:

     Against a finding of good cause:  (1) To the extent that 
resolution of the contention required the district court to 
conduct any factual analysis, as McCoy claims, loss of the 
benefit of the district court's fresh recollection of the trial 
would be relevant.  (2) If the defendant withheld the claim 
for strategic reasons (as the government claims, offering in 
support only a possible contradiction between the Application 
Note 7 argument and McCoy's sufficiency argument against 
both obstruction bumps), it would count against finding good 
cause.

     In favor of a finding of good cause:  (1) As the initial 
sentencing played out, the Application Note 7 claim would not 
have been determinative at any time in that sentencing.  (2) 
The claim was doubly contingent, in that it would have been 
moot if defendant had won all her stated points in the initial 
sentencing and under several varieties of partial victory (e.g., 
if the court had ruled in her favor on the evidentiary basis of 
the obstruction bump, or, indeed, any partial victory except 
those which left the gap between the offense levels at three or 
four).  (3) Addressing the claim on the merits will have no 
material effect on any party's future incentives, as only a 
small fraction of judgments are reversed on appeal, and 

parties thus have strong incentives to raise their sentencing 
objections early.  (4) A person's liberty is at stake.

     Factors that could work against the admission of the new 
objection, but are absent here:  (1) Requirements of additional 
fact-finding.  The issue here required no new fact-finding, as 
it turned on the legal analysis of what constitutes a "signifi-
cant further obstruction," and, in defendant's view, on a 
comparison of the offense conduct with defendant's testimony 
at trial.  (2) Disruption of proceedings.  In the scenario in 
which it arose, consideration of the Application Note 7 argu-
ment would not have interrupted any proceeding in the 
slightest.  (3) Prejudice.  Its consideration on resentencing 
would not have prejudiced the government in any way.

     A requirement that the district court consider such factors 
as these in applying Rule 32(b)(6)(D) does nothing to disturb 
Whren's principle that parties should raise at sentencing the 
objections that they have "reason" to raise.  Whren, 111 
F. 3d at 960.  But incentives to raise an issue have different 
strengths, and nothing in Whren suggests that parties must 
be considered to have "reason" to raise a doubly contingent 
objection for which the likelihood of any significance is re-
mote.  Since an absolute requirement to raise all objections 
(regardless of the degree of relevance) is likely both to waste 
judicial resources and work injustice, we have no basis for 
imposing such a rule, and indeed are barred from doing so 
under Rule 32(b)(6)(D) as we understand it.

     In this case, we think it clear that a district court finding of 
good cause would not have been an abuse of discretion.  We 
need not in the end decide whether the opposite, a finding of 
no good cause, would have been an abuse of discretion.  The 
Application Note 7 claim has already been presented to the 
panel in McCoy II, and, if it should lack merit, there will be 
no need either for an initial good cause ruling by the district 
court or any review for abuse of discretion.  Given the very 
high probabilities (cited above) that a substantive claim will 
not prevail, passing that issue back to the panel is likely to 
consume fewer judicial resources than would a remand to the 

district court.  Accordingly we remand the case to the panel 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

     We understand that district judges' individual experience 
may incline them to different preferences as between a high 
degree of assurance that even contingent issues are raised 
early (at the expense of more time spent either resolving 
them or at least recognizing that the contingency has not 
materialized) and a low of degree of assurance (with a higher 
risk of interruptions for late-raised issues and of successive 
hearings for a single defendant).  District judges may adopt 
standing orders to guide practitioners.  See Fed. R. Crim. P. 
57(b) (allowing judges to "regulate practice in any manner 
consistent with federal law, these rules, and the local rules of 
the district").

     We note in closing that even an unexcused failure to raise a 
claim at sentencing would not automatically bar its consider-
ation on appeal.  As we said in Whren, such a claim is still 
subject to review for plain error.  111 F.3d at 960.  More-
over, because the impact of a sentencing error tends to be 
more obvious than that of the typical trial error, and the 
consequences of a reversal and remand less disruptive, the 
finding of "prejudice" necessary for plain error review is 
more readily made.  See, e.g., United States v. Saro, 24 F.3d 
283, 287-88 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

     The case is remanded to the panel.

                                                      So ordered.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, with whom 
Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Sentelle, Circuit Judge, join, 
dissenting:

     Under what circumstances may a defendant raise at resen-
tencing an objection that he failed to raise at his original 
sentencing?  Until today, our decision in United States v. 
Whren, 111 F.3d 956 (D.C. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 
1119 (1998), provided a relatively straightforward and sensi-
ble answer to the district judges of this circuit:

     [U]pon a resentencing occasioned by a remand, unless 
     the court of appeals expressly directs otherwise, the 
     district court may consider only such new arguments or 
     new facts as are made newly relevant by the court of 
     appeals' decision--whether by the reasoning or by the 
     result.
     
Whren, 111 F.3d at 960.  At best, the majority opinion 
misunderstands and misapplies this rule.  At worst, the court 
has jettisoned Whren sub silentio.  Accordingly, and for the 
reasons set forth below, I respectfully dissent.

                              * * *

     Before a three-judge panel of this court, the appellant, 
JoAnn McCoy, sought remand and reconsideration of the 
district court's May 9, 2001 judgment resentencing her to 33 
months in prison and five years of supervised release.  See 
generally United States v. McCoy, 280 F.3d 1058 (D.C. Cir. 
2002) (McCoy II).  She contended that the district court 
erred in refusing to consider her objection--made under 
Application Note 7 of U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1--to the obstruction-
of-justice enhancement added to her perjury offense level.  
Although McCoy acknowledged that she did not raise the 
Note 7 objection at her original sentencing, she argued that 
the court's remand for resentencing in United States v. 
McCoy, 242 F.3d 399 (D.C. Cir.) (McCoy I), cert. denied, 122 
S. Ct. 166 (2001), made the objection "newly relevant."  On 
February 22, 2002 a divided panel rejected McCoy's conten-
tion, holding that she had waived her Note 7 objection by 

failing to raise it at her original sentencing.  On June 12 the 
full court granted McCoy's petition for rehearing en banc and 
vacated the panel's judgment.  Today the majority (1) holds 
that "a proper application of Rule 32 required the district 
court in resentencing to decide whether McCoy's failure to 
raise her Application Note 7 argument was 'for good cause 
shown,' " maj. op. at 8 (quoting Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(D));  
and (2) intimates that McCoy's failure to raise the objection 
at her original sentencing was for good cause, see id. at 8-10.  
The court errs on both counts.

                                I.

     I do not believe that Rule 32(b)(6)(D) required the district 
court at resentencing to decide whether McCoy failed "[f]or 
good cause shown" to raise the Note 7 objection at her 
original sentencing.  Rule 32(a) provides that "[w]hen a 
presentence investigation and report are made ... [the] 
sentence should be imposed without unnecessary delay follow-
ing completion of the process prescribed by subdivision 
(b)(6)."  Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(a).  In turn, the process pre-
scribed by subdivision (b)(6) requires, first, that the probation 
officer furnish the presentence report to the defendant, the 
defendant's counsel and the government's counsel.  See Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(A).  Next, "[w]ithin 14 days after receiv-
ing the presentence report," the parties are to "communicate 
in writing to the probation officer, and to each other," any 
objection they have to any of the "sentencing classifications 
[or] sentencing guideline ranges ... contained in or omitted 
from the presentence report."   Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(B).  
Not later than seven days before the sentencing hearing, the 
probation officer must furnish to the district court and to the 
parties the revised presentence report and an addendum 
setting forth unresolved sentencing objections.  See Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(C).  Finally, pursuant to the provision upon 
which the majority places so much weight:

     Except for any unresolved objection under subdivision 
     (b)(6)(B), the court may, at the hearing, accept the 
     presentence report as its findings of fact.  For good 
     cause shown, the court may allow a new objection to be 
     raised at any time before imposing sentence.
     
Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(D).

     Rending a few phrases from the broader context of this 
scheme, see maj. op. at 7-8, the majority tortures the Rule 
until it confesses.  When Rule 32 is read as a whole, see 
United Savings Ass'n v. Timbers of Inwood Forest Associ-
ates, 484 U.S. 365, 371 (1988) ("Statutory construction ... is a 
holistic endeavor."), Rule 32(b)(6)(D) is construed more plau-
sibly another way.  By requiring "completion of the process 
prescribed by subdivision (b)(6)" "[w]hen a presentence ... 
report [is] made under subdivision (b)(1)," the Rule on its face 
contemplates that where, as here, a presentence report is 
made at resentencing--the intial report at resentencing being 
just as much a "presentence ... report" as the initial report 
at the original sentencing--the parties will participate in a 
"process" separate from (and no doubt shorter than) the one 
undertaken at the original sentencing proceeding.  Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 32(a) ("The time limits prescribed in subdivision 
(b)(6) may be either shortened or lengthened for good 
cause.").  Rule 32(b)(6)(D)'s inclusion as part of the integrat-
ed (b)(6) procedure manifests that the reference to "a new 
objection" includes only those objections unavailable at the 
Rule 32(b)(6)(B) stage of any one sentencing.  See Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(B);  see also infra note 1.  Thus, I do not 
read the Rule's "new objection" language to permit a defen-
dant to "revive in the second round an issue he allowed to die 
in the first."  Whren, 111 F.3d at 960.

     Nothing in the Rule precludes the interpretation I urge.  
Only one other circuit, the Tenth, adopts the majority's 
contrary construction.  See United States v. Moore, 83 F.3d 

1231, 1235 (10th Cir. 1996) (holding, in section 2255 context, 
that district court's refusal to conduct de novo resentencing 
"was potentially in conflict with the ability of the parties to 
move to raise new issues with respect to the presentence 
report at any time prior to the imposition of sentence" where 
they have "good cause" to do so (citing Fed. R. Crim. P. 
32(b)(6)(B))).  The Tenth Circuit, of course, adheres to the de 
novo resentencing approach, see United States v. Smith, 930 
F.2d 1450, 1456 (10th Cir.) ("fully de novo resentencing is 
entirely appropriate" (quotations omitted)), cert. denied, 502 
U.S. 879 (1991), an approach we explicitly and wisely rejected 
in Whren:

     De novo resentencing is in essence a license for the 
     parties to introduce issues, arguments, and evidence that 
     they should have introduced at the original sentencing 
     hearing.  The alternative of requiring the parties to raise 
     all relevant issues at the original sentencing hearing 
     serves both equity and efficiency:  Each party gets early 
     notice of the other's position, and the district court can 
     resolve all material issues early on--when the record is 
     fresh in mind--and in a single proceeding, thereby mini-
     mizing the scope of any second proceeding, i.e., should 
     the first result in a remand.
     
Whren, 111 F.3d at 959-60.  I am baffled by the court's 
willingness to adopt an interpretation of Rule 32(b)(6)(D) that 
(1) sanctions the wasteful de novo resentencing described 
above;  (2) effectively overturns Whren, which the majority 
does not even attempt to harmonize with the Rule;  (3) was 
urged by neither party,1 see infra Part II.A;  (4) is not the 

__________
     1 Although the parties expressed in their en banc briefs "views of 
the Rule's role," maj. op. at 7, neither even remotely suggested the 
role the court propounds.  See Supp. Br. of Appellee at 2, 5, 7, 9 
n.4;  Supp. Reply Br. of Appellant at 2-5.  Indeed, McCoy herself 
argued that the "good cause" language of Rule 32(b)(6)(D) "applies 

most natural reading of the Rule;  and (5) cuts against the 
case law of the other "waiver" circuits, which do not even 
mention the Rule under similar circumstances, much less hold 
that it has the broad application the majority suggests.  See 
United States v. Ticchiarelli, 171 F.3d 24, 32 (1st Cir.) 
(adopting Whren's waiver approach without mentioning Rule 
32), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 850 (1999);  United States v. 
Marmolejo, 139 F.3d 528, 530-31 (5th Cir.) (same), cert. 
denied, 525 U.S. 1056 (1998);  United States v. Parker, 101 
F.3d 527, 528 (7th Cir. 1996) (adopting waiver approach 
similar to that of Whren without mentioning Rule 32).

     I take issue as well with the majority's suggestion that the 
language of Rule 32(c)(1) supports permitting McCoy to raise 
her Note 7 objection at resentencing.  See maj. op. at 7 
("Rule 32(c)(1)'s language ... provides a broad opportunity to 
comment, and we think McCoy's perjury-specific contention 
clearly qualified.").  Rule 32(c)(1) provides that

     [a]t the sentencing hearing, the court must afford counsel 
     for the defendant and for the Government an opportunity 
     to comment on the probation officer's determinations and 
     on other matters relating to the appropriate sentence, 
     and must rule on any unresolved objections to the pre-
     sentence report....  For each matter controverted, the 
     court must make either a finding on the allegation or a 
     determination that no finding is necessary because the 
     controverted matter will not be taken into account in, or 
     will not affect, sentencing.
     
Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(c)(1) (emphasis added).  The court's 
apparently sweeping view of a party's "opportunity to com-
ment on ... other matters relating to the appropriate sen-
tence," maj. op. at 7 (quoting Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(c)(1)), would 
permit at resentencing an objection that at the original 
sentencing would not have "immediately affect[ed]" a defen-
dant's combined offense level.  Id.  But that interpretation 
seriously misreads the Rule in its entirety.  Rule 32(c)(1)'s 
reference to "other matters relating to the appropriate sen-

__________
only to objections that should have been made earlier under Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 32(b)(6)(B)."  Supp. Reply Br. of Appellant at 4.

tence" does not include McCoy's belated Note 7 objection, 
which constitutes instead a "comment on the probation offi-
cer's [previous obstruction-of-justice] determinations."  Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 32(c)(1).  By operation of text and under any 
reasonable reading of Rule 32 as a whole, "other matters 
relating to the sentence" do not include "comment[s] on the 
probation officer's determinations."  Id. (emphasis added);  
see Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Una-
bridged 1599 (1981) ("other" means "not being the one ... 
first mentioned or of primary concern" (emphasis added));  
see also United States v. Chung, 261 F.3d 536, 539 (5th Cir. 
2001) ("Rule 32(b)(6)(B)'s deadline ... would be meaningless 
if the district court were obliged to entertain new objections 
at the sentencing hearing" pursuant to Rule 32(c)(1)).  In-
deed, the cases that mention "other matters relating to the 
appropriate sentence" include "matters" such as a district 
court's sua sponte upward (or downward) departure, its impo-
sition of a special condition of supervised release or any other 
condition of sentencing "not expressly contemplated by the 
[G]uidelines."  E.g., United States v. Angle, 234 F.3d 326, 347 
(7th Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 533 U.S. 932 (2001);  see also, e.g., 
United States v. Hernandez, 251 F.3d 1247, 1250-52 (9th 
Cir.), reh'g denied, 280 F.3d 1216 (9th Cir. 2001);  United 
States v. Queensborough, 227 F.3d 149, 153-55 (3d Cir. 2000), 
cert. denied, 531 U.S. 1131 (2001);  United States v. Pank-
hurst, 118 F.3d 345, 357 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1030 
(1997);  United States v. Edgin, 92 F.3d 1044, 1048-49 (10th 
Cir. 1996), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 1069 (1997).

     The United States Supreme Court has observed that, in 
conjunction with the integrated process set forth in Rule 
32(b)(6), Rule 32(c)(1) was designed to "promot[e] focused, 
adversarial resolution of the legal and factual issues relevant 
to fixing Guidelines sentences."  Burns v. United States, 501 
U.S. 129, 137 (1991).  Whren dovetails with a proper reading 
of the Rule by requiring the parties to "raise all relevant 
issues at the original sentencing hearing," thereby ensuring 

that "[e]ach party gets early notice of the other's position [so 
that] the district court can resolve all material issues early on 
[and] when the record is fresh in mind."  Whren, 111 F.3d at 
959-60.  I acknowledge that Rule 32, Burns and Whren 
direct the parties to raise only "relevant" or "material" issues 
at the original sentencing--so that they do not waste the 
district court's time--but I also recognize (as the majority 
does not) that McCoy's Note 7 objection was "relevant" under 
circuit precedent.  See infra Part II.B.

                               II.

     Even if I were to accept the proposition that Rule 
32(b)(6)(D) required the district court at resentencing to 
decide whether McCoy failed "for good cause shown" to raise 
the Note 7 objection at her original sentencing, I could not 
agree with the result reached today because (1) neither the 
government nor the defendant relied on the Rule at the panel 
stage and neither has urged (at any stage) the interpretation 
the majority adopts and applies retroactively;  and (2) in any 
event, Whren holds by necessary implication that in this 
circuit a defendant cannot show "good cause" to raise a "new 
objection" at resentencing under Rule 32(b)(6)(D) if he had 
incentive to raise the objection earlier.

                                A.

     The court's focus on Rule 32 at the en banc stage is 
surprising.  Our en banc briefing order directed the parties 
"to address in their briefs only the issue of whether the 
exception established in United States v. Whren, 111 F.3d 956 
(D.C. Cir. 1997), for arguments 'made newly relevant by the 
court of appeals' decision--whether by the reasoning or by 
the result,' id. at 960, applies to this case."  Br. Order.  
Although the parties discussed Rule 32 in their supplemental 
briefs, neither party described any interplay of the Rule with 
Whren.  Accordingly, we have been deprived of meaningful 
assistance from either the government or the federal public 
defender on the matter.  In her en banc brief, McCoy did not 

submit that Rule 32(b)(6)(D) would have permitted her to 
raise her Note 7 objection at resentencing, see supra note 1;  
instead she claimed that Whren did not preclude her from 
doing so.  She did claim that at her original sentencing "the 
Note 7 issue was not 'material.' "  See Supp. Reply Br. of 
Appellant at 3.  But that simply brings us back to Whren, 
under which we must decide whether the Note 7 objection 
became "newly relevant" (i.e., newly "material") after our 
remand in McCoy I.  I would hold that it did not.  See infra 
Part II.B.

     I am also surprised by the court's willingness to include an 
advisory opinion guiding a district court's good cause determi-
nation, see maj. op. at 9-10;  the majority's list of possible 
good cause factors is unnecessary to deciding the question 
before us.  Even more disturbing, the court--while conceding 
that the question of good cause is within the district judge's 
discretion in the first instance--"think[s] it clear that a 
district court finding of good cause would not have been an 
abuse of discretion."  Id. at 10.  I am at a loss;  how can this 
proposition be clear when the parties have had no chance to 
test it in an adversarial context, whether before the district 
court, the panel or the en banc court?

                                B.

     The court observes that "the Whren test must be under-
stood in light of [Rule 32]," maj. op. at 7, but fails to 
acknowledge the converse:  the Rule must be understood in 
light of the Whren test.  Whren holds that

     [a] defendant should not be held to have waived an issue 
     if he did not have a reason to raise it at his original 
     sentencing;  but neither should a defendant be able to 
     raise an issue for the first time upon resentencing if he 
     did have reason but failed nonetheless to raise it in the 
     earlier proceeding.
     
Whren, 111 F.3d at 960 (emphasis added).  The majority's 
repeated references to the Note 7 objection as "a contention 

that was contingently relevant in the initial sentencing," maj. 
op. at 2 (emphasis in original);  see also id. at 5 ("potentially 
relevant"), 6 ("purely contingent"), 9, 10 ("doubly contin-
gent"), reveal its profound misunderstanding of the Whren 
rule.  It should be clear by now that Whren defines relevance 
(or materiality) in terms of incentive, not of potentiality, 
imminence or certainty of effect.  In this circuit, there is no 
such thing as a "contingently relevant" contention, much less 
a "doubly contingent" one;  a defendant either has incentive 
at the initial sentencing to raise his objection or he does not.  
Following Whren jot-for-jot in Ticchiarelli, the First Circuit 
recognized this explicitly:

     Whether there is a waiver depends not ... on counting 
     the number of missed opportunities (hearings, motions, 
     etc.) to raise an issue, but on whether the party had 
     sufficient incentive to raise the issue in prior proceed-
     ings.  See United States v. de la Cruz-Paulino, 61 F.3d 
     986, 994 n.5 (1st Cir. 1995) (noting, in the context of Fed. 
     R. Crim. P. 12, that "government violations of Rule 
     12(d)(2) should excuse a defendant's failure to move to 
     suppress evidence prior to trial ... since defendants 
     have no incentive to move to suppress evidence that the 
     government will not be introducing");  see also Whren, 
     111 F.3d at 960.  This approach requires a fact-intensive, 
     case-by-case analysis.
     
Ticchiarelli, 171 F.3d at 32-33;  see also United States v. 
Hass, 199 F.3d 749, 753 (5th Cir. 1999) ("[W]hether a defen-
dant waived an issue for consideration at resentencing is 
determined by whether the defendant had an incentive to 
raise that issue in the prior proceedings."), cert. denied, 531 
U.S. 812 (2000).  On the facts of Ticchiarelli, the court found 
that the defendant had not waived his resentencing objection 
by failing to raise it at his original sentencing because, by the 
time of that sentencing, "the district court had already issued 
a final ruling, memorialized in a published order" rejecting 
the argument.  Ticchiarelli, 171 F.3d at 33.  Ticchiarelli 

plainly lacked incentive to raise the objection at his sentenc-
ing;  acknowledging that fact, the court stated that its "waiver 
doctrine does not require that a defendant, in order to 
preserve his rights on appeal, raise every objection that 
might have been relevant if the district court had not already 
rejected the defendant's arguments."  Id. (emphasis altered);  
see also United States v. Rhodes, 145 F.3d 1375, 1378 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998) (permitting defendant to raise rehabilitation issue 
at resentencing where he "could not have argued at initial 
sentencing for a departure based upon post-sentence rehabili-
tative efforts since these efforts had not yet taken place" 
(internal quotation and alteration omitted)).

     By contrast to Ticchiarelli's new objection, McCoy's Note 7 
argument was not rejected by the district court before the 
original sentencing.  Because she had no idea how the court 
was going to rule on any (much less all) of her sentencing 
challenges, McCoy had incentive to raise at the outset all 
objections she had to the revised presentence report to 
ensure that she received the lowest possible Guidelines range.  
In other words, McCoy had just as much incentive at sentenc-
ing as at resentencing to keep the gap in her offense levels at 
six, thereby minimizing the effect of the multi-group adjust-
ment mandated by U.S.S.G. s 3D1.4.  See McCoy II, 280 
F.3d at 1063-64 ("Had she persuaded the sentencing judge 
[about one of her sentencing challenges] (as, we presume, was 
her purpose), McCoy's 'controlling' false statement offenses 
level would have been reduced to 18, bringing it within four 
points of her perjury offense level and increasing the multi-
group adjustment by one for a combined offense level of 20.");  
maj. op. at 2-5 (explaining section 3D1.4's application to this 
case).  Had she raised the Note 7 claim at her original 
sentencing, she would have preserved the objection and avert-
ed the ensuing dispute.

                              * * *

     Today's decision does the district court no favor.  Abandon-
ing Whren's bright-line waiver rule, the court (in dicta) 

replaces it with a non-exhaustive set of amorphous "McCoy 
factors"2 that will inundate district judges with "good cause" 
claims at resentencing.  Many of those claims are bound to be 
as meritless as the one now before us;  even if the district 
court is able to dismiss them out of hand, the time spent 

__________
     2 One of the court's factors in favor of finding good cause--"[a] 
person's liberty is at stake," maj. op. at 10--is irrelevant.  A 
person's liberty is always at stake at sentencing.  (That is the point, 
after all.)  The makeweight "liberty factor" does not assist a 
sentencing judge to distinguish one new objection from the next.

 And although one of the majority's factors against a finding of 
good cause--"[i]f the defendant withheld the claim for strategic 
reasons," id. at 9--makes substantive sense, the court cavalierly 
dismisses the notion that the factor is met here.  It seems to me 
that McCoy chose for tactical reasons not to raise the Note 7 
objection when she was originally sentenced.  She did initially 
challenge the obstruction-of-justice enhancement on double jeopar-
dy grounds.  She argued that because she had been "convicted of 
perjury for statements that she made during a bankruptcy proceed-
ing," and because she had made "precisely the same statement" 
during her criminal trial, "[t]o convict her of perjury and then to 
enhance her sentence on essentially the same conduct is unconstitu-
tional [under] the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Constitution."  
McCoy's Supp. Sentencing Mem. at 5 (quoted in McCoy I, 242 F.3d 
at 408).  On appeal in McCoy I, however, she took the opposite 
position;  she challenged the enhancement on sufficiency-of-the-
evidence grounds and contended that the two statements were 
different.  See McCoy I, 242 F.3d at 408 ("McCoy argues ... that 
her testimony was not the same in both proceedings...." (emphasis 
added)).  In McCoy II, she asserts once again that she repeated 
"precisely the same statements" at her criminal trial that she made 
during the bankruptcy proceeding and that repeated perjury does 
not constitute a "significant further obstruction" under Note 7.  Br. 
of Appellant at 19.  Accordingly, even if Whren did not leave 
McCoy without "good cause" to raise her new objection at resen-
tencing, the tactics of her counsel would.

 The court's failure to include as one of its McCoy factors the 
defendant's incentive to raise an objection at his original sentencing, 
see maj. op. at 9-10, seems to confirm that, after today, Whren is 
nothing more than "a derelict on the waters of the law."  Lambert 
v. California, 355 U.S. 225, 232 (1957) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).

considering them will be ill spent.3

     So begins the era of de novo resentencing in the D.C. 
Circuit.  Although some other circuits may be satisfied with 
the choice, I thought we had made a better decision.  I 
respectfully dissent from the remand and would affirm the 
district court's May 9, 2001 resentencing judgment.

__________
     3 The majority observes that "[d]istrict judges may adopt stand-
ing orders to guide practitioners" pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 57(b).  
Maj. op. at 11.  I, for one, would recommend they re-adopt Whren.

       