                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 12, 2002   Decided October 8, 2002 

                           No. 01-1213

               Association of American Railroads, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Surface Transportation Board and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

               Edison Electric Institute, et al., 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                   Surface Transportation Board

     Samuel M. Sipe, Jr., argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Cynthia L. Taub and Louis P. 
Warchot.

     Thomas J. Stilling, Attorney, Surface Transportation 
Board, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Ellen D. Hanson, General Counsel, Craig M. 
Keats, Deputy General Counsel, and John P. Fonte and 
Robert B. Nicholson, Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     William L. Slover, John H. LeSeur, Christopher A. Mills, 
Peter A. Pfohl, John M. Cutler, Jr., Michael F. McBride, 
Bruce W. Neely, Nicholas J. DiMichael, Federic L. Wood, 
and Andrew P. Goldstein were on the brief for intervenors.

     Before:  Sentelle and Randolph, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  American Association of 
Railroads (AAR) challenges the Surface Transportation 
Board's (STB) April 6, 2001 "corrected decision," reaffirming 
its determination to exclude consideration of product and 
geographic competition from the market dominance analysis 
in rail rate cases.  In American Association of Railroads v. 
Surface Transportation Board, 237 F.3d 676 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
(AAR v. STB I), we held that the Staggers Act definition of 
"market dominance" does not require the STB to consider 
indirect (product and geographic) competition.  However, on 
remand we directed the Board to "weigh the effect, if any" of 
the statute's preamble, manifesting a preference for market-
based rather than regulatory rate setting, on its decision. We 
conclude that the STB's new decision appropriately addresses 
this language.

                                I.

     Congress originally gave the Interstate Commerce Com-
mission (ICC) the authority to examine every railroad ship-
ping rate to ensure that it was "just and reasonable."  See 49 
U.S.C. s 1(5)(1976).  But, discovering that such a broad 
regulatory scheme was unhealthy for the industry, Congress 
passed the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform 
Act, Pub. L. No. 94-210, s 202(b), 90 Stat. 31 (4R Act), to 

deregulate rail rates.  Under this statute, the ICC could only 
review the reasonableness of a carrier's rates if it had first 
found that the railway had market dominance over its service.  
Market dominance is defined as "an absence of effective 
competition from other rail carriers or modes of transporta-
tion to which a rate applies."  49 U.S.C. s 10707(a).  The Act 
also directed the commission to "establish, by a practical 
determination, the rules, standards and procedures of deter-
mining whether and when a carrier possesses such dominance 
... without administrative delay."  Pub. L. No. 94-210, 
s 202(d), 90 Stat. at 35. (emphasis added).

     Initially, the ICC's "Special Procedures for Making Find-
ings of Market Dominance" only considered direct competi-
tors who operated along the same points of departure and 
destination, including fellow rail carriers (intramodal competi-
tors) and non-rail transporters (intermodal competitors).  The 
Commission expressly declined to require a consideration of 
indirect product competition (using a different product sub-
ject to a different rate), or geographic competition (using a 
different departure-point or destination).  We held that this 
arrangement was consistent with a reasonable reading of the 
statute, particularly in light of the Act's clear preference for 
efficient and practical proceedings.  Atchison, Topeka & San-
ta Fe Ry. v. ICC, 580 F.2d 623, 623-34 (D.C. Cir. 1978).

     In 1980, the ICC proposed rulemaking to add indirect 
competition to its market dominance analysis.  While the 
rulemaking was pending, Congress enacted the Staggers Act 
to deregulate the rail industry even further.  Pub. L. No. 
96-448, 94 Stat. 1895 (1980).  The new law kept the market 
dominance calculus as a prerequisite for Commission regula-
tion, and directed the ICC "to determine whether, and to 
what extent, product competition should be considered ... in 
determining the reasonableness of the rail carrier rates."  Id. 
s 205(a)(1), 94 Stat. at 1905.  This directive, however, did not 
alter the meaning or use of the term "market dominance."  
Id. s 205(a)(3)(B), 94 Stat. at 1906.  In response, the ICC 
decided to issue a new rule requiring both product and 
geographic competition to be considered in the market domi-
nance analysis.  The Fifth Circuit upheld this decision in 

Western Coal Traffic v. United States, 719 F.2d 772 (5th Cir. 
1983) (en banc), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 953 (1984).

     In 1995 Congress abolished the ICC and vested its authori-
ty to regulate rail rates in the Surface Transportation Board.  
The STB issued a decision on July 1, 1999 removing indirect 
competition from the market dominance calculus.  Ex parte 
No. 627, Market Dominance Determinations-Product and 
Geographic Competition (Dec. 21, 1998) (STB Dec. 1998).  
The Board believed that the change was permissible under 
the Staggers Act, since its language does not actually require 
that indirect product competition be considered in the market 
dominance formula. And it believed that the revision was 
warranted because the time and resources spent on indirect 
competition evidence in rate litigation was often inordinate, 
preventing the Board from providing for the expeditious 
handling and resolution of all proceedings, as mandated by 
other Staggers Act provisions.  The Board thought the 
change would benefit shippers, especially the smaller and 
more rural ones, because under the new rule, there would be 
less disincentive to challenge rates as a result of the reduction 
in litigation burdens and costs.  Yet it also would be fair to 
carriers, who could still point to indirect competition to 
defend the reasonableness of their rates in particular cases.  
STB Dec. 1998 at 12-14.

     The AAR disagreed and sought review of the Board's 
decision.  In AAR v. STB I we rejected the Petitioner's claim 
that the Staggers Act's amendments and additions to the 4R 
statute, one of which merely substituted the word "transpor-
tation" for the phrase "traffic or movement" in the statutory 
definition of market dominance, see Pub. L. No. 95-473, 92 
Stat. 1337, 1382 (1978) [10706], altered the force of our 
Atchison holding.  AAR v. STB I, 237 F. 3d at 679.  We were 
of the view that under Chevron1 the Board maintained discre-
tion to interpret the market dominance definition so as to 
exclude indirect competition.  Therefore, we deferred to its 
latest interpretation and accepted the Board's reasoning that 

__________
     1 Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 
837 (1984).

the decision would reduce administrative delay by limiting the 
litigation of the innately complex issues of geographic and 
product competition.  Id. at 680.  Accordingly, the decision 
would advance the Staggers Act mandate to "establish proce-
dures to ensure expeditious handling of challenges to the 
reasonableness of railroad rates ... which shall include ap-
propriate measures for avoiding delay in the discovery and 
evidentiary phases of such proceedings."  Id.;  49 U.S.C. 
s 10704(d).

     Although we thought the Board's decision "reasonable in 
isolation"-meaning as an interpretation of the key language-
we decided that it was arbitrary and capricious for the Board 
to construe market dominance without considering the 
preamble policy.  On remand, we directed the STB to "weigh 
the effect, if any" of the language calling for "competition and 
demand for services ... to establish reasonable rates for rail 
transportation  ... to the maximum extent possible ...," on 
its determination.  Id.;  49 U.S.C. s 10101(1).  After the 
Board denied AAR's request to reopen the administrative 
record and solicit comments, on the grounds that it had 
already considered its alternative measures, it issued its 
official response on April 6, 2001. In this corrected decision, 
the Board explained that the first preamble policy (RTP-1) is 
"not inconsistent" with its decision to exclude product and 
geographic competition from consideration in the market 
dominance analysis.  It claimed a responsibility to apply, not 
one, but all 15 "separate and sometimes conflicting policy 
goals that together establish the framework for regulatory 
oversight of the rail industry."  Ex Parte No. 627, Market 
Dominance Determinations--Product and Geographic Com-
petition (April 6, 2001) (Corrected Decision at 6).  AAR then 
brought this petition for review, contending that the Board 
did not properly respond to the Court's remand order.

                               II.

     There is not much left to this case.  We have already 
decided that the Board's reading of the statute is permissible.  

AAR v. STB I, 237 F. 3d at 680.  Neither the law of the 
circuit nor the law of the case permits us to reconsider that 
issue, despite the Petitioner's efforts to have us do so.  See 
LaShawn A. v. Barry, 87 F.3d 1389, 1395 (D.C. Cir.1996) (en 
banc).  Therefore the only matter legitimately before us is 
whether or not the Board's 2001 decision included an ade-
quate "weighing" of the preamble's first policy directive set 
out in the Staggers Act.  The provision states:

     In regulating the railroad industry, it is the policy of the 
     United States Government--
     
          (1) to allow, to the maximum extent possible, competi-
          tion and the demand for services to establish reason-
          able rates for transportation by rail. 49 U.S.C. 
          s 10101(1) (emphasis added).
          
     The Board reasonably considered the effects of RTP-1.  It 
does not believe that this preamble provision necessarily 
trumps the other (somewhat contradictory) policy goals in the 
statute.  We have previously held that it is up to the Board to 
arrive at a reasonable accommodation of the conflicting poli-
cies set out in the Staggers Act.  See Baltimore Gas & Elec. 
Co. v. United States, 817 F. 2d 108, 115 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  
RTP-1, although indeed a forceful expression of a strong 
preference for market-based rather than regulatory rate set-
ting, does not compel the Board to alter its decision in this 
case.

     The Board believes that eliminating indirect competition 
from the market dominance calculus reflects a proper balance 
between RTP-1, expressing Congress's desire to have compe-
tition determine rail rates where possible, and RTPs-2, oblig-
ing the Board to "provide for the expeditious handling and 
resolution of all proceedings where regulation is required."  
49 U.S.C. ss 10101(2)-(15).  It has observed that discovery in 
individual cases has often included hundreds of questions 
directed to the existence or effectiveness of product and 
geographic competition.  Evidence of indirect competition has 
also forced the Board to address matters outside their area of 
expertise, adding to the time needed to resolve rate cases.  
STB July '99 Dec. at 10-11;  STB 2001 Dec. at 2-3.  In short, 

the Board's construction of the statutory definition furthers 
its statutory mandate, added by the ICCTA in 1995, to 
establish procedures to ensure expeditious handling of chal-
lenges to the reasonableness of railroad rates, including "ap-
propriate measures for avoiding delay in the discovery and 
evidentiary phases of such proceedings."  49 U.S.C. 
s 10704(d) (emphasis added).  This decision may also allow 
shippers that lack competitive alternatives practical access to 
the rate complaint process.  According to the Board, that 
would give real meaning to RTP-6, promoting the mainte-
nance of "reasonable rates where there is an absence of 
effective competition."  49 U.S.C. s 10101(6).  While we rec-
ognize that the Board's construction was not the only permis-
sible view, its attempt to strike a balance between the various 
statutory objectives is reasonable (not arbitrary or capri-
cious).

     To be sure, we need not agree with every reason that the 
Board advances in support of its decision.  Although the 
Petitioner has conceded that market forces will compel carri-
ers to offer reasonable rates where there is effective competi-
tion, the Board's argument that shippers will not bring rate 
claims where indirect competition genuinely exists may be an 
overstatement.  It is certainly plausible that some shippers 
would consider regulators' hands to be friendlier than invisi-
ble ones.2

     Nevertheless, it is reasonable to presume that if Congress 
had wanted for indirect competition to be a mandatory con-
sideration in the market dominance inquiry, it would have 
stated so directly.  Instead, Congress determined to leave 
that decision to the agency, while still leaving an impression 
that it wanted less regulation, rather than more.  See West-
ern Coal Traffic League v. United States, 719 F. 2d 772, 779 
(5th Cir. 1983).  We have already held that the Board reason-

__________
     2 The expense of litigating rate cases has not prevented all 
shippers from filing cases where competition exists.  Coal shippers, 
in particular, are inclined to bring rate cases even where prices may 
be constrained by indirect competition. Comments of the Ass'n of 
American Railroads, Ex Parte No. 627 (served Apr. 29, 1998).

ably exercised its option, concluding that its latest decision 
can potentially accommodate the various statutory policies 
relating to expeditious review and access to relief while 
upholding congressional preferences for market-based rates.  
AAR v. STB I, 237 F.3d at 680.

     It appears then, that the Petitioner is not only asking us to 
substitute our policy wisdom for that of the Board, but is also 
essentially requesting that we overrule our prior determina-
tion that the Board's decision to exclude evidence of indirect 
competition from the market dominance analysis was not 
arbitrary or capricious.  We are not in either business.

     Accordingly, the petition for review is denied.

                                                             So ordered.

                      