                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 30, 2001   Decided December 28, 2001 

                           No. 00-5281

              James A. Willis, a/k/a Jimmy Willis, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

            Federal Bureau of Investigation, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (96cv01455)

     James H. Lesar argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Meredith Manning, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellees. With her on the brief were Roscoe C. 
Howard Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant 
U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  This case presents an issue of 
first impression for this circuit:  what criteria should guide 
district courts in deciding motions for the appointment of 
counsel in cases brought under the Freedom of Information 
Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552 ("FOIA")?

     James A. Willis is serving time for drug offenses.  He filed 
a FOIA action in 1996 seeking the release of numerous 
documents.  The documents, he claims, will exonerate him.  
After bringing suit, Willis filed two motions for the appoint-
ment of counsel.  FOIA does not contain a provision authoriz-
ing the appointment of counsel.  Willis therefore invoked the 
general civil statute:  "The court may request an attorney to 
represent any person unable to afford counsel."  28 U.S.C. 
s 1915(e)(1).  The district court denied both motions and then 
granted summary judgment against Willis.

     On Willis's appeal, we held that the failure of the magis-
trate judge, who was managing the case pursuant to 28 
U.S.C. s 636, to provide any reasons for refusing to appoint 
counsel for Willis necessitated a remand.  Willis v. FBI, No. 
98-5071, 1999 WL 236891 (D.C. Cir. Mar. 19, 1999). We stated 
that the district court or the magistrate judge will need to 
determine whether the criteria set forth in Poindexter v. FBI, 
737 F.2d 1173 (D.C. Cir. 1984), a Title VII case, should be 
adopted for FOIA cases.

     On remand, the magistrate judge issued a report explaining 
why he had denied Willis's motions for counsel.  See Report 
and Recommendation of March 6, 2000.  Willis had shown 
that he was capable of representing himself, his FOIA action 
did not involve complex legal or factual issues, the case would 
not require discovery, and the interests of justice would not 
be served by appointing counsel.  See id. at 5-8.

     The district court adopted the report.  The court concluded 
that Local Civil Rule 83.11(a)(4)(B)--rather than Poindex-
ter--provides the relevant factors for deciding motions for the 

appointment of counsel in FOIA cases.  The local rule pro-
vides:  "If the judge assigned the case determines, pursuant 
to 28 U.S.C. s 1915(e), that the case should not be dismissed, 
the judge may then determine whether to appoint an attorney 
to represent such party.  Such a determination should be 
made as soon as practicable after the action is assigned, 
taking into account:  (i) the nature and complexity of the 
action;  (ii) the potential merit of the claims as set forth in the 
pleading;  (iii) the inability of the pro se party to retain 
counsel by other means;  (iv) the degree to which the inter-
ests of justice will be served by appointment of counsel, 
including the benefit the court may derive from the assistance 
of the appointed counsel;  and (v) any other factors deemed 
appropriate by the judge to serve the interests of justice."  
D.D.C. Civ. R. 83.11(a)(4)(B).

     Neither Willis nor any other indigent civil litigant is guar-
anteed counsel.  The discretionary decisions of district courts 
whether to appoint counsel under 28 U.S.C. s 1915(e)(1) will 
be set aside only for abuse.  See Cookish v. Cunningham, 787 
F.2d 1, 2 (1st Cir. 1986);  Luttrell v. Nickel, 129 F.3d 933, 936 
(7th Cir. 1997).  Here the magistrate judge, whose report and 
recommendation the court adopted, followed the criteria in 
Local Civil Rule 83.11(a)(4)(B).  The magistrate determined 
that counsel need not be appointed because Willis had shown 
through numerous coherent filings that he was capable of 
representing himself and making logical presentations to the 
court.  The magistrate also based his denial on his determina-
tion that Willis's FOIA case did not involve complex legal or 
factual issues and, like many FOIA cases, would not require 
any discovery.  Willis points out that an analysis of the merits 
of his case was absent from the magistrate's report, and he 
argues that the magistrate's explanation for denying counsel 
was therefore insufficient.  We disagree.  Given the magis-
trate's conclusion that Willis was capable of handling his 
relatively straightforward FOIA case unaided, the magistrate 
did not need to go any further.

     In addition, we reject Willis's contention that the court 
erred in selecting Local Civil Rule 83.11 as the appropriate 
standard rather than Poindexter's multi-factor test.  The 

Poindexter criteria are the plaintiff's ability to afford an 
attorney;  the merits of the plaintiff's case;  plaintiff's efforts 
to secure counsel;  and the capacity of the plaintiff to present 
the case adequately without the aid of counsel.  737 F.2d at 
1185.  Poindexter interpreted Title VII's appointment provi-
sion, 42 U.S.C. s 2000e-5(f)(1), a provision "generally viewed 
as imposing a lesser burden on plaintiffs seeking appointment 
of counsel, both because of the specificity of Congress' action 
... and because this provision does not require that the 
plaintiff be a pauper."  Poindexter, 737 F.2d at 1182 n.18.  
That provision obviously does not apply to FOIA cases, nor 
do the reasons behind it.  Local Civil Rule 83.11, which 
implements 28 U.S.C. s 1915(e)(1), thus controls.  The local 
rule differs only slightly from the Poindexter factors and, to 
the extent there are differences, it embraces many of the 
considerations adopted in other circuits for applying 28 
U.S.C. s 1915(e)(1).  See, e.g., Long v. Shillinger, 927 F.2d 
525, 527 (10th Cir. 1991) (holding that courts should consider 
the merits of the litigant's claims, the nature of the factual 
issues, the litigant's ability to present his claims, and the 
complexity of the legal issues);  Cookish, 787 F.2d at 3 
(holding that factors to be considered include the indigent's 
ability to conduct whatever factual investigation is necessary, 
the complexity of the factual and legal issues, and the capabil-
ity of the indigent litigant to present the case);  Ulmer v. 
Chancellor, 691 F.2d 209, 213 (5th Cir. 1982) (holding that 
courts should consider a number of factors including the type 
and complexity of the case and whether the indigent is 
capable of adequately presenting the case).

     Because the district court acted within its discretion in 
deciding that Willis did not qualify for counsel under the local 
rule, its judgment denying his motions is

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                          