                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 12, 2001    Decided July 10, 2001 

                           No. 00-5103

             Louis Jackson, on behalf of himself and 
               others similarly situated, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                  District of Columbia, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv03276)

     E. Desmond Hogan argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs were Jonathan L. Abram, William S. Haft 
and Arthur B. Spitzer.

     Edward E. Schwab, Assistant Corporation Counsel, argued 
the cause for appellee District of Columbia.  With him on the 
brief were Robert R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, Charles L. 

Reischel, Deputy Corporation Counsel, and Lutz Alexander 
Prager, Assistant Deputy Corporation Counsel.

     Michael A. Humphreys, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellee Bureau of Prisons.  With him on the 
brief were Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig 
Lawrence, Assistant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Henderson, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Rastafarian and Sunni Muslim pris-
oners challenge a prison grooming policy that forbids beards 
and long hair, arguing that the policy violates the Free 
Exercise Clause of the First Amendment and the Religious 
Freedom Restoration Act.  Although the district court found 
that the prisoners failed to exhaust their administrative reme-
dies as required by the Prison Litigation Reform Act, the 
court went on to hold that the policy violated neither the 
First Amendment nor the Religious Freedom Restoration 
Act.  The prisoners appeal, arguing that for statutory, proce-
dural, and constitutional reasons, the exhaustion requirement 
does not apply to them.  Agreeing with the district court that 
the prisoners failed to exhaust their administrative remedies, 
we remand with instructions to vacate in part and dismiss the 
complaint without prejudice.

                                I

     The National Capital Revitalization and Government Im-
provement Act of 1997 requires the District of Columbia to 
close the Lorton Correctional Complex by December 31, 2001.  
D.C. Code s 24-1201(b).  The Act instructs the District to 
transfer its prisoners to facilities operated by the Federal 
Bureau of Prisons ("BOP").  Id.  Because BOP has insuffi-
cient space to accommodate all D.C. prisoners, the District 
contracted to transfer over 1000 prisoners to Virginia Depart-
ment of Corrections ("VDOC") facilities.  BOP also trans-
ferred an additional 900 District inmates in its custody to 
VDOC prisons.

     On November 15, 1999, VDOC announced new grooming 
standards for all inmates in its prisons.  For male inmates, 
the policy prohibits beards and goatees, requires hair to be 
cut above the shirt collar, and bans hairstyles "such as braids, 
plaits, dreadlocks, cornrows, ponytails, buns, mohawks, par-
tially shaved heads, [or] designs cut into the hair."  Inmate 
Grooming Standards, Va. Dep't of Corr., Procedure No. DOP 
864, at 2 (Nov. 15, 1999).  The policy also imposes grooming 
requirements on female prisoners, but permits their hair to 
be shoulder-length.  Penalties for violating the policy include 
assignment to special housing;  termination of most visitation, 
telephone, and commissary privileges;  and suspension from 
work and other activities.  Id. at 3.  If on arrival a new 
prisoner "refuses to cooperate, use of ... force/restraints is 
authorized in order to bring the inmate into compliance with 
grooming standards."  Id.

     Louis Jackson, Isadore Gartrell, Carl Wolfe, and Roddy 
McDowell, appellants, are serving D.C. sentences at the 
VDOC Sussex II prison in Waverly, Virginia.  They brought 
this action in the United States District Court for the District 
of Columbia on behalf of themselves and other D.C. prisoners, 
principally Sunni Muslims and Rastafarians, who are housed 
in Virginia facilities and who believe their religious faiths 
forbid them from cutting their hair, shaving their beards, or 
both.  In their complaint, the prisoners alleged that the 
grooming policy violates the Free Exercise Clause of the 
First Amendment and the Religious Freedom Restoration 
Act ("RFRA"), 42 U.S.C. s 2000bb to 2000bb-4.  RFRA 
forbids the government from "substantially burden[ing] a 
person's exercise of religion" unless the government can 
"demonstrate[ ] that application of the burden to the person--
(1) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest;  
and (2) is the least restrictive means of furthering that 
compelling governmental interest."  Id. s 2000bb-1(b).  Con-
gress enacted RFRA to protect one of "the most treasured 
birthrights of every American"--"the right to observe one's 
faith, free from Government interference."  S. Rep. No. 103-
111, at 4 (1993).  Although the Supreme Court has declared 
RFRA unconstitutional as applied to the states, City of 

Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507 (1997), we have assumed, 
without deciding, that "RFRA applies to the federal govern-
ment, notwithstanding the Supreme Court's decision in ... 
Boerne."  Alamo v. Clay, 137 F.3d 1366, 1368 (D.C. Cir. 
1998);  cf. Henderson v. Kennedy, No. 00-5070, slip op. at 5-6 
(D.C. Cir. June 26, 2001).  We shall continue that assumption 
here.

     The prisoners made two basic claims in the district court.  
First, they contended that VDOC lacked a compelling interest 
in the grooming policy and that the policy was not the least 
restrictive means of achieving whatever interests VDOC had.  
Alternatively, they argued that BOP and the District had a 
less restrictive means of housing prisoners who believed that 
the grooming policy required them to violate fundamental 
religious tenets:  transferring them to non-Virginia prison 
facilities without such grooming policies.

     On December 14, 1999, one day before the grooming poli-
cy's effective date, the district court issued a temporary 
restraining order preventing the policy from being applied to 
any District inmate with "sincerely held religious beliefs the 
new grooming policy would compromise."  Order Granting 
T.R.O., Jackson v. District of Columbia, No. 99-03276 
(D.D.C. Dec. 14, 1999).  Shortly thereafter, BOP filed a 
motion to intervene as a defendant, explaining that it has a 
contract with VDOC to house former Lorton inmates now in 
BOP's care.  The district court granted BOP's motion, and 
the prisoners filed an amended complaint to include BOP 
prisoners in the class.

     To comply with the TRO, BOP implemented a screening 
procedure to identify prisoners' religious preferences before 
assigning them to VDOC facilities.  Sunni Muslim and Rasta-
farian prisoners were sent to facilities outside Virginia that 
did not require them to cut their hair or shave their beards.

     Following discovery and trial, the district court ruled that 
the prisoners had failed to exhaust VDOC's grievance proce-
dures and had thus not complied with the Prison Litigation 
Reform Act's ("PLRA") requirement that "[n]o action ... be 
brought with respect to prison conditions under ... any ... 
Federal law[ ] by a prisoner confined in any jail, prison, or 

other correctional facility until such administrative remedies 
as are available are exhausted," 42 U.S.C. s 1997e(a).  See 
Jackson v. District of Columbia, 89 F. Supp. 2d 48, 63 
(D.D.C. 2000).  Explaining, however, that "considerable re-
sources [had been] devoted to the presentation of evidence," 
and that appellate review was "certain," id. at 64, the court 
went on to consider the merits of the case.  Ruling against 
the prisoners, the court concluded that although the prison-
ers' belief that they could not cut their hair was "heartfelt 
and sincere," id. at 65, and although they had demonstrated 
that the grooming policy "substantially burdens their exercise 
of religion," id., the prison interests served by the policy were 
compelling, and VDOC had no less restrictive alternatives, id. 
at 66-69.  The district court entered "judgment for defen-
dants."  Id. at 50.  In doing so, the court "decline[d] to 
evaluate" the issue raised by the prisoners' alternative claim:  
"whether defendants have compelling interests in keeping 
plaintiffs incarcerated in Virginia Corrections facilities."  Id. 
at 66.

     The prisoners appeal, arguing that:  (1) the PLRA's ex-
haustion requirement does not apply to them;  (2) the district 
court erred in failing to read an irreparable harm exception 
into the exhaustion requirement;  and (3) in any event, two 
class members successfully exhausted available administrative 
remedies.  On the merits, they press only their alternative 
argument that BOP and the District could assign them to 
prisons without grooming policies, as BOP did to comply with 
the TRO.

                                II

     In support of their claim that the district court erred in 
applying the PLRA's exhaustion requirement to them, the 
prisoners argue that the PLRA does not apply to RFRA 
actions and that the District and BOP waived the exhaustion 
defense by failing to include it in their answers.  We address 
each argument in turn.

     The prisoners' first argument rests on two provisions of 
RFRA.  Entitled "Judicial relief," one provision establishes 

that "[s]tanding to assert a claim or defense under this 
section shall be governed by the general rules of standing 
under Article III of the Constitution."  42 U.S.C. s 2000bb-
1(c).  The second provision, entitled "Rule of construction," 
states that "[f]ederal statutory law adopted after November 
16, 1993 is subject to this chapter unless such law explicitly 
excludes such application by reference to this chapter."  Id. 
s 2000bb-3(b).  According to the prisoners, these two provi-
sions allow them to pursue their RFRA action without first 
complying with the PLRA's exhaustion requirement.  They 
argue that because nothing in the PLRA--a "Federal statuto-
ry law adopted after November 16, 1993"--"explicitly ex-
cludes ... application" of RFRA's "Judicial relief" provision, 
courts may condition the filing of RFRA actions on nothing 
more than "the general rules of standing under Article III of 
the Constitution."

     We disagree.  The prisoners read the statute as if it said 
"Article III standing is the only requirement for RFRA 
suits."  The statute actually says only that "[s]tanding ... 
shall be governed by the general rules of standing under 
Article III of the Constitution."  Id. s 2000bb-1(c) (emphasis 
added).  Describing the purpose of the "Judicial relief" provi-
sion, the Senate Report on the bill refers only to standing, 
saying nothing at all about other requirements for suit. 
S. Rep. No. 103-111, at 13 ("Ordinary article III rules are to 
be applied in determining whether a party has standing to 
bring a claim pursuant to this act.").  If the prisoners' 
reading of the statute were correct, courts would have to 
disregard not only the PLRA exhaustion requirement, but 
also such basic matters as personal jurisdiction, venue, and 
statutes of limitations.  Neither the statute nor its legislative 
history suggests that Congress intended such an astonishing 
result.

     The prisoners argue that because all federal court plaintiffs 
must satisfy Article III standing, see Warth v. Seldin, 422 
U.S. 490, 498 (1975), limiting the "Judicial relief" section to 
standing would leave the section "utterly without effect[,] 
contravening an elementary principle of statutory construc-
tion."  Appellants' Reply Br. at 3 (internal quotation omitted).  
Again, we disagree.  The Senate Report makes clear that 

Congress included the provision in order to emphasize that 
RFRA should not "have [the] unintended consequence[ ]" of 
"unsettl[ing]" standing law.  S. Rep. No. 103-111, at 12-13.  
"The committee intends that [standing] issues continue to be 
resolved under Article III standing rules and establishment 
clause jurisprudence.  The Act would not provide a basis for 
standing in situations where standing to bring a free exercise 
claim is absent."  Id. at 13 (emphasis added).  Although it 
may be unusual for Congress to include language in a statute 
merely to emphasize its intention not to change a particular 
aspect of existing law, that appears to be precisely what 
Congress did here.

     The prisoners' second argument is that even if the PLRA's 
exhaustion requirement applies to RFRA suits, BOP and the 
District waived the defense by failing to include it in their 
answers to the original complaint.  BOP did not raise its 
exhaustion defense until it answered the first amended com-
plaint;  the District raised the defense in a "notice" that it was 
joining BOP's exhaustion defense.  See Jackson, 89 F. Supp. 
2d at 58 n.46.  Treating the District's notice as a motion to 
amend its answer to plaintiffs' first amended complaint, the 
district court concluded that granting the motion would not 
prejudice the prisoners because they had learned of the 
defense two weeks earlier when BOP identified two witnesses 
who would testify on the subject of exhaustion.  Id.

     Challenging the district court's decision, the prisoners cite 
Harris v. Sec'y, U.S. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, 126 F.3d 339 
(D.C. Cir. 1997), for the principle that "affirmative defenses 
must be raised in a responsive pleading."  Id. at 341.  But 
Harris also emphasizes that district courts retain discretion 
to grant leave to amend pleadings to include new defenses, id. 
at 344-45, just as the district court did here.  We review 
district court decisions regarding amendments of pleadings 
for abuse of discretion, see Material Supply Int'l, Inc. v. 
Sunmatch Indus. Co., 146 F.3d 983, 991 (D.C. Cir. 1998), 
recognizing that leave to amend should be "freely given when 
justice so requires," Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a), absent "any appar-
ent or declared reason--such as undue delay, bad faith[,] ... 
[or] undue prejudice to the opposing party," Foman v. Davis, 

371 U.S. 178, 182 (1962).  Not until their reply brief did the 
prisoners argue that any such reason existed in this case.  
This argument came too late.  See Corson & Gruman Co. v. 
NLRB, 899 F.2d 47, 50 n.4 (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("We require 
petitioners and appellants to raise all of their arguments in 
the opening brief to prevent 'sandbagging' of appellees and 
respondents and to provide opposing counsel the chance to 
respond.").

                               III

     The prisoners argue that the district court erred by refus-
ing to recognize an irreparable injury exception to the 
PLRA's exhaustion requirement.  "Under the district court's 
interpretation [that the PLRA's exhaustion requirement lacks 
an irreparable harm exception], the PLRA prevents a prison-
er who is subject to daily torture from seeking an injunction 
until he exhausts a six-month (or longer) prison grievance 
procedure."  Appellants' Opening Br. at 15 n.3.  Such an 
exception is necessary, the prisoners argue, "in order to avoid 
... serious constitutional questions."  Id.

     We think an irreparable injury exception is unnecessary.  
The Supreme Court has long recognized that federal courts 
possess a "traditional power to issue injunctions to preserve 
the status quo while administrative proceedings are in prog-
ress and prevent impairment of the effective exercise of 
appellate jurisdiction."  FTC v. Dean Foods Co., 384 U.S. 597, 
604 (1966).  As we explained in Wagner v. Taylor, "[i]f [a] 
court may eventually have jurisdiction of the substantive 
claim, the court's incidental equitable jurisdiction, despite the 
agency's primary jurisdiction, gives the court authority to 
impose a temporary restraint in order to preserve the status 
quo pending ripening of the claim for judicial review."  836 
F.2d 566, 571 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  In Wagner, we found that 
although Title VII complainants must ordinarily exhaust ad-
ministrative remedies before seeking judicial relief, id. at 570 
n.34, because Title VII does not expressly foreclose courts' 
"inherent equitable power to issue ... injunctions to preserve 
the status quo," id. at 572, district courts retain jurisdiction to 
grant interim injunctive relief where plaintiffs face either 

irreparable injury or imminent retaliation.  Id. at 574-76;  see 
also Nat'l Treasury Employees Union v. King, 961 F.2d 240 
(D.C. Cir. 1992) (responding to the union's argument that it 
would suffer irreparable injury to its First Amendment rights 
during the time that the Federal Labor Relations Authority 
considered its unfair labor practice claim by ordering the 
district court to hold the case in abeyance for three months or 
until the FLRA decided the union's claim, and instructing the 
district court, in order to prevent the union from suffering 
irreparable injury, to hear the claim at the end of that period 
if the FLRA had not acted on the claim);  cf. Sampson v. 
Murray, 415 U.S. 61, 84 (1974) (explaining that a showing of 
irreparable injury would be necessary to justify preliminary 
injunctive relief staying agency action during the agency's 
appeals process).

     Like Title VII, the PLRA contains nothing expressly fore-
closing courts from exercising their traditional equitable pow-
er to issue injunctions to prevent irreparable injury pending 
exhaustion of administrative remedies.  The district court 
therefore had no need to recognize an irreparable injury 
exception to the PLRA's exhaustion requirement;  the court 
had inherent power to protect the prisoners while they ex-
hausted prison grievance procedures.  Of course, the district 
court had no need to exercise that authority in this case, for 
by the time BOP raised its exhaustion defense, the court had 
issued a temporary restraining order that, by agreement of 
the parties, remained in effect until the court ruled on the 
merits.

                                IV

     This brings us to the question of whether the prisoners 
exhausted their administrative remedies as required by the 
PLRA.  VDOC's grievance procedures have four stages, but 
only the first two relate to this case.  A prisoner begins by 
filing an informal complaint with prison staff.  The staff must 
respond in writing within fifteen days.  If unsatisfied with the 
response, the prisoner may file a Level I formal grievance 
within thirty days of the occurrence, to which the prison must 

respond within thirty days (or sixty days if the prison issues a 
"continuance").  Inmates are notified of the grievance proce-
dures "during orientation at all reception centers and all 
parole violator units," and copies are made available "in 
locations accessible to both employees and inmates."  Inmate 
Grievance Procedure, Va. Dep't of Corr., Procedure No. DOP 
866, at 3-4 (Nov. 20, 1998).

     The prisoners argue that class members Louis Jackson and 
Carl Wolfe exhausted their administrative remedies.  See 
Foster v. Gueory, 655 F.2d 1319, 1321-22 (D.C. Cir. 1981) 
(explaining that each individual plaintiff in a class-action suit 
need not have pursued the available administrative remedies 
"if at least one member of the plaintiff class has met the filing 
prerequisite").  Jackson filed an informal complaint on De-
cember 1, 1999, but never received a response.  Relying on 
their understanding that the response to an informal com-
plaint must be attached to a Level I grievance, the prisoners 
argue that Jackson could not file a Level I formal grievance 
since he had no response to attach.  According to the district 
court, however, even if the filing of an informal complaint to 
which prison officials fail to respond satisfies the PLRA, 
Jackson's filing did not.  As the district court observed, 
because prison officials have fifteen days to respond to an 
informal complaint, Jackson's December 1 complaint was still 
pending when the prisoners filed suit on December 10, 1999.  
See Jackson, 89 F. Supp. 2d at 59-60.

     In so ruling, the district court rejected the prisoners' 
argument that the PLRA permits suit to be filed so long as 
administrative remedies are exhausted before trial.  "[T]he 
statute means what it plainly says," the district court held;  
"prisoners may only file actions under federal law concerning 
their conditions of confinement after they have exhausted 
their prison's administrative remedies."  Id. at 59.  We agree, 
as do three other circuits.  See Freeman v. Francis, 196 F.3d 
641, 645 (6th Cir. 1999);  Perez v. Wis. Dep't of Corr., 182 F.3d 
532, 534-35 (7th Cir. 1999);  Garrett v. Hawk, 127 F.3d 1263, 
1265 (10th Cir. 1997).  But see Williams v. Norris, 176 F.3d 
1089, 1090 (8th Cir. 1999) (holding that it is sufficient for 
prisoners to exhaust their remedies before trial).  The PLRA 

says that no action shall be "brought ... until such adminis-
trative remedies as are available are exhausted," not that no 
action shall be tried until administrative remedies are ex-
hausted. 42 U.S.C. s 1997e(a) (emphasis added).

     The prisoners next argue that Jackson satisfied their 
PLRA exhaustion obligation because, by the date they filed 
their amended complaint (January 18, 2000), the deadline for 
the prison's response to Jackson's informal complaint had 
passed.  But if the PLRA meant only that prisoners had to 
exhaust administrative remedies before filing an amended 
complaint, they would have no incentive to exhaust those 
remedies prior to filing suit.  The prisoners could complete 
the grievance process while suit was pending, avoiding dis-
missal by later amending their complaint.  This would defeat 
the very purpose of the PLRA exhaustion requirement:  re-
lieving courts of the burden of lawsuits filed before prison 
officials have had an opportunity to resolve prisoner griev-
ances on their own.  See Alexander v. Hawk, 159 F.3d 1321, 
1326 n.11 (11th Cir. 1998).

     Class member Carl Wolfe's argument that he exhausted his 
administrative remedies rests on his claim that he complained 
about the grooming policy to three prison officials, one of 
whom--the warden--told him "to file in the court."  Trial Tr. 
2/29/2000 at 62.  Relying on Miller v. Tanner, 196 F.3d 1190 
(11th Cir. 1999), the prisoners argue that "[t]he PLRA's 
exhaustion requirement does not require a prisoner to pursue 
an administrative procedure that prison officials have ex-
pressly told him is not available to cure the inmate's com-
plaint."  Appellants' Opening Br. at 25.

     In Miller, prison officials moved to dismiss a prisoner's 
complaint for failure to comply with the PLRA's exhaustion 
requirement because the prisoner did not appeal following the 
rejection of his grievance.  196 F.3d at 1192, 1194.  Yet the 
letter the prisoner received from the grievance clerk denying 
his grievance stated that "[w]hen any grievance is terminated 
at the institutional level you do not have the right to appeal.  
The above listed grievance[ ] is closed."  Id. at 1192.  The 
Eleventh Circuit found that this letter "unambiguously told 

[the prisoner] that an appeal was futile, even prohibited."  Id. 
at 1194.  Observing that "appealing might be treated as 
insubordination and there might be harmful consequences for 
disobeying the rules," the court concluded that "[the prisoner] 
was not required, in order to exhaust his administrative 
remedies, to file an appeal after being told unequivocally that 
appeal of an institutional level denial was precluded."  Id.

     This case differs from Miller in two significant respects.  
To begin with, the record in this case contains no "unambigu-
ous" or "unequivocal" (the Eleventh Circuit's words) state-
ment that Wolfe had exhausted the prison's grievance proce-
dures.  Indeed, we find nothing in the record to support the 
prisoners' claim that Wolfe was told "that he had no recourse 
through VDOC's grievance process," or that Wolfe's "only 
option for challenging the policy was to file in court."  Appel-
lants' Opening Br. at 25.  The warden never even mentioned 
the grievance procedures;  he said only "there [was] nothing 
he [could] do" and that Wolfe had to "file in the court," Trial 
Tr. 2/29/2000 at 62.  And under the PLRA, a prisoner must 
exhaust his administrative remedies before going to court.  
Moreover, as we read Wolfe's entire description of the war-
den's statement, which the prisoners fail to quote in their 
brief, the warden seems to have meant only that Wolfe had to 
file suit if he wanted a transfer to a District facility:

     I asked him first if he could get me transferred back to 
     the District of Columbia being that I'm a Rastafarian and 
     this policy is totally against Rastafarian as far as cutting 
     my hair, shaving my face.  I explained my whole reli-
     gious policy to him.  He said there is nothing he can do 
     for me.  The only thing I can do, I got to file in the 
     court.
     
Id. at 62-63.

     Second, the prisoners in this case never allege that Wolfe 
risked discipline if he pursued a grievance.  Quite to the 
contrary, despite the warden's statement that Wolfe had "to 
file in the court," Wolfe filed an informal complaint with his 
unit manager, and, after receiving a negative response, filed a 
Level I formal grievance.  Id. at 66;  Trial Tr. 3/1/2000 at 300.  

When that grievance was rejected, he filed a Level II appeal.  
He was still waiting for a response when trial in the district 
court began.  Trial Tr. 2/29/2000 at 66-67.

     It is thus clear from the record that Wolfe had not exhaust-
ed his administrative remedies at the time of trial, let alone 
when the prisoners filed their complaint.  Mindful of the 
Supreme Court's recent statement that Congress intended 
the PLRA to broaden the exhaustion requirement for prison-
er suits, see Booth v. Churner, No. 99-1964, 2001 WL 567712, 
at *5 (U.S. May 29, 2001), we agree with the district court 
that Wolfe failed to comply with the PLRA.

                                V

     Because the prisoners failed to exhaust their administrative 
remedies, the district court should have dismissed the com-
plaint without prejudice, allowing the prisoners to refile once 
they have completed the VDOC grievance procedures.  See 
Martini v. Fed. Nat'l Mortgage Ass'n, 178 F.3d 1336, 1348 
(D.C. Cir. 1999).  Because the merits of the RFRA claim have 
been fully briefed in this appeal, however, and because the 
district court might have to consider this claim on remand, we 
close with one observation.  See id. at 1349 (commenting on 
the merits of one of the issues on appeal despite this court's 
dismissal of the appellant's complaint because of the possibili-
ty that "this issue [would] arise again in a new trial").  In 
evaluating the merits of the prisoners' RFRA claim, the 
district court expressly "decline[d]" to consider the issue 
presented by the prisoners' alternative contention, the one 
they appeal here.  Therefore, should the prisoners refile after 
exhausting their administrative remedies, the district court 
will need to consider whether BOP and the District can 
demonstrate that alternative placement in non-Virginia pris-
ons without grooming policies is infeasible.  See, e.g., Jolly v. 
Coughlin, 76 F.3d 468, 479 (2d Cir. 1996) (requiring a prison 
sued under RFRA to prove that its treatment of the plaintiff 
was "the least restrictive means to further [its] asserted 
compelling interest").

     The portions of the district court decision regarding the 
merits (Sections IIE, IIF, and III) are vacated, and this 
matter is remanded with instructions to dismiss the complaint 
without prejudice.

                                                             So ordered.

                             