                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 8, 2001    Decided August 2, 2002 

                           No. 00-7250

               World Wide Minerals, Ltd., et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                 Republic of Kazakhstan, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv01199)

     Anson M. Keller argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs was Marshall Lee Miller.

     Waller T. Dudley argued the cause for appellees Republic 
of Kazakhstan and State Committee of the Republic of Kaza-
khstan on the Management of State Property.  M. Melissa 
Glassman was on the brief.  Stephen M. Colangelo entered 
an appearance.

     Jared A. Goldstein argued the cause for appellee National 
Atomic Company Kazatomprom.  With him on the brief was 
Thomas B. Wilner.

     Carolyn B. Lamm argued the cause for appellee Nukem, 
Inc.  With her on the brief were Francis A. Vasquez Jr. and 
Eric Grannon.  Judd C. Lawler entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  In 1996 and 1997, World Wide 
Minerals Ltd., a Canadian corporation, entered into a series 
of agreements with the Republic of Kazakhstan.  Pursuant to 
those agreements, World Wide took over the management of 
one of Kazakhstan's major uranium complexes and loaned 
Kazakhstan several million dollars to fund the restoration of 
the facility.  World Wide contends that, in return, Kaza-
khstan agreed (inter alia) to permit World Wide to export 
Kazakhstan uranium.  World Wide alleges that Kazakhstan 
breached its agreements by failing to issue World Wide a 
uranium export license and by seizing its assets in Kaza-
khstan.  World Wide further alleges fraudulent inducement, 
tortious interference, conversion, conspiracy, and violations of 
the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act 
(RICO), 18 U.S.C. s 1961 et seq.1

     The defendants in this case are Kazakhstan and two of its 
instrumentalities, as well as Nukem, Inc., a New York corpo-
ration that World Wide contends conspired with Kazakhstan 
in committing wrongful acts against World Wide.  The dis-
trict court concluded that Kazakhstan and its instrumentali-
ties had waived sovereign immunity against suit, and that the 
court therefore had jurisdiction over the claims against these 
defendants under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act 
(FSIA), 28 U.S.C. ss 1330, 1605(a)(1).  The court nonetheless 

__________
     1 Two of World Wide's subsidiaries (World Wide Resource Fi-
nance, Inc. and KazUran Corporation), as well as its sales agent 
(Nuclear Fuel Resources Corporation), are also plaintiffs in this 
case.  For the sake of convenience, we refer to the plaintiffs 
collectively as World Wide.

dismissed those claims pursuant to the act of state doctrine.  
The court also dismissed World Wide's claims against Nukem, 
holding that it did not have personal jurisdiction over that 
New York corporation because World Wide's injuries did not 
arise out of any act that took place in the District of Colum-
bia.

     We affirm the dismissal of World Wide's claims against the 
Kazakhstan entities, albeit on somewhat different grounds.  
Although we agree that Kazakhstan waived sovereign immu-
nity for some of World Wide's claims, we conclude that it did 
not waive immunity for all of the claims.  As to those claims 
where there was no waiver, we affirm dismissal for lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction.  As to the remaining claims 
against Kazakhstan and one of its instrumentalities, we agree 
with the district court that the act of state doctrine is fatal to 
World Wide's suit.  This conclusion also removes any sub-
stantial federal question with respect to identical claims 
against the other instrumentality, a corporation wholly owned 
by Kazakhstan.  Finally, because the dismissal of the claims 
against Nukem was based on a misunderstanding regarding 
the date upon which World Wide alleges that officials of 
Nukem and Kazakhstan met in the District of Columbia to 
conspire against it, we remand those claims to permit the 
district court to determine whether the facts are sufficient to 
establish personal jurisdiction.

                                I

     In 1995, the Republic of Kazakhstan issued a decree an-
nouncing the privatization of the country's uranium industry 
and its intention to contract with foreign investors for the 
management of previously state-run facilities.  Am. Compl. 
p 40.2  Shortly thereafter, World Wide submitted a proposal 

__________
     2 The facts set out in this Part are taken from World Wide's 
amended complaint and documents incorporated by reference there-
in.  Because we are reviewing the district court's decision on a 
motion to dismiss, we must assume that the allegations of the 
complaint are true, although many are disputed by the defendants.  
See Saudi Arabia v. Nelson, 507 U.S. 349, 351 (1993).

to take over the management of Tselinny Gorno-Khimicheskii 
Kombinat (TGK), a state holding company that operated a 
uranium complex located in the area of Kazakhstan's North-
ern Mines.  After a period of negotiation, the parties entered 
into the four agreements that are at issue in this case.

     The first agreement was the Management Agreement.  
That agreement, signed by World Wide and the State Com-
mittee of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the Management of 
State Property (Kazakhstan State Committee) on October 7, 
1996, granted World Wide the right to manage and control 
the assets of TGK.  Id. p 56;  Management Agreement p 2.11.  
In return, World Wide agreed to satisfy TGK's outstanding 
debts and to implement a restructuring program for the 
uranium complex.  Management Agreement pp 2.11(b), 2.22.  
The agreement listed a number of additional points "which 
have not been concluded in this Agreement" but which were 
to be "addressed in good faith negotiations," including the 
granting of a license to World Wide to export TGK uranium 
for international sale.  Id. p 2.17, Sched. 2 p 2.3.  World Wide 
was entitled to terminate the agreement if Kazakhstan did 
not grant it the license by December 16, 1996.  Id. p 2.18.  
Although World Wide never received the license, it did not 
suspend performance under the contract until April 30, 1997.  
Am. Compl. p 73.

     On November 14, 1996, World Wide, the Kazakhstan State 
Committee, and TGK executed a second agreement, the Loan 
Agreement.  Under that agreement, World Wide agreed to 
lend TGK at least $5 million to fund the restoration and 
operation of the uranium complex.  In the same month, 
World Wide took over management of the TGK complex and 
began to make loans under the Loan Agreement.  Id. pp 58, 
59, 61.

     The third agreement was the Strategic Alliance Agreement, 
which World Wide entered into with Kazatomprom on Febru-
ary 28, 1997.  Kazatomprom is a corporation, wholly owned 
by the Republic of Kazakhstan, that is charged with manag-
ing nuclear energy complexes and promoting the development 
of uranium production in Kazakhstan.  Id. p 60.  In the 

Strategic Alliance Agreement, the parties agreed to form a 
joint venture to explore, develop, and mine several other 
uranium sources, including deposits in Kazakhstan's Southern 
Mines, and to market uranium from those sources.  Id. p 69.  
Kazatomprom also agreed to "assist" World Wide in obtaining 
a uranium export license from Kazakhstan.  Strategic Alli-
ance Agreement p 8.2.

     Finally, on March 25, 1997, World Wide, TGK, and the 
Kazakhstan State Committee entered into a fourth agree-
ment, the Pledge Agreement.  This agreement gave World 
Wide a security interest in the assets and shares of TGK as 
collateral for its loans.  The Pledge Agreement also prohibit-
ed the transfer of any of the pledged assets or shares.  Am. 
Compl. pp 70, 85;  Pledge Agreement p 5.1.3.

     On March 27, 1997, following execution of the Pledge 
Agreement, World Wide entered into an contract with Con-
sumers Energy Company, a Michigan utility, to deliver ap-
proximately $4.1 million worth of Kazakhstan uranium.  In 
order to fulfill this contract, World Wide needed to receive an 
export license by May 30, 1997.  By the end of April, howev-
er, World Wide had not received the necessary license, and, 
on April 30, it suspended mining operations at the TGK 
complex.  Am. Compl. pp 71-73.

     In May 1997, in response to its requests for an export 
license, a Kazakhstan official told World Wide that Kaza-
khstan had previously given another company, Nukem, exclu-
sive rights to the entire quota of uranium that Kazakhstan 
was permitted to export to the United States.  That quota 
was determined by a Suspension Agreement between the two 
countries.  Id. pp 77, 78.3  Although World Wide continued to 

__________
     3 Kazakhstan had entered into the Suspension Agreement in 
return for the United States' agreement to suspend an antidumping 
investigation initiated by the Department of Commerce under the 
Tariff Act, 19 U.S.C. s 1673a.  See Agreement Suspending the 
Antidumping Investigation on Uranium from Kazakhstan ("Suspen-
sion Agreement"), reproduced at 57 Fed. Reg. 49,220, 49,222 (Oct. 
30, 1992);  Am. Compl. p 33.  The Suspension Agreement specifical-
ly provided that uranium exported to the United States required 

seek an export license from Kazakhstan, and negotiated 
several extensions of its contract with Consumers Energy 
pending the grant of such a license, its final extension ran out 
on July 4, 1997.  On July 10, the contract between World 
Wide and Consumers Energy was terminated.  World Wide 
alleges that, during the period in which it was trying to obtain 
a license, Nukem approached Consumers Energy with an 
offer to sell it uranium in the event that World Wide failed to 
obtain the license, and that subsequently Nukem did sell 
Kazakhstan uranium to Consumers Energy.  Id .pp 82-84.

     Thereafter, what was left of World Wide's relationship with 
Kazakhstan quickly deteriorated.  On August 1, Kazakhstan 
terminated the Management Agreement, declaring that 
World Wide had failed to fulfill its obligations.  It then 
allegedly seized $1 million worth of World Wide's uranium 
and other property located at the TGK complex, and forced 
World Wide's employees to leave the country.  Id. pp 86-87.  
Finally, on October 2, 1997, Kazakhstan issued a decree 
transferring all of the assets and shares of TGK to Kazatom-
prom.  Id. p 17;  Republic of Kazakhstan, Ministry of Fi-
nance, Resolution No. 317 (Oct. 2, 1997) (J.A. at 431).

     In May 1998, World Wide sued Kazakhstan, the Kaza-
khstan State Committee, Kazatomprom, and Nukem in the 
United States District Court for the District of Columbia.  In 
its eleven-count amended complaint, World Wide alleged that 
Kazakhstan and the Kazakhstan State Committee (collective-
ly Kazakhstan) breached their agreements with World Wide, 
fraudulently induced World Wide to enter into several of the 
agreements, wrongfully converted its property, tortiously in-
terfered with its contracts, unlawfully conspired against it, 
and committed acts that violated RICO.  In addition to 
damages for these violations, World Wide sought a declarato-
ry judgment establishing its "right to market Kazakhstan 
uranium under the Suspension Agreement or otherwise."  
Am. Compl. p 161.  World Wide joined Kazatomprom in most 

__________
"export licenses and certificates ... issued in a manner determined 
by the Government of Kazakhstan, in accordance with laws of 
Kazakhstan."  Suspension Agreement p V.A, 57 Fed. Reg. at 49,224.

of these counts, and joined Nukem as a defendant in the 
counts for tortious interference, conspiracy, and violation of 
RICO, and in its request for a declaratory judgment.  Al-
though World Wide alleges various wrongful conduct, the 
amended complaint identifies Kazakhstan's denial of its appli-
cation for an export license as "the very heart of this matter."  
Id. p 157.4

     The defendants moved to dismiss World Wide's amended 
complaint, arguing that the court lacked personal and subject 
matter jurisdiction, and that the act of state doctrine barred 
adjudication of World Wide's claims.  The district court 
granted the motions to dismiss, and denied World Wide's 
request to file a second amended complaint as futile.  World 
Wide Minerals Ltd. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 116 F. Supp. 
2d 98 (D.D.C. 2000).  The court began by holding that, 
because Kazakhstan had expressly waived its sovereign im-
munity in the Pledge Agreement, the FSIA, 28 U.S.C. 
ss 1330(a) & (b), 1605(a)(1), gave the court personal jurisdic-
tion over Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom and subject matter 
jurisdiction over all of World Wide's claims against them.  
116 F. Supp. 2d at 103.5  The court concluded, however, that 

__________
     4 The eleven counts, and the defendants to which they apply, are 
as follows:  Count I, against Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom, for 
breach of the Management Agreement;  Count II, against Kaza-
khstan, for breach of the Loan Agreement;  Count III, against 
Kazakhstan, for breach of the Pledge Agreement;  Count IV, 
against Kazatomprom, for breach of the Strategic Alliance Agree-
ment;  Count V, against Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom, for fraud in 
the inducement to enter into the Management and Loan agree-
ments;  Count VI, against Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom, for fraud 
in the inducement to enter into the Strategic Alliance Agreement;  
Count VII, against Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom, for conversion;  
Count VIII, against all defendants, for tortious interference with 
World Wide's contracts with its sales agent and Consumers Energy;  
Count IX, against all defendants, for civil conspiracy;  Count X, 
against all defendants, for violation of RICO;  and Count XI, against 
all defendants, for a declaratory judgment.

     5 The FSIA grants United States courts both subject matter and 
personal jurisdiction (where service of process has been made) over 

"granting World Wide relief would require a judgment on the 
acts of a sovereign state," including Kazakhstan's failure to 
grant World Wide an export license and its decision to 
expropriate World Wide's property.  Accordingly, the court 
held the claims against the Kazakhstan defendants barred by 
the act of state doctrine.  Id. at 104.

     The district court also dismissed World Wide's claims 
against Nukem, holding that it lacked personal jurisdiction 
over the corporation.  The court rejected all of the jurisdic-
tional theories asserted by World Wide, including the "trans-
acting business" clause of the District of Columbia's long-arm 
statute, D.C. Code s 13-423(a)(1), and "conspiracy jurisdic-
tion."  The court rejected the latter two theories on the 
ground that the only act sufficient to satisfy their prerequi-
sites took place after World Wide's injuries had already been 
incurred.  116 F. Supp. 2d at 108.  World Wide now appeals.

                                II

     We review the district court's dismissal of World Wide's 
complaint de novo, and must accept the complaint's allega-
tions as true for purposes of this appeal.  See El Hadad v. 
United Arab Emirates, 216 F.3d 29, 31, 32 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 
2000).  In doing so, we consider only the allegations of the 
(first) amended complaint.  Although World Wide indicated in 
its notice of appeal that it planned to challenge the district 

__________
any claim against a foreign state as to which the state is not entitled 
to immunity.  28 U.S.C. s 1330(a), (b).  The district court held that, 
where one of the FSIA's exceptions to sovereign immunity (e.g., 
waiver) applies, a foreign government and its instrumentalities are 
subject to suit without the need to apply the "minimum contacts" 
test traditionally used in determining whether the assertion of 
personal jurisdiction satisfies due process.  116 F. Supp. 2d. at 102-
03.  Subsequently, this circuit reached the same conclusion with 
respect to "an actual foreign government," but expressed no view as 
to whether that conclusion also applied to "other entities that fall 
within the FSIA's definition of 'foreign state'--including corpora-
tions in which a foreign state owns a majority interest."  See Price 
v. Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, No. 00-7244, slip op. 
at 26 (D.C. Cir. June 28, 2002).

court's refusal to permit it to file a second amended com-
plaint, see Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a), it failed to do so until its reply 
brief.  As we have said many times before, a party waives its 
right to challenge a ruling of the district court if it fails to 
make that challenge in its opening brief.  See, e.g., Students 
Against Genocide v. Department of State, 257 F.3d 828, 834-
35 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  Board of Regents v. EPA, 86 F.3d 1214, 
1221 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  see also Terry v. Reno, 101 F.3d 1412, 
1415 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (holding that where the appellants listed 
challenges in the "Statement of Issues," but failed to brief 
them, the challenges were waived).

     World Wide contends that none of the defendants' motions 
to dismiss should have been granted.  In response, Kaza-
khstan, Kazatomprom, and Nukem assert that the district 
court was correct in ruling that a variety of threshold obsta-
cles, including sovereign immunity, the act of state doctrine, 
and lack of personal jurisdiction, barred World Wide's claims.  
In the following three Parts, we address the issues relating to 
each defendant separately.

                               III

     World Wide's amended complaint levels ten of its eleven 
charges against Kazakhstan (including the Kazakhstan State 
Committee).  They are:  Count I (breach of the Management 
Agreement), Count II (breach of the Loan Agreement), Count 
III (breach of the Pledge Agreement), Count V (fraud in the 
inducement to enter into the Management and Loan agree-
ments),6 Count VI (fraud in the inducement to enter into the 
Strategic Alliance Agreement), Count VII (conversion), Count 
VIII (tortious interference), Count IX (civil conspiracy), 
Count X (violation of RICO), and Count XI (declaratory 
judgment).  In Part III.A, we conclude that the district court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over seven of these counts, 
because Kazakhstan has sovereign immunity against their 

__________
     6 Although the title of this count also alleges fraud in the induce-
ment to enter into the "Preliminary Agreement," neither the count 
nor World Wide's briefs allege any damages or make any argument 
relating to that agreement, and we therefore give it no independent 
consideration.

adjudication in United States courts.  In Part III.B, we 
conclude that the remaining three counts were properly dis-
missed pursuant to the act of state doctrine.

                                A

     We turn first to whether the district court was correct in 
concluding that it had subject matter jurisdiction over all of 
World Wide's claims against Kazakhstan.  See In re Papan-
dreou, 139 F.3d 247, 254-56 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (holding that 
jurisdiction must be resolved before applying the act of state 
doctrine, because that doctrine is "a substantive rule of law").7 
The FSIA is "the sole basis for obtaining jurisdiction over a 
foreign state in our courts."  Argentine Republic v. Amerada 
Hess Shipping Corp., 488 U.S. 428, 434 (1989).  Under the 
FSIA, a district court has jurisdiction over a civil action 
against a foreign state for any claim "with respect to which 
the foreign state is not entitled to immunity."  28 U.S.C. 
s 1330(a).  The Act provides that a foreign state is generally 
immune from the court's jurisdiction unless one of the excep-
tions listed in the statute applies.  Id. ss 1604, 1605;  Verlin-
den B.V. v. Central Bank of Nigeria, 461 U.S. 480, 488-89 
(1983).8

     In the district court, World Wide argued that the court had 
subject matter jurisdiction under two FSIA exceptions:  the 
waiver exception, 28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(1), and the commercial 
activity exception, id. s 1605(a)(2).  In its briefs on appeal, 

__________
     7 In its reply brief, World Wide argues that we cannot review the 
district court's finding of subject matter jurisdiction because the 
appellees "failed to cross-appeal on this issue."  World Wide Reply 
Br. at 11.  To the contrary, we have an independent responsibility 
to consider that question.  See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better 
Env't, 523 U.S. 83, 95 (1998).

     8 World Wide does not dispute that the Kazakhstan State Com-
mittee is an "agency or instrumentality of a foreign state" within 
the meaning of the FSIA.  28 U.S.C. s 1603(a), (b);  see World 
Wide Br. at xiii.  As such, like Kazakhstan, the State Committee is 
entitled to immunity unless one of the statute's enumerated excep-
tions applies.  Id. s 1604.

however, World Wide did not argue that the commercial 
activity exception was applicable, relying instead on the waiv-
er exception.9  And at oral argument, World Wide eschewed 
any reliance on the FSIA's commercial activity exception.  
Accordingly, we limit our inquiry to whether the district court 
had jurisdiction by virtue of Kazakhstan's waiver of immuni-
ty.10  Under the FSIA's waiver exception, a state is not 
immune from suit in any case "in which the foreign state has 
waived its immunity either explicitly or by implication."  Id. 
s 1605(a)(1).  World Wide does not rely on a theory of 
implied waiver, but rather on the explicit waivers of sovereign 
immunity contained in the Pledge and Management agree-
ments.11

__________
     9 This was so despite the fact that Kazatomprom devoted a 
substantial portion of its brief to arguing against the applicability of 
the commercial activity exception.  See Kazatomprom Br. at 14-24.

     10 The defense of sovereign immunity may be raised at any time 
because, if valid, it means that the court lacks power to hear the 
case.  See Steel Co., 523 U.S. at 94-95.  A challenge to sovereign 
immunity, by contrast, is an argument that can be waived.  See 
Watters v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., No. 01-7092, 
slip. op. at 7 n.13 (D.C. Cir. July 17, 2002) (holding that a claim that 
sovereign immunity has been waived is itself waived if not argued 
on appeal).

     11 As we have previously noted, the "FSIA does not define an 
implied waiver."  Creighton Ltd. v. Government of the State of 
Qatar, 181 F.3d 118, 122 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  This circuit, however, 
has "followed the 'virtually unanimous' precedents construing the 
implied waiver provision narrowly."  Id. (quoting Shapiro v. Repub-
lic of Bolivia, 930 F.2d 1013, 1017 (2d Cir. 1991)).  Courts have 
found implied waiver where a foreign state has filed a responsive 
pleading without raising the defense of sovereign immunity.  Id. at 
123.  They have also found implied waiver where the state has 
agreed to arbitrate or to adopt a particular choice of law, under 
circumstances not present in this case.  Id.;  see id. at 122 (" '[M]ost 
courts have refused to find an implicit waiver of immunity to suit in 
American courts from a contract clause providing for arbitration in 
a country other than the United States.' " (quoting Frolova v. 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 761 F.2d 370, 377 (7th Cir. 

     In general, explicit waivers of sovereign immunity are 
narrowly construed "in favor of the sovereign" and are not 
enlarged "beyond what the language requires."  Library of 
Cong. v. Shaw, 478 U.S. 310, 318 (1986) (internal quotation 
marks omitted);  see Watters v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., No. 01-7092, slip. op. at 5 (D.C. Cir. July 17, 
2002) (requiring "clear and unequivocal" waiver);  Forman v. 
Small, 271 F.3d 285, 296 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  A foreign sover-
eign will not be found to have waived its immunity unless it 
has clearly and unambiguously done so.  See Aquamar S.A. 
v. Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A., Inc., 179 F.3d 1279, 1292 
(11th Cir. 1999) ("An express waiver under section 1605(a)(1) 
must give a clear, complete, unambiguous, and unmistakable 
manifestation of the sovereign's intent to waive its immunity." 
(internal quotation marks omitted));  see also Maritime Int'l 
Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, 693 F.2d 
1094, 1100 n.10 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (holding that under the FSIA, 
Congress contemplated waivers of a "specific and explicit 
nature").12

     There is no question that Kazakhstan clearly indicated its 
intent to waive its immunity for the claims contained in Count 
I (breach of the Management Agreement) and Count III 
(breach of the Pledge Agreement), as both the Management 
and Pledge agreements contain express waivers of sovereign 
immunity--the latter referring specifically to the FSIA.13  

__________
1985)));  id. at 126 (holding "that Qatar did not, by agreeing to 
arbitrate in France, waive its sovereign immunity under 
s 1605(a)(1)").  As we have also noted, " 'courts have been reluctant 
to stray beyond these examples when considering claims that a 
nation has implicitly waived its defense of sovereign immunity.' "  
Princz v. Federal Republic of Germany, 26 F.3d 1166, 1174 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) (quoting Frolova, 761 F.2d at 377).

     12 Cf. C & L Enters., Inc. v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian 
Tribe, 532 U.S. 411, 418, 421 n.3, 423 (2002) (holding that "to 
relinquish its immunity, a tribe's waiver must be clear" and "not 
ambiguous," and finding instructive "the law governing waivers of 
immunity by foreign sovereigns" (internal quotation marks omit-
ted)).

     13 The Management Agreement states:  "In respect of any arbi-
tration or legal action or proceedings arising out of or in connection 

But the district court further held that the waiver in the 
Pledge Agreement indicated Kazakhstan's intention to waive 
immunity for World Wide's entire lawsuit.  As to this we 
cannot agree.  Neither the waiver in the Pledge Agreement, 
nor that in the Management Agreement, describes the kind of 
claims for which Kazakhstan waived immunity.  And there is 
nothing "clear and unambiguous" about either waiver other 
than that each extends to claims for breach of the agreement 
in which it is contained.14  We see nothing in these waivers to 
indicate that they extend to breaches of the two other agree-
ments at issue in this case (the Loan and Strategic Alliance 
agreements), neither of which contains a waiver of its own.

     Indeed, the fact that only two of the four agreements 
contain waivers is particularly significant in creating ambigui-

__________
with this Agreement, ... [the Kazakhstan State Committee] hereby 
irrevocably agrees not to claim and hereby irrevocably waives ... 
immunity for itself and the assets of the Republic of Kazakstan to 
the full extent permitted by the laws of such jurisdiction."  Manage-
ment Agreement p 6.4.  The Pledge Agreement states:  "[T]he 
Grantor [defined as Kazakhstan and TGK] hereby irrevocably 
agrees not to claim and hereby irrevocably waives ... immunity for 
themselves and their Assets to the full extent permitted by the laws 
of such jurisdiction with the intent inter alia that the foregoing 
waiver of immunity shall have irrevocable effect for the purposes of 
the [FSIA] in any legal action or proceedings to which such Act 
applies."  Pledge Agreement p 19.5.

     14 Supporting the conclusion that the waivers do not apply to all 
of World Wide's claims is the fact that each of these agreements 
contains a provision limiting the agreement's scope.  The Manage-
ment Agreement states that "[t]he subject of this Agreement shall 
be the transfer to World Wide of the right to manage, control, use 
and own the State-owned or controlled block of shares in [TGK]."  
Management Agreement p 1.  And the Pledge Agreement includes 
an integration clause stating that "[t]his Pledge Agreement consti-
tutes and contains the entire agreement of the parties."  Pledge 
Agreement p 21.1.  Although the Pledge Agreement grants World 
Wide a security interest in TGK shares and assets, id. p 2.1, it does 
not itself include an agreement to repay World Wide's loans to 
TGK.

ty.  Although it could be argued that the parties saw no need 
for repetition once a waiver was made in the Management 
Agreement, which was the first of the four, that does not 
explain why they thought it necessary to include a waiver in 
the Pledge Agreement, which was the last.  Moreover, re-
gardless of what could be argued, the fact is that the pres-
ence of waivers in only two of four agreements creates real 
ambiguity as to Kazakhstan's intent.  Cf. Marra v. Papan-
dreou, 216 F.3d 1119, 1123 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("If the Greek 
government were sued by Marra for breach of two different 
contracts, it certainly would have the prerogative to waive a 
sovereign immunity defense with respect to one of the con-
tracts and invoke that defense for the other.").  So, too, do 
provisions in both the Loan and Strategic Alliance agree-
ments that suggest Kazakhstan did not contemplate that 
disputes over those agreements would be resolved in United 
States courts, but rather by arbitration in Kazakhstan and 
Sweden.15

     Nor do we see evidence that, by waiving immunity for 
claims for breach of the Management and Pledge agreements, 
Kazakhstan unambiguously intended to expose itself to the 
miscellany of tort and tort-like claims with which World Wide 
has charged it.  Unlike the claims for breach of those two 
contracts, which arise out of consensual agreements contain-
ing waivers of immunity, the tort claims arise out of exoge-
nous law.  Indeed, in this case that law is truly "exogenous."  

__________
     15 See Strategic Alliance Agreement p 9.3 ("If any dispute or 
difference arises out of or in connection with any matter in relation 
to this Strategic Alliance Agreement ..., the same shall be arbi-
trated between the Parties and the arbitration shall be conducted 
... in Almaty, Kazakhstan.");  Loan Agreement p 4.2 ("If any 
default or dispute or difference ... arises out of or in connection 
with any matter or thing in relation to the provisions of this 
Agreement, ... any party may submit the Dispute to be settled by 
arbitration ... conducted in Stockholm, Sweden....").  Although 
an agreement to arbitrate may in some circumstances constitute an 
implied waiver of sovereign immunity, this is not such a circum-
stance and World Wide does not contend that it is.  See supra note 
11 and accompanying text.

World Wide seeks application of the law of the United States 
(including RICO), see World Wide Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss, 
notwithstanding that no American national was a party to any 
of the four agreements, and notwithstanding that each agree-
ment declares that it "shall be governed by and construed in 
accordance with the laws of Kazakhstan."  Management 
Agreement p 6.1;  Pledge Agreement p 18.1;  Loan Agreement 
p 4.1;  Strategic Alliance Agreement p 9.2.16  Plaintiff makes 
no argument and cites no cases that support extending the 
waivers to these kinds of claims, and analogous cases are to 
the contrary.17

     In sum, we find that Kazakhstan clearly and unambiguous-
ly waived its sovereign immunity only for claims of breach of 
the Management and Pledge agreements, and we therefore 
hold that the district court only had jurisdiction to hear 
counts that make such claims.  Those counts are Count I 
(breach of the Management Agreement) and Count III 
(breach of the Pledge Agreement), as well as Count XI 

__________
     16 Kazakhstan's contention that as a civil law jurisdiction it does 
not recognize common law torts, may be still further evidence that 
Kazakhstan did not intend to waive immunity for tort claims like 
those asserted here.  See Kazakhstan Mot. to Dismiss for Failure to 
State a Claim, at 9-10.  In light of the significant ambiguities 
concerning waiver noted in the text, we need not rely on this point 
to decide this case, and hence need not consider Kazakhstan's 
representation regarding its legal system.  We note, however, that 
World Wide did not dispute that representation.  See World Wide 
Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss.

     17 Cf. Hercules, Inc. v. United States, 516 U.S. 417, 423 (1995) 
(holding that the Tucker Act's waiver of sovereign immunity for 
contract claims does not extend to claims for contracts implied in 
law);  Watters, slip op. at 5-7 (concluding that the WMATA Com-
pact's waiver of immunity for contracts and torts does not extend to 
attorney's liens);  Doe v. Civiletti, 635 F.2d 88, 94-95 (2d Cir. 1980) 
(holding that the Tucker Act's waiver does not extend to statutory 
claims);  Rodenbur v. Kaufmann, 320 F.2d 679, 683-84 (D.C. Cir. 
1963) (holding that a lease's waiver of trial by jury for "any matters 
whatsoever arising out of or in any way connected with this lease" 
did not extend to a tort claim).

(declaratory judgment) to the extent that it seeks a declara-
tion that Kazakhstan breached the Management Agreement.18  
As for all of the other claims against Kazakhstan, there has 
been no waiver, and we therefore affirm their dismissal for 
lack of subject matter jurisdiction.

                                B

     Having concluded that the district court had subject matter 
jurisdiction over the claims in Counts I, III, and XI, we now 
turn to Kazakhstan's contention that another threshold objec-
tion--the act of state doctrine--bars adjudication of those 
counts.  Although ordinarily we would first examine the 
validity of the district court's decision that it had personal 
jurisdiction over Kazakhstan, see Papandreou, 139 F.3d at 
254-56, Kazakhstan does not dispute that decision on appeal.  
Unlike subject matter jurisdiction, a party waives the right to 
dispute personal jurisdiction by failing to contest it on appeal.  
See Spann v. Colonial Village, Inc., 899 F.2d 24, 32-33 (D.C. 
Cir. 1990).

     The act of state doctrine "precludes the courts of this 
country from inquiring into the validity of the public acts a 
recognized foreign sovereign power committed within its own 
territory."  Banco Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino, 376 U.S. 
398, 401 (1964).  It is applicable when "the relief sought or 
the defense interposed would [require] a court in the United 
States to declare invalid the official act of a foreign sovereign 
performed within" its boundaries.  W.S. Kirkpatrick & Co., 
Inc. v. Environmental Tectonics Corp., 493 U.S. 400, 405 
(1990).  When it does apply, the doctrine serves as " 'a rule of 

__________
     18 In Count XI, World Wide asks the court to declare that it "had 
the right to market Kazakhstan uranium under the Suspension 
Agreement."  Am. Compl. p 161.  Since World Wide obtained this 
right, if at all, under the Management Agreement, we construe 
Count XI as a request for a declaration that Kazakhstan breached 
that agreement by not granting World Wide an export license.  To 
the extent that this relatively opaque count asserts other claims, 
Kazakhstan has not waived its immunity and the district court was 
without jurisdiction to entertain them.

decision for the courts of this country,' " id. at 405 (quoting 
Ricaud v. American Metal Co., 246 U.S. 304, 310 (1918)), 
which requires that, "in the process of deciding [a case], the 
acts of foreign sovereigns taken within their own jurisdictions 
shall be deemed valid," id. at 409.  Although the Supreme 
Court's description of the jurisprudential rationale for the 
doctrine has evolved over the years, the Court has most 
recently described it "as a consequence of domestic separa-
tion of powers, reflecting 'the strong sense of the Judicial 
Branch that its engagement in the task of passing on the 
validity of foreign acts of state may hinder' the conduct of 
foreign affairs."  Id. at 404 (quoting Sabbatino, 376 U.S. at 
423).  The policies underlying the doctrine include "interna-
tional comity, respect for the sovereignty of foreign nations 
on their own territory, and the avoidance of embarrassment 
to the Executive Branch in its conduct of foreign relations."  
Id. at 408;  see id. at 409.

     The gravamen of Count I is a claim that Kazakhstan 
breached the Management Agreement by "failing to issue an 
export license" to World Wide.  Am. Compl. p 93.  Count XI 
seeks a declaratory judgment for breach of that agreement, 
and declares that "the denial of Plaintiff[']s export license" is 
"the very heart of this matter."  Id. at p 157.  We have no 
doubt that issuance of a license permitting the removal of 
uranium from Kazakhstan is a sovereign act.  As we have 
previously held in the context of the FSIA, the "right to 
regulate imports and exports is a sovereign prerogative."  
Millen Indus., Inc. v. Coordination Council for North Am. 
Affairs, 855 F.2d 879, 885 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (internal quotation 
marks and alteration omitted);  see Int'l Ass'n of Machinists 
v. OPEC, 649 F.2d 1354, 1361 (9th Cir. 1981) (affirming "the 
principle of supreme state sovereignty over natural re-
sources" in applying the act of state doctrine);  cf. Rush-
Presbyterian-St. Luke's Med. Ctr. v. Hellenic Republic, 877 
F.2d 574, 578 (7th Cir. 1989) (holding that "a contract where-
by a foreign state grants a private party a license to exploit 
the state's natural resources is not a commercial activity 
[under the FSIA], since natural resources, to the extent they 
are 'affected with the public interest,' are goods in which only 

the sovereign may deal");  MOL, Inc. v. Peoples Republic of 
Bangladesh, 736 F.2d 1326, 1328 (9th Cir. 1984) (holding that 
"licensing the exploitation of natural resources is a sovereign 
activity" under the FSIA).

     Because the relief sought here would require us to question 
the "legality" of Kazakhstan's denial of the export license by 
ruling that denial a breach of contract,19 the act of state 
doctrine applies.  Kirkpatrick, 493 U.S. at 405.  Moreover, 
this is plainly a case in which the policies underlying the 
doctrine "justify its application," id. at 409, since questioning 
the export control policies of a foreign state would both 
disrupt international comity and interfere with the conduct of 
foreign relations by the Executive Branch.  Cf. Clayco Petro-
leum Corp. v. Occidental Petroleum Corp., 712 F.2d 404, 408 
(9th Cir. 1983) ("[I]t is clear that judicial scrutiny of sovereign 
decisions allocating the benefits of oil development would 
embarrass the political branches of our government in the 
conduct of foreign policy.").  Indeed, as the amended com-
plaint reveals, both the export of Kazakhstan uranium to the 
United States and the use of licenses to control the quantity 
of such exports are the subjects of diplomatic efforts by the 
Executive.  See supra note 3 and accompanying text.  Ac-
cordingly, we conclude that the claims asserted in Counts I 
and XI must fail as a consequence of the act of state doctrine, 
and we therefore affirm the dismissal of those counts.

     Our analysis of Count III is the same.  In that count, 
World Wide alleges that Kazakhstan breached the Pledge 
Agreement by "transferring the shares of TGK to Kazatom-
prom and by converting all pledged property, assets and 
interests for [its] own use."  Am. Compl. p 103.  The amend-
ed complaint makes clear that this transfer and alleged 
conversion were accomplished pursuant to an official decree 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  Id. p 17;  see Republic of 

__________
     19 If anything, the specific relief sought in Count XI challenges 
the validity of Kazakhstan's actions even more directly, as it asks 
the court to declare that, despite the absence of a license, World 
Wide had "the right to market Kazakhstan uranium."  Am. Compl. 
p 161.

Kazakhstan, Ministry of Finance, Resolution No. 317 (Oct. 2, 
1997) (J.A. at 431).  That kind of expropriation of property is 
the classic act of state addressed in the case law.  And as the 
Supreme Court declared in Sabbatino, "the Judicial Branch 
will not examine the validity of a taking of property within its 
own territory by a foreign sovereign government."  376 U.S. 
at 428;  see id. at 430, 439;  Riggs Nat'l Corp. v. Comm'r of 
Internal Revenue Serv., 163 F.3d 1363, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
(citing Sabbatino, 376 U.S. at 403-04);  Dayton v. Czecho-
slovak Socialist Republic, 834 F.2d 203, 206 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  
Empressa Cubana Exportadora, Inc. v. Lamborn & Co., 652 
F.2d 231, 237-38 (2d Cir. 1981);  Hunt v. Mobil Oil, 550 F.2d 
68, 73 (2d Cir. 1977).  Because Count III would require the 
court to undertake just such an examination, we affirm its 
dismissal.

     At oral argument, World Wide acknowledged that both the 
denial of export licenses and the expropriation of property are 
sovereign acts under the act of state doctrine.  It nonetheless 
contended that this case comes within an exception to that 
doctrine for "commercial activity."  The existence of such an 
exception is an unsettled question that this court has never 
addressed.20  Nor need we do so today.

     In claiming the benefit of the exception here, World Wide 
contends that its claims are not based on Kazakhstan's expro-
priation of its assets or on its denial of an export license, but 
rather on the following "purely" commercial conduct:  1) 
Kazakhstan's failure to repay loans and interest;  2) its refusal 
to enter into a joint venture with World Wide;  and 3) its 
failure to pay management fees.  World Wide Br. at 24, 26.  
However, the first of these claims is made only in Count II 
(breach of the Loan Agreement)--a count that we have 
already held must be dismissed for lack of subject matter 

__________
     20 See Kirkpatrick, 493 U.S. at 404-05 (noting that "some Justices 
have suggested" a possible exception for commercial activity, but 
finding it unnecessary to consider the question to resolve the case);  
Alfred Dunhill of London, Inc. v. Cuba, 425 U.S. 682, 695 (1976) 
(plurality opinion of White, J., adopting commercial activity excep-
tion).

jurisdiction.  The second is made only in Count IV (breach of 
the Strategic Alliance Agreement), which does not name 
Kazakhstan as a defendant (and for which there was also no 
waiver of sovereign immunity).  And the third is not made 
anywhere in the complaint--not even in what would seem the 
most likely place, Count I (breach of the Management Agree-
ment).  We, therefore, have no cause to address World 
Wide's contention that its claims fall within a commercial 
activity exception to the act of state doctrine.

     In sum, we conclude that, although the district court had 
subject matter jurisdiction over three claims against Kaza-
khstan (Counts I, III, and XI), all three must nonetheless be 
dismissed under the act of state doctrine.

                                IV

     In addition to naming Kazakhstan as a defendant, most of 
the counts of the amended complaint also name Kazatom-
prom, a corporation wholly owned by Kazakhstan.21  World 
Wide does not dispute that Kazatomprom is an instrumentali-
ty of Kazakhstan.  World Wide Br. at xiii;  see 28 U.S.C. 
s 1603(b) (providing that an "instrumentality of a foreign 
state" includes any corporation, "a majority of whose shares 
or other ownership interest is owned by a foreign state").  As 
a consequence, Kazatomprom is entitled to the immunity of 
the sovereign.  See 28 U.S.C. ss 1603(a), 1604;  NYSA-ILA 
Pension Trust Fund v. Garuda Indonesia, 7 F.3d 35, 38 (2d 
Cir. 1993) ("A defendant corporation that is owned entirely by 
a foreign state also is considered to be a distinct foreign state 
and immune from the jurisdiction of the federal courts.").  
Thus, for the same reasons discussed in Part III.A, the 
district court lacked jurisdiction to consider against Kazatom-
prom any of the counts of the amended complaint other than 
those alleging breaches of the only two agreements contain-
ing waivers of immunity:  the Management and Pledge agree-

__________
     21 See supra note 4 for a list of the counts.  Kazatomprom is not 
named in Count II (breach of the Loan Agreement) or Count III 
(breach of the Pledge Agreement).  It is the sole defendant in 
Count IV (breach of the Strategic Alliance Agreement).

ments.  And because Kazatomprom is not a defendant in 
Count III (breach of the Pledge Agreement), that leaves only 
Count I (breach of the Management Agreement) and Count 
XI (declaratory judgment, limited to breach of the Manage-
ment Agreement).22

     Our decision in Part III.B also effectively disposes of those 
two remaining counts.  In that part, we held that because the 
gravamen of both Counts I and XI is an attack on the legality 
of Kazakhstan's refusal to grant World Wide an export 
license, those counts are barred--as against Kazakhstan--by 
the act of state doctrine.  And since World Wide offers no 
reason to distinguish between Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom 
for purposes of the application of that doctrine,23 our holding 
in Part III.B dispositively resolves the identical claims 
against Kazatomprom.  This means that there is no substan-
tial federal question as to World Wide's claims against Kaza-
tomprom.  And because in the absence of a substantial 
federal question the district court lacks jurisdiction, we may 
affirm the dismissal of these counts as well for lack of 
jurisdiction.  See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env't, 523 
U.S. 83, 98-99 (1998) (noting that the Court has regarded a 
judgment against a plaintiff, entered because the same issue 
had been "dispositively resolved" in a companion case, as 
"equivalent to a jurisdictional dismissal for failure to present 
a substantial federal question" (citing Norton v. Mathews, 427 
U.S. 524, 530-31 (1976))).

                                V

     Finally, we turn to the district court's decision to dismiss 
World Wide's claims against Nukem.  The amended com-

__________
     22 Although we did not directly address Count IV (breach of the 
Strategic Alliance Agreement) in Part III.A since Kazakhstan was 
not named as a defendant in that count, the analysis of that Part 
applies because the Strategic Alliance Agreement does not contain a 
waiver of sovereign immunity.  The district court therefore lacked 
subject matter jurisdiction over that count.

     23 Nor does the amended complaint distinguish between the two 
in these counts.

plaint names Nukem as a defendant in four counts:  Count 
VIII (tortious interference), Count IX (civil conspiracy), 
Count X (violation of RICO), and Count XI (declaratory 
judgment).  Because Nukem is neither a state nor the instru-
mentality of a state, it cannot assert sovereign immunity as a 
defense.  Nor can we say, as we did regarding Kazatomprom, 
that our resolution of the act of state issues with respect to 
Kazakhstan removes any substantial federal question regard-
ing the claims against Nukem, since we never reached the act 
of state question with respect to Counts VIII-XI, dismissing 
them instead for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.24  We 
must therefore turn to the jurisdictional ground upon which 
the district court dismissed the counts against Nukem:  per-
sonal jurisdiction.

     Nukem is a New York corporation with its principal place 
of business in Connecticut.  In the district court, World Wide 
asserted four alternative grounds for personal jurisdiction, all 
of which the court rejected:  the transacting business clause 
of the District of Columbia's long-arm statute, D.C. Code 
s 13-423(a)(1);  conspiracy jurisdiction;  the nationwide ser-
vice of process provision of RICO, 18 U.S.C. s 1965(d);  and 
the nationwide service of process provision of the Clayton 
Act, 15 U.S.C. s 22.  On appeal, World Wide argued only the 
first two grounds in its opening brief and has therefore 
waived reliance on the latter two.  See Students Against 
Genocide, 257 F.3d at 834-35.

     Under the District's long-arm statute, local courts may 
exercise personal jurisdiction over any person "as to a claim 
for relief arising from the person's ... transacting any busi-
ness in the District of Columbia."  D.C. Code s 13-423(a)(1).  
The statute makes clear that, where jurisdiction is predicated 

__________
     24 In Part III.B, we did conclude that Count XI is barred by the 
act of state doctrine to the extent that it reasserts Count I's claim 
of breach of the Management Agreement.  But Nukem is not a 
defendant in Count I, and our act of state analysis did not address 
the allegation of Count XI that concerns Nukem--that it does not 
have an exclusive right to market Kazakhstan uranium in the 
United States.  Am. Compl. pp 157-60.

solely upon the long-arm statute, "only a claim for relief 
arising from acts enumerated in this section may be assert-
ed."  Id. s 13-423(b).  Thus, personal jurisdiction under this 
theory "is limited to claims arising from the particular trans-
action of business" in the District.  AMAF Int'l Corp. v. 
Ralston Purina Co., 428 A.2d 849, 850 (D.C. 1981);  see 
Naartex Consulting Corp. v. Watt, 722 F.2d 779, 785-86 (D.C. 
Cir. 1983).  Similarly, to establish jurisdiction under a theory 
of civil conspiracy, the plaintiff must plead with particularity 
"overt acts within the forum taken in furtherance of the 
conspiracy."  Jungquist v. Sheikh Sultan Bin Khalifa Al 
Nahyan, 115 F.3d 1020, 1031 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (internal quota-
tions marks omitted).

     The district court held, and World Wide does not dispute, 
that the only act that might satisfy these jurisdictional re-
quirements was a meeting between Nukem officials and Kaza-
khstan's Ambassador, which World Wide alleges took place at 
Kazakhstan's embassy in Washington, D.C.  116 
F. Supp. 2d at 106-07;  World Wide Br. at 45.  World Wide 
alleges that these individuals met at the embassy "for the 
purpose of obtaining and/or confirming [Kazakhstan's] agree-
ment to unlawfully breach its contract with Plaintiffs by 
denying their pending petition for a license to export" Kaza-
khstan uranium to the United States.  Am. Compl. p 6.  As a 
result of some confusion in the parties' pleadings, the district 
court understood World Wide to allege that this meeting took 
place in December 1997.  Since the court also understood 
from World Wide's allegations that all of its injuries occurred 
prior to that date, the court concluded that World Wide's 
claims could not have arisen from that meeting and that the 
meeting could not have furthered the conspiracy.  The court 
therefore concluded that it had neither long-arm nor conspir-
acy jurisdiction over Nukem.  116 F. Supp. 2d at 106, 108.

     On appeal, the parties agree that there was a misunder-
standing in the district court regarding the date upon which 
the embassy meeting allegedly occurred.  Both World Wide 
and Nukem now agree that the relevant allegation--which we 
must take as true for purposes of this appeal--is that Nukem 
and Kazakhstan conspired together at a meeting that took 

place in the District of Columbia in late May 1997.  See Am. 
Compl. p 6;  Nukem Br. at 11.  The basis for the district 
court's dismissal therefore no longer suffices.  Although Nuk-
em contends that May 1997 was also too late to have contrib-
uted to the injuries claimed by World Wide, World Wide 
disputes that contention.  Accordingly, we must remand the 
case to the district court to resolve the dispute over its 
jurisdiction.

                                VI

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm, although in part for 
different reasons, the district court's dismissal of World 
Wide's complaint against Kazakhstan and Kazatomprom.  
The dismissal with respect to Nukem is remanded for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                        Affirmed in part and remanded in part.

       