                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 18, 2001     Decided April 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-5022

                    Walter J. Thomas, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                Colin L. Powell, Secretary of the 
                  Department of State, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (86cv02850)

     G. Arthur Robbins argued the cause for appellants.  On 
the briefs was David G. Whitworth, Jr.

     Henry F. Schuelke, III argued the cause for appellees.  
With him on the brief were S. Robert Sutton, Henry Morris, 
Jr., and Marc L. Fleischaker.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  The Anti-Injunction Act forbids 
federal courts from granting injunctions "to stay proceedings 
in a State court," with three exceptions.  28 U.S.C. s 2283.  
One of the exceptions permits a federal court to enjoin state 
proceedings when "necessary ... to protect or effectuate its 
judgments."  28 U.S.C. s 2283.  The scope of this "relit-
igation exception" is the central issue in this case.

     Walter J. Thomas cites the Anti-Injunction Act as the 
reason why the district court erred in issuing an injunction 
barring him and his co-plaintiffs from prosecuting a lawsuit in 
the Superior Court for the District of Columbia.  We shall 
assume, without deciding, that the District of Columbia is a 
"State" within s 2283's meaning.  A lawsuit Thomas and 
others brought in the Superior Court complains about the 
performance of their attorneys in a class action filed in the 
United States District Court for the District of Columbia in 
1986.  Much of the history is recounted in Thomas v. Al-
bright, 139 F.3d 227 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  The federal action 
began when Thomas and another plaintiff filed a complaint in 
district court seeking certification as a class action and alleg-
ing that the Department of State discriminated against black 
Foreign Service Officers.  See id. at 229.  After six years of 
discovery, an amended complaint allowing 30 additional indi-
viduals to intervene, the addition of still more class represen-
tatives and lengthy settlement negotiations, attorneys for 
parties signed a consent decree resolving the case and agree-
ing that the district court should certify the class and approve 
the settlement pursuant to Rule 23(b)(2) of the Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedure.  See Thomas, 139 F.3d at 229.  By this 
point, however, the relationship between class counsel and 
Thomas and several other class representatives had frayed.

     At a hearing on January 31, 1996, Thomas complained at 
length that several of the named class action plaintiffs had 

neither been informed of, nor agreed with the impending 
settlement.  One month earlier, in December 1995, Thomas 
had retained another attorney--Barbara B. Hutchinson--to 
represent his interests.  On March 20, 1996, the district court 
held a preliminary fairness hearing.  The new attorney repre-
senting Thomas and Allen Latimer (a co-plaintiff in the 
Superior Court action) argued that because her clients disa-
greed with parts of the proposed settlement, the court could 
and should modify it.  An attorney representing Odie Fields, 
Mary Cynthia Smoot, and Alfred Neal (the remaining co-
plaintiffs in the Superior Court action) argued against the 
consent decree and urged the district court to reject it.  
Thomas personally asked the court not to give preliminary 
approval to the proposed settlement.  Despite Thomas's plea, 
the court tentatively approved the settlement and ordered 
notice to be given to the 359 putative class members, of which 
34 wrote to the court supporting the settlement, while 55 
wrote in opposition to it.  See Thomas, 139 F.3d at 230.  On 
July 15 and 23, 1996, the court held an additional fairness 
hearing.  Attorneys for Thomas and other class members 
again urged the court to modify or to reject the settlement.

     In its final judgment, the district court concluded that the 
settlement was fair and reasonable, but the court added a 
provision permitting nine class members to opt out of the 
settlement.  See id.  On appeal, we held that the district 
court had abused its discretion in allowing these class mem-
bers to opt out.  We also concluded that the overall class 
settlement was fair.  See id. at 233.  Five of the class 
members then sued the class counsel for professional negli-
gence in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia.  On 
a motion by the class counsel defendants, the district court 
enjoined these class members from pursuing their suit.  See 
Thomas v. Albright, 77 F. Supp. 2d 114, 124 (D.D.C. 1999).

     Thomas and his co-plaintiffs think the Anti-Injunction Act 
barred the injunction and that the relitigation exception does 
not apply.  The exception rests on the idea that federal courts 
should not be forced to rely on state court application of res 
judicata or estoppel principles to protect federal court judg-
ments and decrees.  See Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon Corp., 

486 U.S. 140, 147 (1988);  Toucey v. New York Life Ins. Co., 
314 U.S. 118, 146 (1941) (Reed, J., dissenting).  Although the 
attorney-defendants in the Superior Court action case were 
not parties to the concluded federal action, traditional preclu-
sion principles may nonetheless bar Thomas and his co-
plaintiffs from prosecuting that action against them.  See 
Parklane Hosiery Co. v. Shore, 439 U.S. 322, 326 n.5 (1979);  
Ethnic Employees of the Library of Congress v. Boorstin, 751 
F.2d 1405, 1409 (D.C. Cir. 1985);  Restatement (Second) of 
Judgments s 29 (1980).  The doctrine of collateral estoppel, 
or as it is now commonly called "issue preclusion," see Re-
statement, supra, at 1, provides that "once an issue is actually 
and necessarily determined by a court of competent jurisdic-
tion, that determination is conclusive in subsequent suits 
based on a different cause of action involving a party to the 
prior litigation."  Montana v. United States, 440 U.S. 147, 
153 (1979);  see McLaughlin v. Bradlee, 803 F.2d 1197, 1201-
02 & n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1986);  Otherson v. Department of Justice, 
711 F.2d 267, 273 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  The relitigation exception 
to the Anti-Injunction Act therefore permits federal courts to 
enjoin state court adjudication of those "claims or issues ... 
[that] ... actually have been decided by the federal court."  
Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon Corp., 486 U.S. at 148.

     Even if a federal court had not decided all the issues raised 
in the state court action, the relitigation exception could still 
apply.  Assume, for instance, that issues not decided in the 
federal action would be resolved in plaintiff's favor in the 
state court.  If the plaintiff still could not prevail because an 
essential element of his state cause of action had already been 
determined against him in the federal suit, the relitigation 
exception would permit an injunction against the state pro-
ceedings.  See, e.g., Next Level Communications v. DSC 
Communications Corp., 179 F.3d 244, 256-57 (5th Cir. 1999) 
(enjoining entire state court action where state court would 
be required to decide issues already litigated in federal 
court);  see also United States v. District of Columbia, 654 
F.2d 802, 809-10 (D.C. Cir. 1981) (finding that relitigation 
exception permits federal courts to enjoin state proceedings 
that raise a different cause of action, but still threaten 

judgment in federal proceeding).  In this case, we must 
therefore compare the complaint in the Superior Court to the 
record in the class action in order to determine whether, in 
order for the plaintiff to succeed in Superior Court, that court 
will have to rule upon an issue or claim already decided by 
the federal district court or the court of appeals.  See Chick 
Kam Choo, 486 U.S. at 148.

     In their Superior Court complaint, Thomas and his co-
plaintiffs alleged the following:

     1. The class action attorneys breached a duty of undivided 
loyalty to Thomas by " 'selling out' and betraying [the Plain-
tiffs] ... when they entered into [a] secret agreement" to 
settle the case without seeking Thomas's approval first.  See 
Complaint for Professional Negligence p 28, Thomas v. Akin, 
Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, L.L.C., No. 99ca1898 (D.C. 
Super. Ct. filed Mar. 19, 1999);  see also id. p p 37, 46, 55, 64 
(making same allegations for Thomas's co-plaintiffs).

     2. The class action attorneys failed to disclose the alleged 
conflict of interest created by acting as class counsel and 
failed to inform Thomas of the negotiating position they 
would take with the State Department.  See id. p 29;  see also 
id. p p 38, 47, 56, 65 (making same allegations for Thomas's 
co-plaintiffs).

     3. The class action attorneys failed to follow Thomas's 
"express instructions regarding the certification of the class 
action as a Rule 23(b)(3), which would have provided for him 
to 'opt-out' of the class in order to receive his full measure of 
damages...."  Id. p 26;  see also id. p p 35, 44, 53, 62 (making 
same allegation for Thomas's co-plaintiffs).

     Thomas and his co-plaintiffs claimed that because of these 
alleged breaches of duty, they lost their federal cause of 
action and the potential damages they might have derived 
from it.  See id. p 31;  see also id. p p 40, 49, 58, 66 (making 
same allegations for Thomas's co-plaintiffs).  They also al-
leged that they suffered damages by having to retain sepa-
rate counsel and spend additional time and money dealing 
with the federal lawsuit.  See id. p p 30, 39, 48, 57, 65.

     As to the first two of these claims there can be no doubt 
that the district court's injunction falls within the exception to 
the Anti-Injunction Act.  Before approving the class action 
settlement, the district court performed its duty of determin-
ing whether the "settlement is fair, adequate, and reasonable 
and is not the product of collusion between the parties."  
Pigford v. Glickman, 206 F.3d 1212, 1215 (D.C. Cir. 2000) 
(internal quotations omitted).  The court found that the "set-
tlement was clearly negotiated at arm's length and presents 
no danger of collusion" between the parties.  See Thomas v. 
Christopher, 169 F.R.D. 224, 239 (D.D.C. 1996).  The court 
further found that class counsel "fairly and adequately pro-
tected the interests of the class."  Id.  While the Superior 
Court complaint alleges that the class action attorneys "sold 
out" their clients, that they engaged in collusive secret negoti-
ations to the detriment of their clients, the district court 
squarely decided otherwise.  The Superior Court plaintiffs 
may not relitigate these matters and an injunction preventing 
them from doing so in the Superior Court was in order.

     The third claim set forth above rests partly on the retainer 
agreement between Thomas and the class action attorneys, an 
agreement Thomas says imposed additional duties on the 
class action attorneys.1  Thomas's complaint pointed to this 
language in the agreement:

     In the event there is any offer of settlement that would 
     compromise and resolve all the plaintiffs' claims in Wal-
     ter J. Thomas v. Shultz, C.A. No. 86-2850, the Client 
     hereby agrees to abide by the wishes of the majority of 
     the plaintiffs with respect to the acceptance or rejection 
     of the settlement offer.
     
Compl. p 9.

     His claim regarding the retainer agreement is part of a 
larger argument about whether the class action attorneys 
committed professional negligence.  In the District of Colum-

__________
     1  Though the Superior Court complaint does not make this 
distinction, the retainer agreement is between the class action 
attorneys and Thomas alone.

bia, a legal malpractice plaintiff is required to demonstrate 
duty, breach, causation, and harm.  "As with any tort action, 
legal malpractice liability is predicated on a finding that the 
injury was proximately caused by the breach of duty."  Dalo 
v. Kivitz, 596 A.2d 35, 41 (D.C. 1991).  For the sake of 
argument we shall assume that Thomas (and his co-plaintiffs) 
would be able to make his case in the Superior Court that the 
class action attorneys had a duty and breached it.  Thomas 
would still have to prove that he suffered a harm as a result.  
According to the complaint, his harm or injury consisted in 
his loss of the ability to pursue a potentially lucrative individ-
ual claim for damages.  See Compl. p 31.  In explaining his 
theory of damages to us he adds that had "Conflicted Counsel 
timely informed the Named Class Representatives of the 
conflict, or withdrawn pursuant to the retainer agreements, 
the Named Class Representatives would have earlier engaged 
independent counsel to protect their personal interests."  
Brief of Appellants at 17.

     This separate counsel would have protected Thomas's per-
sonal interests, he thinks, by having the class action certified 
with opt-out provisions allowing for individual suits.  In other 
words, if the class action had been certified under Federal 
Rule of Civil Procedure 23(b)(3), rather than Rule 23(b)(2), 
Thomas and his co-plaintiffs would have been able to opt-out 
and pursue individual actions (in which they suppose they 
would have done better).  See Compl. p p 13-14.  To prove 
this case in the Superior Court, the plaintiffs would have to 
establish that they were damaged because the class should 
have been certified under Rule 23(b)(3).  See Macktal v. 
Garde, 111 F. Supp. 2d 18, 21 (D.D.C. 2000) (to prove 
malpractice, must establish that plaintiff had a valid claim);  
Niosi v. Aiello, 69 A.2d 57, 60 (D.C. 1949) (same).  But that 
necessarily would entail relitigating an issue already decided 
in the federal courts.

     In Thomas v. Albright, 139 F.3d at 235, we rejected the 
district court's decision to create a hybrid class certified 
under Rule 23(b)(2) with an opt-out clause.  See Thomas, 139 

F.3d at 230.2  The district court had made no findings that 
the class was appropriately certified under Rule 23(b)(3);  but 
the court had "made all the factual findings necessary to show 
that a hybrid class was not appropriate."  Thomas, 139 F.3d 
at 235.  We found it unnecessary to remand the case to the 
district court because "the dissidents do not allege any alter-
native basis that, if proved, would enable the district court 
upon remand to permit them to opt out."  Id. at 237.  In our 
view the claims of the dissident plaintiffs--Thomas and the 
others--were not "different in kind from those of other class 
members."  Id. at 236.  We thus held that the class was 
properly certified under Rule 23(b)(2) with no opt-outs.  
Thomas's malpractice action could survive only if that holding 
were relitigated and found to be incorrect.

     The only other claim Thomas might have is that the alleged 
defects in representation damaged him to the extent that he 

__________
     2  Our conclusion in Thomas that there was no basis for certify-
ing a hybrid class necessarily meant that there was no basis for 
certifying a class under Rule 23(b)(3).  Though the case considered 
the propriety of a hybrid class action--which is different from a 
pure (b)(3) class action--we explicitly concluded that no plaintiff's 
claim was sufficiently atypical to justify permitting class members 
to opt out, which is the key characteristic of both hybrid and (b)(3) 
class actions.  See Thomas, 139 F.3d at 236.  If an opt out right 
could not be justified, there would be no reason to certify the class 
action under 23(b)(3) rather than 23(b)(1) or (2).  See 1 Herbert 
Newberg & Alba Conte, Newberg on Class Actions s 4.20 (3d ed. 
1992) (arguing that Rule 23 requires a court to certify a class action 
as a (b)(3) class action only if it cannot be certified under (b)(1) or 
(2)).  Moreover, a hybrid class action is certified under both (b)(2) 
and (b)(3).  See Thomas, 139 F.3d at 234;  Eubanks v. Billington, 
110 F.3d 87, 96 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  By finding that a hybrid class 
action was unjustified, we necessarily found that the claims did not 
meet (b)(3)'s criteria for an opt out class action.  See Thomas, 139 
F.3d at 235 (noting that the district court did not make findings 
necessary for a (b)(3) class action and then noting that "[t]o the 
contrary, the court made all the factual findings to show that a 
hybrid class was not appropriate").  We therefore disagree with the 
dissent that the federal proceedings left open the question whether 
the class could be certified under Rule 23(b)(3).

had to hire outside counsel to represent him in the fairness 
disputes.  See Compl. p p 30, 39, 48, 57, 64.  Under District of 
Columbia law, one can sue to recover the cost of retaining 
additional counsel in response to a lawyer's malpractice.  See 
Knight v. Furlow, 533 A.2d 1232, 1235 (D.C. 1989).  But that 
narrow claim is undercut by Thomas's own litigation posture 
here, which is that he wanted the opportunity to bring in 
individual counsel earlier in the process.  It is senseless to 
suppose that damages resulted from failing to bring in indi-
vidual counsel to advance the losing claim that the class 
should be certified either as a hybrid class or a Rule 23(b)(3) 
class.  As we have held, that claim could prevail if and only if 
Thomas were permitted to relitigate the issues already decid-
ed in the class action.

     We therefore conclude that if the Anti-Injunction Act 
applies to the District of Columbia, the relitigation exception 
to the Act permitted the district court to enjoin Thomas and 
his co-plaintiffs from pursuing their complaint in the Superior 
Court.  Since Thomas has not argued that the court abused 
its discretion in issuing the injunction, we have no reason to 
question the court's judgment that the balance of interests, 
both public and private, weighed in favor of issuing the 
injunction.  See Thomas, 77 F. Supp. 2d at 123-24.

                                                            Affirmed.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  The decision reached 
by the majority in this case depends upon the proposition that 
all issues that could be raised in the malpractice action 
brought by Walter J. Thomas and his co-plaintiffs were 
precluded by the disposition of the class action.  While this is 
almost true, I do not think it is entirely so.

     In their complaint before the District of Columbia Superior 
Court, the plaintiffs allege that their counsel entered into a 
consent decree certifying the class pursuant to Rule 23(b)(2), 
"[c]ontrary to the express instructions and wishes of the 
Plaintiffs."  The plaintiffs further allege that their attorneys 
breached a fiduciary duty because the plaintiffs "had rejected 
any compromise or settlement which would result in a certifi-
cation of the class pursuant to Rule 23(b)(2), rather than 
23(b)(3), which would allow the individual Plaintiffs to 'opt-
out' of the class in order to maintain their individual causes of 
action."  It would appear that Thomas and his co-plaintiffs 
are stating, or attempting to state, a cause of action depend-
ing upon the propositions that class counsel had an individual 
duty to the plaintiffs and that the plaintiffs had instructed 
counsel not to agree to the (b)(2) certification.  These propo-
sitions raise factual issues that should be resolved by the D.C. 
Superior Court.

     When the district court approved the settlement in the 
underlying action and certified the class under Rule 23(b)(2), 
it noted that "Plaintiffs moved for certification under Rule 
23(b)(2)."  Thomas v. Christopher, 169 F.R.D. 224, 239 
(D.D.C. 1996).  Similarly, on appeal, this Court stated that 
"[c]lass counsel repeatedly requested certification pursuant to 
(b)(2), [and] the consent decree stated that the parties agreed 
to certification pursuant to (b)(2)."  Thomas v. Albright, 139 
F.3d 227, 235 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  Indeed, the consent decree 
barred the district court from "modifying the terms of the 
agreement."  Id. at 233.  Although the plaintiffs argued for 
the right to opt out of the settlement during the fairness 
hearings and again on appeal, they did so within the confines 
of Rule 23(b)(2).  Their arguments would have been unneces-
sary if their counsel had negotiated for a Rule 23(b)(3) 
certification.

     The majority mistakenly asserts that in order to prevail in 
their Superior Court case, "the plaintiffs would have to 
establish that they were damaged because the class should 
have been certified under Rule 23(b)(3)."  Slip Op. at 7.  
Rather, to prevail, the plaintiffs simply would have to estab-
lish that the class could have been certified under Rule 
23(b)(3).1  That question has never been litigated.

     Although the plaintiffs were represented separately during 
the fairness hearings, they contend that they essentially were 
not represented at the table when counsel negotiated with the 
State Department.  If they had been adequately represented, 
then their views on opting out surely would have been 
expressed in the precertification negotiations.  If the plain-
tiffs had instructed counsel not to agree to a 23(b)(2) certifica-
tion and if counsel had an individual duty to the plaintiffs (two 
very big "ifs"), then, as the plaintiffs allege, counsel may have 
violated its fiduciary duty by (1) not telling them about the 
conflict between the interests of the plaintiffs and the class as 

__________
     1  I disagree with the majority's analysis of the rules governing 
class actions.  The majority states that "no plaintiff's claim was 
sufficiently atypical to justify permitting class members to opt out, 
which is the key characteristic of ... (b)(3) class actions."  Slip Op. 
at 8 n.2.  Rule 23(a) unequivocally states that one prerequisite to 
any class action is that the representative parties' claims are 
"typical of the claims ... of the class."  Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a).  
Specifically, a 23(b)(3) class action is justified whenever "the court 
finds that the questions of law or fact common to the members of 
the class predominate over any questions affecting only individual 
members, and that a class action is superior to other available 
methods for the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy."  
Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3).  The district court undoubtedly could have 
certified the Thomas class under 23(b)(3), even though--and, per-
haps, because--the plaintiffs' claims were "no different in kind from 
those of other class members."  139 F.3d at 236.  Nevertheless, 
because the consent decree compelled the district court to certify 
the class under 23(b)(2), it had no reason to confront this question.  
Cf. Eubanks v. Billington, 110 F.3d 87, 96 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (refusing 
to address whether "full (b)(3) protections" should be afforded to 
the plaintiffs because "the plaintiffs did not seek certification as ... 
a (b)(3) ... class").

a whole and (2) not advocating the plaintiffs' position in the 
negotiations.  These issues were not addressed by the district 
court in its initial decision or by this Court on appeal.  In 
fact, these issues could not have been litigated because the 
consent decree negotiated by counsel locked the district court 
in to certifying the class pursuant to Rule 23(b)(2).  See 
Thomas, 139 F.3d at 233.

     The majority assumes, without deciding, that the District of 
Columbia is a "State" within the meaning of the Anti-Injunc-
tion Act, 28 U.S.C. s 2283, suggesting that the scope of the 
Act's relitigation exception "is the central issue in this case," 
Slip Op. at 2.  In this case, the Court need not assume, much 
less decide, that the Act applies to D.C.2  The scope of the 
relitigation exception is not the central issue in this case.  
With or without the Anti-Injunction Act, the United States 
District Court cannot enjoin the ongoing litigation in the 
Superior Court without some legal basis for doing so.  Here, 
as I understand the appellees' complaint, the basis is that the 
issues involved in the Superior Court case have been hereto-
fore litigated in the federal litigation.  It may be that the 
appellees should ultimately prevail, but in my view it should 
be achieved after the litigation of what appear to me to be 
open issues in the Superior Court.

     A court cannot issue a permanent injunction without first 
finding that the applicant has demonstrated actual success on 
the merits.  See Amoco Production Co. v. Village of Gambell, 
480 U.S. 531, 546 n.12 (1987).  Here, to establish success on 
the merits, counsel must show that Thomas and his co-

__________
     2  As I have noted before, some sections of the Court Reform 
Act, Pub. L. No. 91-358, 84 Stat. 473 (1970), require D.C. courts "to 
be treated as state courts, others do not."  United States v. Mills, 
964 F.2d 1186, 1198 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (en banc) (Sentelle, J., dissent-
ing).  "Congress has not, for example, plainly extended the prohibi-
tion upon the issuance of federal injunctions staying state court 
proceedings, see 28 U.S.C. s 2283, to District proceedings."  Id. 
Indeed, whether D.C. courts are protected by s 2283 is a valid 
question that has not been resolved.  There is no reason to suggest 
that the Anti-Injunction Act plays any role in the outcome of this 
case.

plaintiffs are collaterally estopped from asserting the issues 
raised in their malpractice claims.  The plaintiffs have not 
actually litigated the issues I discuss above, nor has any court 
decided those issues.  Whether we apply the Anti-Injunction 
Act or the general law governing issue preclusion, our analy-
sis is the same, and the district court plainly erred when it 
enjoined the D.C. Superior Court.  Compare Chick Kam 
Choo v. Exxon Corp., 486 U.S. 140, 149 (1988) (holding that 
for the Act's relitigation exception to apply the party moving 
for an injunction must show that the issue "was itself actually 
litigated and decided by the District Court"), with Davis v. 
Davis, 663 A.2d 499, 501 (D.C. 1995) (explaining that issue 
preclusion applies when "the issue is actually litigated and 
... determined by a valid, final judgment on the merits").

     The majority may be correct that Thomas and his co-
plaintiffs suffered no harm, but that seems to me a merits 
question and not a preclusion one.  That is, if the injunction is 
lifted, it may well be that the Superior Court can rule that 
there is no harm, and therefore no cause of action, but I 
believe that is for the Superior Court to determine and not 
for us.  Like my colleagues, I agree that Thomas and his co-
plaintiffs' malpractice claim is very shaky.  Unlike my col-
leagues, however, I believe that ruling is not for this Court to 
make.

     For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

                      