                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                       Filed June 28, 2002

                        Division No.  98-1

                  In Re:  Bruce Edward Babbitt 
                    (Stetson Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     This matter coming to be heard and being heard before the 
Special Division of the Court upon the petition of Catherine 
Baker Stetson for reimbursement of attorneys' fees and costs 
pursuant to section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 
1978, as amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591 et seq. (1994), and it 
appearing to the court for the reasons set forth more fully in 
the opinion filed contemporaneously herewith* that the peti-
tion is not well taken, it is hereby

__________
     * Dissenting opinion filed by Senior Circuit Judge Cudahy.

     ORDERED, ADJUDGED, and DECREED that the peti-
tion of Catherine Baker Stetson for attorneys' fees she in-
curred during the investigation by Independent Counsel Car-
ol Elder Bruce be denied.

                                                       Per Curiam

                                                       For the Court:

                                                       Mark J. Langer, Clerk

                                                       by Marilyn R. Sargent

                                                       Chief Deputy Clerk





































                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                       Filed June 28, 2002

                        Division No.  98-1

                  In Re:  Bruce Edward Babbitt 
                    (Stetson Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                ON APPLICATION FOR ATTORNEYS' FEES

     Opinion of the Special Court filed Per Curiam.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Senior Circuit Judge Cudahy.

     Per Curiam:  Catherine Baker Stetson petitions this court 
under section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 
as amended, 28 U.S.C. ss 591-599 (1994) (the "Act"), for 
reimbursement of attorneys' fees in the amount of $4,777.09 
that she incurred during and as a result of the investigation 
conducted by Independent Counsel ("IC" or "OIC") Carol 
Elder Bruce.  Because we conclude that Stetson has not 
carried her burden of showing that the fees would not have 
been incurred but for the requirements of the Act, we deny 
the petition in its entirety.

                            Background
     The facts of the investigation conducted by IC Bruce are 
set forth in detail in In re Babbitt (Babbitt Fee Application), 

290 F.3d 386, 388-89 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 2002) (per cu-
riam).  For our purposes here, we briefly note that IC Bruce 
was appointed to investigate allegations that the White House 
had improperly influenced the 1995 decision of the U.S. 
Department of the Interior ("DOI") to deny the application of 
three Indian tribes to take off-reservation land into trust in 
order to establish a casino on the property, and that Secre-
tary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt had lied about the decision 
to Congress.  The allegations concerned contributions of a 
substantial amount of money to the Democratic National 
Committee and other Democratic interests by certain Indian 
tribes opposed to the casino and suggested that the DOI's 
decision to deny the casino application was influenced by 
these donations.  Catherine Baker Stetson, the fee petitioner 
here, was a volunteer active in soliciting contributions from 
American Indians in support of the DNC in 1995 and 1996, 
apparently including from the tribes that were central to the 
allegations surrounding the casino application.  As the IC's 
jurisdictional mandate included investigation into any connec-
tion between political contributions of Indian tribes and the 
decision on the casino application, Stetson's activities came to 
the attention of the IC.  The IC issued a subpoena for certain 
documents to Stetson, who subsequently destroyed a number 
of documents that she claimed were not responsive to the 
subpoena.  Consequently, the IC began an investigation of 
the document destruction issue.  Stetson eventually entered 
into an immunity agreement with the IC.

     Stetson, pursuant to section 593(f)(1) of the Act, has peti-
tioned this court for reimbursement of the attorneys' fees she 
incurred during the IC's investigation.  As directed by sec-
tion 593(f)(2) of the Act, we forwarded copies of Stetson's fee 
petition to the Attorney General and the IC and requested 
written evaluations of the petition.  The court expresses its 
appreciation to the IC and the Attorney General for submit-
ting these evaluations, which we have given due consideration 
in arriving at the decision announced herein.

                             Analysis

     The Independent Counsel statute provides that

     Upon the request of an individual who is the subject of 
     an investigation conducted by an independent counsel 
     pursuant to this chapter, the division of the court may, if 
     no indictment is brought against such individual pursuant 
     to that investigation, award reimbursement for those 
     reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by that individual 
     during that investigation which would not have been 
     incurred but for the requirements of this chapter.
     
28 U.S.C. s 593(f)(1).  Accordingly, in order to obtain an 
attorneys' fees award under the statute, a petitioner must 
show that all of the following requirements are met:

     1) the petitioner is a "subject" of the investigation;
     
     2) the fees were incurred "during" the investigation;
     
     3) the fees would not have been incurred "but for" the 
     requirements of the Act;  and
     
     4) the fees are "reasonable."
     
See In re North (Dutton Fee Application), 11 F.3d 1075, 
1077-82 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div. 1993) (per curiam).  Because 
we find that Stetson fails to satisfy the third requirement, 
known as the "but for" test, we need not address the remain-
ing requirements.

                       * * * * * * * * * *

     We have previously established that "[a]ll requests for 
attorneys' fees under the Act must satisfy the 'but for' 
requirement."  In re Sealed Case, 890 F.2d 451, 452 (D.C. 
Cir., Spec. Div., 1989) (per curiam).  And we have repeatedly 
held that "[t]he most difficult element for a fee applicant to 
establish under the Act is that the fees 'would not have been 
incurred but for the requirements of [the Act].' "  In re North 
(Bush Fee Application), 59 F.3d 184, 188 (D.C. Cir., Spec. 
Div., 1995) (per curiam) (quoting Dutton, 11 F.3d at 1079).  
In order to establish eligibility for an award, the fee applicant 
must show that the amounts claimed are only those fees and 
expenses above and beyond those she would have incurred as 
a result of an investigation by the DOJ.  In re Sealed Case, 
890 F.2d at 452-53.  As we stated in In Re Pierce (Olivas Fee 

Application), 178 F.3d 1350, 1355 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) 
(per curiam), "[i]f the investigative act generating the defen-
sive costs would, in the absence of the Act, have been pursued 
by other authorities--'had the case been handled by the 
Department of Justice or other executive authorities rather 
than the Independent Counsel'--then Congress did not con-
template the award of counsel fees.  In Re North (Dutton 
Fee Application), 11 F.3d at 1080."

     Stetson claims that she would not have incurred the attor-
neys' fees requested "but for" the "operation of the Indepen-
dent Counsel statute," noting that she was only a peripheral 
figure in the OIC's investigation, that "the IC enjoyed wide 
discretion and an unrestrained ability to explore all angles" of 
Babbitt's testimony regarding the DOI's denial of the tribes' 
application, and that her involvement in the investigation "is a 
by-product of the unusually broad and thorough reach that is 
not uncommon of IC investigations."  But contrary to what 
Stetson implies, simply because an investigation was conduct-
ed by an independent counsel under the Act does not auto-
matically mean that the "but for" test is met.  If it did, then, 
as we have noted elsewhere,"virtually every person investi-
gated by the Independent Counsel for potentially criminal 
conduct would satisfy the 'but for' requirement of the Act."  
Olivas at 1355 (citation and internal quotation marks omit-
ted);  see also In re Pierce (Kisner Fee Application), 178 F.3d 
1356, 1360 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) (per curiam).  Such a 
result was not the intent of the Congress.  See In re Nofzig-
er, 925 F.2d 428, 445 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1991) (per 
curiam).

     In a similar vein, Stetson claims that absent the OIC's 
"broad latitude in conducting its investigation," she would 
have "not been contacted at all or had such contact occurred 
it would have been minimally intrusive."  Stetson compares 
her situation to that of the fee applicant in In re Sealed Case, 
arguing that that case recognizes the "but for" requirement 
to be satisfied "when an investigation pursuant to the Act is 
significantly more taxing than one that would otherwise oc-
cur."  In In re Sealed Case, the Attorney General requested 
the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate an 

alleged minor tax violation by a government official.  We 
found the "but for" requirement fulfilled because the govern-
ment official (the fee applicant) had been subjected to a more 
rigorous application of the criminal law than is applied to 
other citizens.  We made this finding because of two factors.  
First, the Attorney General in his application for appointment 
of an independent counsel represented that the Act's restric-
tions were a hindrance to his conducting an adequate prelimi-
nary investigation.  We noted that if the AG had not been so 
hindered then the government official "might have been 
subjected to a lesser investigation, or perhaps exonerated at 
this early stage."  890 F.2d at 453.  Second, we found that 
although the independent counsel had been appointed to 
investigate the applicant's 1981, 1982, and/or 1984 tax returns, 
he actually examined the applicant's tax returns for nine 
years, from 1976 to 1984.  We stated that the ordinary 
examination of a taxpayer for a similar tax offense "would 
have been substantially less probing."  Id. at 454.

     In the case before us, as we explained in Babbitt, the 
Attorney General in her application for appointment of an 
independent counsel made no representation that the Act's 
limitations restricted her preliminary investigation.  290 F.3d 
at 393.  Furthermore, no such less probing examination 
would have been made in the absence of the Act.  As we 
made clear in Babbitt, if IC Bruce had not investigated the 
deep and widespread allegations surrounding the denial of the 
casino application, then other prosecuting authorities would 
have done so.  For Stetson, this means that her conduct too 
would have been investigated just as extensively in the ab-
sence of the Act.  And although we have in the past found the 
"but for" requirement satisfied where a professional prosecu-
tor would have conducted the same investigation as the IC 
but where "an inquiry [occurred] not normally pursued in a 
criminal investigation," In re Pierce (Abrams Fee Applica-
tion), 190 F.3d 586, 593 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) (per 
curiam) (independent counsel investigated whether fee appli-
cant had properly complied with a provision of the HUD 
handbook), that is not the situation here.  Rather, Stetson 
was investigated for document destruction, an offense we 

addressed previously in the "but for" context in Olivas.  We 
concluded there, as we do here, that the fee applicant did not 
satisfy the "but for" requirement since investigation and 
potential prosecution for this type of activity was " 'not 
uniquely related to the Act.' "  Olivas, 178 F.3d at 1355 
(quoting In re North (Corr Fee Application), 56 F.3d 261, 264 
(D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1995) (per curiam)).

                            Conclusion

     The petition of Catherine Baker Stetson for reimbursement 
of attorneys' fees is denied for failure to comply with the "but 
for" requirement of 28 U.S.C. s 593(f)(1).

     Richard D. Cudahy, Senior Circuit Judge, dissenting:

     The majority opinion makes no mention of the recommen-
dation by the Department of Justice that Ms. Stetson's 
attorneys' fees be paid.  The Department submitted a similar 
recommendation with respect to Secretary Babbitt's fee peti-
tion, and that recommendation quoted the same passage as 
does the present recommendation, from the Attorney Gener-
al's application for appointment of an independent counsel in 
the Babbitt case.  This quotation from the application of the 
Attorney General referred specifically to the heightened crim-
inal intent requirements that attached to her preliminary 
investigation.  Notwithstanding this statement by the Attor-
ney General, the panel majority in In re Babbitt relied on it 
version of the "but for" test to deny the major part of the fee 
request over my dissent. For a more extensive discussion of 
the "but for" test, and the increasing (and arguably unjusti-
fied) rigor of its application in recent years, I refer to my 
dissent in In re Babbitt (Babbitt Fee Application), 290 F.3d 
386, 395-403 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 2002) (Cudahy, J., dissent-
ing).

     It is a fallacy to try to make a "but for" analysis of Ms. 
Stetson's fee petition in isolation from the analysis of Secre-
tary Babbitt's petition.  The investigation of Ms. Stetson was 
merely a part of the investigation of Secretary Babbitt.  Had 
Secretary Babbitt not been investigated, Ms. Stetson would 
not have been, and the "but for" issue for Ms. Stetson is 
necessarily the same as for Secretary Babbitt.  As my dissent 
in the case of Secretary Babbitt's fee petition made clear, the 
Attorney General would never have referred the Babbitt 
matter for investigation by an independent counsel unless 
special provision of the Independent Counsel Act forbade her 
to decline the reference unless there was clear and convincing 
evidence that Secretary Babbitt lacked the requisite criminal 
intent.  See 28 U.S.C. s 592(a)(2)(B)(ii).  The circumstance 
that this special statutory provision on criminal intent had no 
apparent direct impact on Ms. Stetson is of no consequence. 
The investigation of Ms. Stetson was entirely a by-product of 
a lengthy and exhaustive independent counsel inquiry into the 
words and actions of Secretary Babbitt--an investigation that 
in my judgment went forward on account of the special 

criminal intent provision of the Independent Counsel Act.  
Therefore, for the same reason that I believe Secretary 
Babbitt's petition satisfies the "but for" test, I believe Ms. 
Stetson satisfies this requirement as well.

     The fact that part of the inquiry into the activities of Ms. 
Stetson involved alleged document destruction is also of no 
consequence.  One is not entitled to look into and character-
ize the details of the investigation if the inquiry as a whole 
meets the "but for" test as it certainly does here.  One need 
not make the dubious argument that an inquiry into alleged 
document destruction is somehow unique to an investigation 
by an independent counsel.  As I see it, this is beside the 
point.

     Proper resolution of the present fee petition must turn on 
the remaining three requirements of the case law, see ante at 
2-3 (citing In re North (Dutton Fee Application), 11 F.3d 
1077-83), which have been overlooked here because the ma-
jority found its "but for" analysis dispositive.  Although there 
might be some question about the documentation of reason-
ableness of hourly rates, I believe that Ms. Stetson's fee 
petition meets the other requirements for reimbursement of 
fees.

     I therefore respectfully dissent.

                                                                          