                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 24, 2000     Decided March 7, 2000 

                           No. 99-5217

                        Daniel S. Jacobs, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

           Lois J. Schiffer, in her official capacity 
              as Assistant Attorney General for the 
           Environment and Natural Resources Division 
               of the U.S. Department of Justice, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00506)

     Kathleen L. Jennings argued the cause for appellant.  
With her on the briefs was Robert A. Van Kirk.

     Thomas M. Bondy, Attorney, United States Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief 

were David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney General, 
Barbara C. Biddle, Assistant Director, and Wilma A. Lewis, 
United States Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Having obtained a partial judgment 
in his favor, see Jacobs v. Schiffer, 47 F. Supp.2d 16 (D.D.C. 
1999), Daniel S. Jacobs appeals the denial of attorney's fees 
under the Equal Access to Justice Act, 28 U.S.C. s 2412 
("EAJA").  Jacobs contends that the district court misper-
ceived the relevant inquiry under EAJA and that as a matter 
of law the government was not substantially justified in its 
position that Jacobs obtain its advance approval before shar-
ing information with his attorney in the course of obtaining 
legal advice about a potential lawsuit against his employing 
agency.  We agree, and reverse, remanding the case for the 
district court to determine the amount of attorney's fees to 
award Jacobs.

                                I.

     The underlying litigation stems from the reaction that 
Jacobs, a trial lawyer in the Environment and Natural Re-
sources Division, Environmental Enforcement Section, of the 
United States Department of Justice, received when he re-
ported his "qualms" about the propriety of certain strategies 
and tactics by the Section in cases to which he was assigned 
to his supervisors--ultimately, to Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant 
Attorney General for the Environment and Natural Re-
sources Division of the Department of Justice.  See Jacobs, 
47 F. Supp.2d at 17-18.  During the same period Jacobs 
reported his qualms, Jacobs' performance rating was lowered 
and he was involuntarily transferred to a different litigating 
group.  Id. at 18.  Jacobs consulted a private attorney to 
determine "whether the conduct that he reported within the 
[Department] constituted wrongdoing, whether his supervi-
sors improperly retaliated against him, and what public dis-

closures he might lawfully make under the Whistleblower 
Protection Act, 5 U.S.C. s 2302(b)(8)." Id.

     Recognizing the potentially sensitive nature of some of the 
materials Jacobs sought to disclose, Jacobs' attorney at the 
time, Jonathon Turley, asked Assistant Attorney General 
Schiffer to notify Division management that he "would have 
to review internal memoranda on the specific litigation that is 
the subject of the retaliation claims," and that "any confiden-
tiality or departmental objections to such a review be made as 
soon as possible so as to expedite this matter."  The Depart-
ment's response on behalf of the Assistant Attorney General 
was that the Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA"), 5 U.S.C. 
s 552 (1996), controlled, and hence any records that Jacobs 
wanted to disclose to his attorney had to be identified before 
the Department could authorize their disclosure.  Citing its 
FOIA regulations, 28 C.F.R. s 16 (1996), the Department 
advised that Jacobs " 'must describe the records sought in 
sufficient detail to enable Department personnel to locate the 
records with a reasonable amount of effort.' "

     Jacobs responded through counsel that a whistle-blower 
does not make documents "public" by showing them to his or 
her attorney, and that he was entitled "to seek legal advice 
and discuss internal matters without such discussions being 
classified as an unauthorized or public disclosure."  Jacobs 
asked whether the Department would consider certain com-
munications by him to his attorney without prior approval to 
violate Department rules, specifically:  (1) oral communica-
tions between a whistle-blower and his attorney discussing 
the basis of his claim and the handling of specific cases that 
are material to the whistle-blower complaint;  (2) internal 
electronic messages and memoranda from or to supervisors 
concerning the whistle-blower's internal complaints;  and (3) 
internal electronic messages and memoranda concerning the 
handling of cases that are material to the whistle-blower 
complaint.  The Department's position was that these com-
munications were not exempt from the general restrictions on 
the release of non-public information.

     Because Jacobs and the Department were at loggerheads 
concerning how Jacobs could obtain legal advice with respect 

to his contemplated lawsuit against the Department, Jacobs 
filed suit against Assistant Attorney General Schiffer in 1997, 
seeking injunctive relief for what he considered to be a denial 
of his rights secured by the First and Fifth Amendments.1  
Jacobs' first cause of action, claiming a First Amendment 
right to communicate with his attorney, was premised largely 
on Martin v. Lauer, 686 F.2d 24 (D.C. Cir. 1982) ("Martin 
II").  Jacobs' second cause of action went beyond Martin II, 
alleging that his First Amendment associational interests 
gave him the right to disclose FOIA-exempt information in 
the course of seeking legal advice from his attorney and from 
"public interest and professional organizations committed to 
civil rights, whistle-blower rights, government accountability, 
and environmental enforcement." His third cause of action 
alleged an unconstitutional impairment of attorney-client 
communications that impeded his access to the courts in 
violation of the Due Process Clause.

     The district court granted summary judgment for Jacobs 
on his first cause of action, ruling that the Department's 
"absolute embargo" on Jacobs' communications with his attor-
ney constituted "a prior restraint ... considerably more 
onerous than the one that the D.C. Circuit found unconstitu-
tional in [Martin II]," and thus violated Jacobs' free speech 
rights.  Jacobs, 47 F. Supp.2d at 20, 22, 24.  After reviewing 
in camera documents Jacobs proposed to show his attorney, 
the district court found that "it is clear on this record that 

__________
     1 Jacobs sought three orders:  (1) that the prohibition on unautho-
rized disclosures of non-public information in attorney-client com-
munications, or any requirement of pre-communication review of 
such disclosures, violates the right of freedom of speech under the 
First Amendment;  (2) that the prohibitions on such disclosures in 
attorney-client communications, or any requirement of pre-
communication review of the same, violates freedom of association 
under the First Amendment;  and (3) that such prohibition or 
requirement violates the right to unimpeded access to the courts 
under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.  The 
prayer for relief also sought orders enjoining the Department from 
enforcing pre-disclosure restrictions and awarding Jacobs reason-
able attorney's fees and costs under EAJA.

Mr. Jacobs could show his attorney some, if not all, of the 
documents that he would like to disclose without violating any 
statute or regulation."  Id.  The district court likewise reject-
ed the Department's position that a government lawyer, 
under D.C. Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 1.6(a), " 're-
veal[s]' his client's confidences and secrets when he discloses 
to his personal attorney--with the express understanding 
that the information should go no further--only those confi-
dences and secrets that the latter needs in order to advise the 
government lawyer of his rights and obligations as a possible 
whistle-blower."  Id. at 20-21.  The district court concluded, 
therefore, that the Department's restraint "is broader than 
that imposed by law or professional ethics," id. at 21, and, 
relying on Martin II, 686 F.2d at 31-35, the court ruled that 
the restraint violated Jacobs' First Amendment rights.  Ja-
cobs, 47 F. Supp.2d at 24.  In the district court's view, to 
address the Department's concerns about the disclosure of 
confidential information, "[a]ll that is required ... is an order 
directing Mr. Jacobs' attorney to keep in confidence, and to 
use only for the purpose of rendering advice to Mr. Jacobs, 
any nonpublic information that his client may impart to him."  
Id. at 24.2  While concluding that Jacobs had no right to 
disclose FOIA-exempt information to public interest groups, 
the court found it unnecessary to resolve Jacobs' second and 
third causes of action.  Id.

     Although Jacobs had succeeded on his free speech claim, 
the district court denied Jacobs attorney's fees under EAJA, 
explaining only that:

__________
     2 The district court also permanently enjoined the Department

     from requiring [Jacobs] to notify the [Department] and obtain 
     authorization before disclosing to counsel hereinafter identified 
     any nonpublic information without which, according to counsel's 
     good-faith belief, counsel cannot formulate effective legal advice 
     to [Jacobs] regarding matters arising from events giving rise to 
     this action....
     
Jacobs, 47 F. Supp.2d at 25.  The district court's order provided 
that "nothing in this Order shall be read to authorize [Jacobs] or 
counsel to violate any law or rule of professional conduct...."  Id.

     Mr. Jacobs' prayer for relief generally exempting him 
     from inhibitions on the disclosure of nonpublic informa-
     tion to any sympathetic third party likely to offer to 
     advise him represents an extreme to which the Court has 
     not found him entitled.  In the circumstances the Court 
     concludes that [the Department] was substantially justi-
     fied in resisting Jacobs' request for carte blanche permis-
     sion to disclose without following the rules.
     
Id. at 24-25.  The Department did not appeal the judgment 
on Jacobs' free speech claim, and our review, therefore, is 
limited to Jacobs' contention that the district court erred in 
denying him attorney's fees under EAJA.

                               II.

     Under EAJA, a party is entitled to attorney's fees when (1) 
the party "prevailed" in the underlying litigation by "suc-
ceed[ing] on a significant issue in litigation that achieves some 
of the benefits the party sought in bringing suit," Anthony v. 
Sullivan, 962 F.2d 586, 589 (D.C. Cir. 1993), (citing Hensley 
v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 433 (1983)), and (2) the govern-
ment cannot demonstrate substantial justification for its posi-
tion.  See, e.g., F.J. Vollmer Co. v. Magaw, 102 F.3d 591, 594 
(D.C. Cir. 1996).  The government's "position" includes both 
its pre-litigation and litigation positions, id., and is "substan-
tially justified if it is 'justified in substance or in the main--
that is, justified to a degree that could satisfy a reasonable 
person.  That is no different from ... [having] a reasonable 
basis both in law and fact.' "  Id. at 595 (quoting Pierce v. 
Underwood, 487 U.S. 552, 565 (1988)).  The government 
bears the burden of demonstrating substantial justification.  
Id.  The district court ruled that the Department had met its 
burden, and our review of the district court's denial of 
attorney's fees is for abuse of discretion.  See, e.g., Pierce, 
487 U.S. at 562-63;  Vollmer, 102 F.3d at 596.

     It is well established that a party "prevails" under EAJA's 
first inquiry even if success is only partial, Farrar v. Hobby, 
506 U.S. 103, 111 (1996);  Texas State Teachers Ass'n v. 
Garland Indep. Sch. Dist., 489 U.S. 782, 791 (1989), and it is 

undisputed that Jacobs prevailed on his first cause of action:  
the district court ruled that the Department's position requir-
ing preclearance was an "absolute embargo" and an unconsti-
tutional prior restraint.  Jacobs, 47 F. Supp.2d at 20, 24.  In 
such circumstances, the district court's task with respect to 
the EAJA inquiry was to determine whether the govern-
ment's position with respect to the issue on which the party 
prevailed was substantially justified.  See, e.g., Air Transport 
Ass'n. of Canada v. FAA, 156 F.3d 1329, 1332 (D.C. Cir. 
1998);  Cinciarelli v. Reagan, 729 F.2d 801, 804-05 (D.C. Cir. 
1984).

     The district court's terse denial of attorney's fees effective-
ly precluded inquiry into the reasonableness of the Depart-
ment's position with respect to the issue upon which Jacobs 
prevailed, namely his right to disclose information to his 
attorney without first revealing that information to the De-
partment for preclearance.  Instead, the district court evalu-
ated the Department's position primarily as a reaction to 
Jacobs' broader contentions concerning public interest groups 
on which he did not prevail.  The court has explained that 
such a "holistic" approach to the government's position is 
contrary to EAJA, see Air Transport Ass'n of Canada, 156 
F.3d at 1332, and that the relevant "position" of the govern-
ment is that which corresponds to the claim or aspect of the 
case on which the private party prevailed.  Thus, even if the 
Department was, as the district court found, justified in 
refusing to authorize carte blanche disclosure of non-public 
information to public interest organizations, the question for 
the district court under EAJA was whether the Department's 
preclearance restraint on Jacobs' communications with his 
attorney was reasonable.  By lumping together the Depart-
ment's positions on Jacobs' first and second causes of actions, 
involving disclosure to his attorney and public interest organi-
zations, respectively, the district court never addressed that 
crucial question.

     The district court's failure to make the appropriate inquiry 
under EAJA was an error of law, which, by definition, was an 
abuse of discretion.  See Cooter & Gell v. Hartmax Corp., 496 
U.S. 384, 405 (1990).  Because the question of whether the 

Department's position was substantially justified can be an-
swered as a matter of law, a remand is unnecessary, see, e.g., 
George Hyman Constr. Co. v. Brooks, 963 F.2d 1532, 1539 
(D.C. Cir. 1992);  Shaw v. FBI, 749 F.2d 58, 63 (1984), and we 
turn to the critical question that the district court did not 
address.

     In view of the district court's judgment on the merits of 
Jacobs' free speech claim, which the government did not 
appeal,3 the appropriate inquiry under EAJA is whether the 
Department was substantially justified in placing on Jacobs' 
communications with his attorney a prior restraint consider-
ably more onerous than the one that the court held unconsti-
tutional in Martin II.4  On the undisputed facts, the answer 
can only be "No."  The Department has been consistently 
unwilling to recognize that communication of government 
information by a federal government employee to the employ-
ee's attorney, where the attorney is bound to keep such 
information confidential, is not a public disclosure of such 
information, and that the employee enjoys rights under the 
First Amendment to engage in such communications in addi-
tion to those the employee enjoys as a member of the general 
public under FOIA.  In response to Jacobs' initial request for 

__________
     3 The Department in its brief to this court takes issue with the 
district court's characterization of the government's position as 
requiring Jacobs to receive advance approval before disclosing 
information to his attorney and as a restriction more severe than 
that at issue in Martin II.  This it cannot do;  it did not appeal that 
judgment.  See, e.g., Trahan v. Brady, 907 F.2d 1215, 1218 (D.C. 
Cir. 1990);  Trahan v. Reagan, 824 F.2d 96, 103 (D.C. Cir. 1987), 
vacated on other grounds, 866 F.2d 1424 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  In any 
event, we find no basis on which to conclude that the district court 
clearly erred in its characterization.  See Cooter & Gell, 496 U.S. at 
403-05;  Vollmer, 102 F.3d at 596.

     4 Subsequently, the court affirmed the district court's judgment 
that even in the absence of specific precedent regarding a federal 
employee's rights to communicate with the employee's attorney, the 
government's position had not been substantially justified under 
EAJA.  See Martin v. Lauer, 740 F.2d 36, 45-47 (D.C. Cir. 1984) 
(Martin III).

the Department to register its objections to any of Jacobs' 
contemplated disclosures to his attorney, the Department 
responded:  "[W]e know of no authority under which the 
types of communications described in your letters are except-
ed from the general restrictions on the release of confidential 
information."  Jacobs, 47 F. Supp.2d at 18 n.2.  Once Jacobs 
filed his lawsuit, the Department's position changed only to 
refer to additional statutory and regulatory obstacles to dis-
closure,5 but at no point did the Department yield from its 
preclearance position as to the first cause of action on which 
Jacobs ultimately prevailed.

     Yet the Department's position--its professed unawareness 
of any authority that might justify Jacobs' contemplated 
communications with his attorney--failed to acknowledge that 
the First Amendment, superior to the statutory and regulato-
ry provisions relied upon by the Department, might provide 
such authority.  This failure was inexplicable in light of 
Martin II, which was decided more than a decade earlier.  In 
Martin II, the Department had required two employees who 
were challenging the legality of a reduction-in-force to inform 
it of what non-public, FOIA-exempt information they had 
revealed to their attorney.  686 F.2d. at 26-27.  Noting that a 
balancing test to weigh the First Amendment rights of gov-
ernment employees against the government's interests will 
vary according to the type and context of the speech at issue, 
id. at 31 (citing Pickering v. Bd. of Education, 391 U.S. 563, 
568 (1968)), the court concluded that:

     Since the [Department's] memorandum works to restrict 
     communications between government employees and 
     
__________
     5 The additional statutes and regulations cited by the Department 
included the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552a(b) (1996);  the Trade 
Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. s 1905 (1996);  an ethics regulation concern-
ing use of non-public information by a government employee, 5 
C.F.R. s 2635.703 (1996);  the so-called "Touhy" regulations govern-
ing production or disclosure in federal and state proceedings, 28 
C.F.R. s 16.21-16.29 (1996);  and a regulation prohibiting the im-
proper use of official information, 28 C.F.R. s 45.735-10 (1996).  
Schiffer also cited Department Order 2710.8A (1997), regarding 
removal and maintenance of documents.

     their attorneys, it implicates the fundamental right of 
     those employees to meaningful access to the courts.  
     Absent grounds to believe that discussions in this limited 
     context would significantly impair any governmental in-
     terest, we conclude that the ... memorandum provisions, 
     as applied to FOIA-exempt information violate appel-
     lants' first amendment rights.
     
Id. at 32.6  Observing that there is a critical distinction 
between disclosures in the attorney-client context and public 
disclosures, id. at 32, 34-35, the court further concluded that 
"the government may protect its interest in prohibiting public 
disbursal of any sensitive information without intruding on 
the employee's substantial interest in freely discussing his 
legal rights with his attorney."  Id. at 34.  While the govern-
ment arguably "could protect its interest in preventing public 
disclosure of government information by requiring the em-
ployee not to authorize any subsequent disclosure of sensitive 
government information by his or her attorney," the court 
stated that a "broad restriction, undermining the confidential-
ity of the attorney-client relationship and chilling discussions 
with counsel in order to protect the government's unclear 
interest in monitoring all discussions of FOIA-exempt infor-
mation cuts too deeply into the employee's first amendment 
rights."  Id. at 34-35.

     It thus has long been clear that the First Amendment does 
not provide a federal employee seeking legal advice regarding 
a dispute with the employing agency with carte blanche 
authority to disclose any and all confidential government 
information to the employee's attorney, but rather that the 
scope of the First Amendment right is determined by balanc-

__________
     6 In Martin II, the court

     emphasize[d], however, that this conclusion pertains only to the 
     communications made to the employees' attorneys and not to 
     any subsequent use made of those communications.  Were the 
     employees to reveal the FOIA-exempt information to others, or 
     to authorize their attorney to do so, the balance between the 
     government's interests and the employees' might well shift.
     
Id. at 32.

ing the employee's interests in communication with the gov-
ernment's interests in preventing communication.  Relevant 
to this balancing is whether the attorney is likely to keep this 
information in confidence, as suggested by willingness to 
enter into a protective order, or whether such communica-
tions to the personal attorney will operate as a de facto public 
disclosure.  Where, as here, there was no evidence to suggest 
that Jacobs' attorney would publicly disclose the information 
Jacobs sought to communicate, the First Amendment re-
quired a balancing of interests beyond the balance between 
disclosure and non-disclosure under the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act.  Understandably, the Department would be con-
cerned about giving carte blanche approval of unlimited dis-
closures to one of its attorneys who has access to a broad 
range of potentially sensitive, non-public information and who 
is challenging its management of litigation.  But the reason-
ableness of the Department's position with respect to Jacobs' 
free speech claim regarding his attorney must be evaluated in 
light of Martin II.  In that regard it is bears noting that in 
Martin II the court observed, albeit in dictum, that in the 
whistle-blower context, where a legal question arises as to 
whether a contemplated public disclosure would be prohibited 
by law, "[s]urely, [the employee] must be allowed to consult 
his attorney for an answer to that question absent some 
strong governmental interest in limiting such communica-
tions."  Martin II, 686 F.2d at 33 n.41.

     Consequently, the Department's position was not substan-
tially justified as a matter of law in light of the Department's 
complete unwillingness to acknowledge that Jacobs had an 
interest in communicating with his attorney on his side of the 
First Amendment's scale.  While the district court's judg-
ment on the merits is a separate matter, see Vollmer, 102 
F.3d at 595, the gap between where the district court deter-
mined the point of First Amendment equilibrium to be and 
the Department's "absolute embargo" evidences the Depart-
ment's unwillingness to confront the constitutional implica-
tions of its dispute with Jacobs.  Instead, prior to the instant 
litigation, the Department stated that it was aware of no 
authority that would have allowed Jacobs to make his contem-

plated communications to his attorney.  In the district court, 
the Department continued to claim that it was unable to 
assess the scope of the information that Jacobs contemplated 
sharing with his attorney, even though Jacobs' attorney had 
previously indicated to the Assistant Attorney General that 
"the scope of the inquiry concerns primarily one case and 
correspondence with the Section and yourself on that case."  
Although Jacobs' attorney also acknowledged that more than 
one case might be involved in Jacobs' contemplated whistle-
blower claim the Department was not faced with an employee 
engaged in an unbounded fishing expedition.  In this court, 
the Department continues to treat Jacobs' disclosures to his 
attorney as disclosures to the public and attempts to distin-
guish Martin II by maintaining, contrary to the district 
court's findings by which it is bound, see supra n.3, that the 
Department never required preclearance of information Ja-
cobs sought to share with his attorney, and further, but 
without claiming that the protective order entered by the 
district court is insufficient to address its concerns, that the 
sensitive information to which Jacobs had access was funda-
mentally different from the information at issue in Martin II.  
That Jacobs sought also, in his second cause of action, to 
share information with third parties is irrelevant to the EAJA 
issue, for he did not prevail on that claim, and thus the 
Department's continued focus on that part of his complaint is 
misplaced, particularly insofar as prior to Jacobs' filing suit 
the Department's position was directed solely at Jacobs' 
request to share information with his attorney.

     Under the circumstances, the Department could not rea-
sonably insist that its interests could be protected only by 
preclearing document-by-document the information Jacobs 
sought to share with his attorney.  Even assuming the De-
partment could have adopted a position that would have been 
substantially justified short of agreeing to a protective order, 
in light of Martin II and the willingness of Jacobs and his 
attorney to address the Department's concerns that their 
communications not be disclosed to the general public, the 
Department cannot meet its burden to demonstrate that its 

prior restraint on Jacobs' communications with his attorney 
was substantially justified.

     Accordingly, we reverse and remand the case for the 
district court to determine the amount of attorney's fees to 
award Jacobs.

                                                     