                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 29, 1999    Decided August 22, 2000 

                           No. 98-1422

     United Food and Commercial Workers International Union 
                       Local 400, AFL-CIO, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

                  Farm Fresh Acquisition, Inc., 
                            Intervenor

                        Consolidated with 
                             98-1479

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Carey R. Butsavage argued the cause for petitioner. With 
him on the briefs was James B. Coppess.

     Steven B. Goldstein, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were Linda Sher, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. 
Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and David 
Habenstreit, Supervisory Attorney.  John D. Burgoyne, Dep-
uty Associate General Counsel, entered an appearance.

     Michael P. Oates argued the cause for intervenor.  With 
him on the brief was A. Neal Barkus.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  The United Food and Commercial 
Workers International Union, Local 400, AFL-CIO ("the 
Union") filed unfair labor practice charges with the National 
Labor Relations Board in connection with an organizing drive 
at Farm Fresh grocery stores in the Tidewater area of 
Virginia.1  The Board determined that Farm Fresh had 
committed a number of unfair labor practices, and the compa-
ny has not petitioned for review of that determination.  The 
Board declined, however, to find unfair labor practices in two 
circumstances as to which the Union has petitioned for re-
view:  the ejection of nonemployee organizers from the snack 
bar at one Farm Fresh store, and the exclusion of nonemploy-
ee organizers from the sidewalk in front of four other stores.  
We consider those matters below.

                                I

     We begin with the snack bar incident, which itself began 
with a sidewalk incident.  Farm Fresh operates a grocery 
store on Princess Anne Road in Virginia Beach, Virginia.  
The store operates under a lease that covers both the build-

__________
     1 Farm Fresh operated the stores under various names including 
Farm Fresh, Nick's, and Food Carnival.  Farm Fresh was subse-
quently acquired by FF Acquisition, L.L.C.  For ease of reference 
we will refer to the employer and all of its stores as "Farm Fresh."

ing and its adjacent sidewalk.  On May 1, 1990, James Green 
and Dudley Saunders, Union organizers not employed by 
Farm Fresh, were outside the Princess Anne Road store 
soliciting employee support.  They stood approximately 30 
feet from the entrance.  The store's manager, Nat Harlow, 
approached the two organizers and instructed them to move 
50 feet away in accordance with a Farm Fresh policy barring 
all solicitation within 50 feet of store entrances.  The organiz-
ers refused to move, and Harlow summoned the police.  The 
police told the organizers that if they did not move, Harlow 
could obtain warrants for their arrest for trespass.  When 
Harlow left to obtain the warrants, the organizers departed.  
A magistrate issued trespass warrants the next day.2

     On May 3, 1990, an attorney for Farm Fresh sent the 
Union a letter "regarding the recent activities of organizers 
for UFCW Local 400 at stores owned and operated by Farm 
Fresh."  The letter advised that, under company policy, "[a]ll 
outside solicitors must remain no closer than 50 feet from 
public entrances to the stores," and that "[t]he snackbar or 
cafeteria facilities may be used only in ways consistent with 
their use by members of the public generally."  The letter 
also specifically noted that warrants accusing Saunders and 
Green "of trespassing have been issued by a magistrate for 
the City of Virginia Beach," and requested "that you advise 
these men that if they again appear on the property of the 
store on Princess Anne Road they will be considered tres-
passers and will be treated as such."  J.A. at 137-38.

     On May 14, Green and Saunders returned to the Princess 
Anne Road store to eat lunch at its snack bar.  Store 
manager Harlow told them "that in light of the pending 
warrants issued on May 2, he did not want them anywhere in 
the store until the matter was resolved."  Farm Fresh, Inc., 
326 N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 2 (1998).  Harlow permitted the 
organizers to finish their meal, and thereafter they departed.  
The Union subsequently filed charges alleging that Farm 

__________
     2 The authority of the Princess Anne Road store to exclude the 
organizers from its sidewalk has not been challenged in this court.  
See infra Part II.

Fresh had violated section 8(a)(1) of the National Labor 
Relations Act ("NLRA"), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), by ordering 
the organizers to leave the snack bar.3

     At the time of the incidents in question, the right of access 
by nonemployee union organizers to employers' public snack 
bars was governed by the NLRB's opinion in Montgomery 
Ward & Co., 288 N.L.R.B. 126 (1988), rev'd on other grounds, 
904 F.2d 1156 (7th Cir. 1990).  In Montgomery Ward, the 
Board held that "solicitation in restaurants cannot be prohib-
ited when ... the conduct of the nonemployee organizer is 
consistent with the conduct of other patrons of the restau-
rant."  Id. at 127.4  Before the Union's case against Farm 
Fresh was decided, however, the Supreme Court issued its 
decision in Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 527 (1992).  
Lechmere held that an employer is not required to open its 
property to nonemployee organizers unless the union can 
show that it has no other reasonable means of communicating 
with the employees, or that the employer's access rules 
discriminate against union solicitation.  See id. at 535;  see 
also Lucile Salter Packard Children's Hosp. v. NLRB, 97 
F.3d 853, 857 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     In the instant case, the NLRB found that Farm Fresh had 
excluded Saunders and Green from the snack bar on the basis 
of an across-the-board policy banning solicitation by any 
outsider at the facility.  The Board then held that although 
such a no-solicitation ban would have been unlawful under 

__________
     3 Section 7 of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. s 157, guarantees employees 
"the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organi-
zations, ... and to engage in other concerted activities for the 
purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection."  
Section 8(a)(1) makes it an unfair labor practice "to interfere with, 
restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of the rights guaran-
teed" by section 7.  Id. s 158(a)(1).

     4 See Farm Fresh, Inc., 301 N.L.R.B. 907, 928 (1991);  Dunes 
Hotel & Country Club, 284 N.L.R.B. 871 (1987);  Harold's Club, 267 
N.L.R.B. 1167, 1167 (1983), enforced, 758 F.2d 1322 (9th Cir. 1985);  
Marshall Field & Co., 98 N.L.R.B. 88, 94 (1952), enforced as 
modified, 200 F.2d 375 (7th Cir. 1952).

Montgomery Ward, that decision could not survive Lechmere.  
Board Members Fox and Liebman dissented.  They argued, 
first, that the viability of Montgomery Ward was not at issue 
in this case because the union organizers had not been 
ejected on the basis of a no-solicitation policy, but rather 
because there were outstanding trespass warrants against 
them.  Second, they argued that Montgomery Ward did 
survive Lechmere because it was grounded in the anti-
discrimination exception to the employer's right to exclude.  
Agreeing with the dissenters as to the first point, we have no 
occasion to address the second.

     This court must uphold a decision of the Board with respect 
to a question of fact "if it is supported by substantial evidence 
on the record considered as a whole."  29 U.S.C. s 160(e);  
see Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 477, 488 
(1951).  In its eagerness to address the Lechmere issue, 
however, the Board's majority conjured a factual situation as 
to which there is no substantial evidence.  Indeed, we can 
find no evidence at all that Farm Fresh ejected Green and 
Saunders on the basis of a company policy barring solicitation 
in the snack bar.  Rather, all of the evidence, including Farm 
Fresh's own frank admission, indicates that Green and Saun-
ders were excluded simply because of the outstanding tres-
pass warrants.  See Farm Fresh Br. at 12 n.5 ("[T]he two 
organizers excluded from the snackbar were asked to leave 
because of outstanding trespass warrants issued by the City 
of Virginia Beach.") (emphasis added).

     When manager Harlow confronted Green and Saunders at 
the snack bar, he gave one and only one explanation for 
asking them to leave:  the existence of the trespass warrants.  
See J.A. at 660 (testimony of Harlow);  id. at 578 (testimony 
of Green);  id. at 636 (testimony of Saunders).  That explana-
tion is consistent with Farm Fresh's May 3 letter, which 
specifically "requested that you advise these men that if they 
again appear on the property of the store on Princess Anne 
Road they will be considered trespassers and will be treated 
as such."  J.A. at 138.  It is also consistent with the absence 
of any evidence that Green and Saunders were soliciting at 

the snack bar on May 14;  the only evidence is that they were 
eating lunch.

     Nor is there any support for the proposition that Farm 
Fresh had a no-solicitation policy with respect to the snack 
bar.  To the contrary, in their brief before the Board, Farm 
Fresh stated that it "permitted Union organizers to engage in 
lawful solicitation in the snack bars which Farm Fresh oper-
ated in many of the stores in question."  Farm Fresh, Inc., 
326 N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 10 (Members Fox and Liebman 
dissenting) (quoting Farm Fresh Br. in Support of Cross 
Exceptions, at 7).  This is confirmed by specific evidence that 
Union organizers had previously engaged in solicitation in 
Farm Fresh's snack bars without interference from the com-
pany.  See id. at 10 n.4.  Indeed, Green and Saunders had 
themselves frequently solicited employees at the Princess 
Anne Road snack bar prior to May 3.  See id.  As the 
Board's Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) found, the ejection 
of Saunders and Green was "an exception to [Farm Fresh's] 
general 'hands off' approach to nondisruptive organizational 
conduct on the part of Union representatives inside the 
stores."  Id. at 22 (ALJ Decision).

     The NLRB did not dispute this evidence, acknowledging 
that Farm Fresh's policy may previously have been "more 
lenient."  Farm Fresh, Inc., 326 N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 3.  The 
Board concluded, however, that whatever Farm Fresh's earli-
er policy had been, the May 3 letter made clear it had a no-
solicitation policy as of that date.  In reaching this conclusion, 
the Board relied on two paragraphs of the letter.  Paragraph 
1 stated that all outside solicitors must remain "no closer than 
50 feet from public entrances."  Paragraph 3 stated that 
snack bars could be used "only in ways consistent with their 
use by members of the public generally."  The Board con-
cluded that the first paragraph controlled, and was intended 
to ban solicitation not just from the portion of the sidewalk 
that was within 50 feet of the entrance, but from the entire 
store--inside and out.

     The Board reached this conclusion notwithstanding that 
paragraph 3 did not state that solicitation was banned in the 

snack bar, whether by organizers or "the public generally."  
The weakness of the Board's finding is further illuminated by 
the employer's own rejection of the intent the Board attrib-
uted to it.  At oral argument, counsel for intervener Farm 
Fresh candidly stated that the May 3 letter did not represent 
a no-solicitation policy, but rather was intended to be consis-
tent with Montgomery Ward--which required employers to 
permit snack bar solicitation as long as organizers behaved in 
a manner consistent with that of the public in general.  That 
intent is hardly surprising.  At the time the letter was 
written, Montgomery Ward was the governing law and para-
graph 3 mirrors its language.  Compare Letter p 3 (J.A. at 
137) (stating that snack bar "may be used only in ways 
consistent with their use by members of the public general-
ly"), with Montgomery Ward, 288 N.L.R.B. at 127 (holding 
that exclusion from snack bar is improper when "the conduct 
of the nonemployee organizer is consistent with the conduct 
of other patrons of the restaurant").

     The NLRB rejected the unfair labor practice charge 
against Farm Fresh based on its factual finding that the 
company expelled the two organizers because they were 
violating the company's no-solicitation policy, and based on its 
legal conclusion that such a policy was lawful.  Because there 
is no substantial evidence to support the Board's factual 
finding, its ultimate disposition cannot stand.  Hence, we 
have no occasion to consider whether the Board's legal con-
clusion--that employers may ban all solicitation from their 
public snack bars--is correct.  Nor do we have reason to 
consider whether the actual ground upon which Farm Fresh 
ejected the organizers--the existence of outstanding trespass 
warrants--would have sufficed to support dismissal of the 
unfair labor practice charge.  Because this court "cannot 
sustain agency action on grounds other than those adopted by 
the agency in the administrative proceedings," Macmillan 
Pub. Co. v. NLRB, 194 F.3d 165, 168 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (citing 
SEC v. Chenery Corp., 318 U.S. 80, 94 (1943)), we reverse the 
Board's decision and remand the case to the agency for 
further consideration.

                                II

     The second issue before us concerns Farm Fresh's policy of 
barring solicitation on the sidewalks in front of nine of its 
stores.  All nine stores were situated in strip malls with 
common areas and co-tenants.  Each store was operated 
under lease, with Farm Fresh possessing varying rights 
and/or obligations with respect to the sidewalks.  Notwith-
standing the variances in the leases, Farm Fresh enforced a 
common policy at each store:  No solicitation of any kind was 
permitted within 50 feet of the public entrance.  At each of 
the nine stores involved, nonemployee organizers were in-
formed of the policy and, when they refused to comply, were 
threatened with legal action or arrested.  The Union filed 
unfair labor practice charges against each store, contending 
that Farm Fresh violated NLRA s 8(a)(1) by enforcing the 
policy on sidewalks as to which they lacked sufficient proper-
ty interests to exclude nonemployee organizers.

     All parties agree that the lawfulness of the employer's 
exclusion of nonemployee union representatives in this situa-
tion is governed by the NLRB's decision in Indio Grocery 
Outlet, 323 N.L.R.B. 1138, 1141 (1997), enforced, 187 F.3d 108 
(9th Cir. 1999).  Indio reaffirmed that for exclusion to be 
lawful, "there is a threshold burden on the [employer] to 
establish that it had, at the time it expelled the Union 
representatives, an interest which entitled it to exclude indi-
viduals from the property."  Indio, 323 N.L.R.B. at 1141 
(internal quotation omitted).5  To determine whether the 
employer had such a property interest, the Board "look[s] to 
the law that created and defined the [employer's] property 
interest, which is state, rather than Federal, law."  Id.;  see 

__________
     5 See O'Neil's Markets v. United Food and Commercial Workers 
Union, 95 F.3d 733 (8th Cir. 1996), enforcing sub nom. Food for 
Less, 318 N.L.R.B. 646, 649-50 (1995);  Johnson & Hardin Co., 305 
N.L.R.B. 690, 691, 695 (1991), enforced in pertinent part, 49 F.3d 
237 (6th Cir. 1995);  Polly Drummond Thriftway Inc., 292 N.L.R.B. 
331, 332 (1989), enforced, 882 F.2d 512 (3rd Cir. 1989);  Barkus 
Bakery, 282 N.L.R.B. 351, 354 (1986), enforced, 833 F.2d 306 (3rd 
Cir. 1987).

also Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U.S. 200, 217 n.21 
(1994) ("The right of employers to exclude union organizers 
from their private property emanates from state common 
law....").  If the employer is unable to meet the burden of 
demonstrating the requisite property interest, its exclusion of 
union agents from the area constitutes a violation of section 
8(a)(1).  See Indio, 323 N.L.R.B. at 1141;  cases cited supra 
note 5.

     Applying this test, the ALJ found that Farm Fresh had not 
committed unfair labor practices at two of the stores, those at 
Princess Anne Road (discussed in Part I above) and High 
Street, because the company possessed sufficient property 
interests in the appurtenant sidewalks to exclude the organiz-
ers.  In both cases, Farm Fresh had expressly leased both 
the stores and the sidewalks at issue.  See Farm Fresh, Inc., 
326 N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 16, 21 (ALJ Decision).  The NLRB 
affirmed the ALJ as to these stores, and the Union has not 
appealed.

     As for the remaining stores, the ALJ concluded that Farm 
Fresh lacked sufficient property interests to exclude the 
organizers and therefore had committed unfair labor prac-
tices by ejecting them.  Farm Fresh appealed to the Board, 
which affirmed the ALJ with respect to three of the stores.  
In each of those three cases, the sidewalks were not leased to 
Farm Fresh but rather remained in the exclusive control of 
the landlord.  Nor did those leases impose upon Farm Fresh 
any obligations with respect to maintenance of the sidewalks.  
The Board concluded that the company had no right to eject 
the organizers from the sidewalks of those three stores, and 
that the ejections therefore constituted unfair labor practices.  
Farm Fresh has not sought review of those determinations.

     This leaves the four stores that are the subject of this case:  
the Colonial Avenue, Shore Drive, Merrimack Trail, and 
Victory Boulevard stores.  Although the lease agreements for 
these stores do not--with one possible exception noted be-
low--lease the sidewalks to Farm Fresh, they do impose upon 
the tenant company an obligation to clean and maintain the 
sidewalks.  The ALJ concluded that this obligation was insuf-

ficient to entitle Farm Fresh to expel the organizers from the 
property.  The Board disagreed, concluding that the mainte-
nance obligations were sufficient to entitle Farm Fresh to 
invoke the Virginia trespass statute.  The Union petitions for 
review.

     As the NLRB held in Indio, whether an employer has a 
sufficient property interest to exclude Union organizers is a 
question of state property law:  in this case, the law of the 
Commonwealth of Virginia.  As the NLRB has no special 
expertise in interpreting Virginia law, we review the question 
de novo.  See Cellwave Telephone Services L.P. v. FCC, 30 
F.3d 1533, 1537 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (reviewing de novo FCC's 
interpretation of state law);  see also NLRB v. Better Build-
ing Supply Corp., 837 F.2d 377, 378 (9th Cir. 1988) (giving no 
deference to Board's interpretation of bankruptcy law).

     The Virginia trespass statute upon which the Board relied 
states as follows:

     If any person without authority of law goes upon or 
     remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, 
     or any portion or area thereof, after having been forbid-
     den to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, 
     lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge 
     thereof ... he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
     
Va. Code Ann. s 18.2-119 (Michie 1996) (emphasis added).  
Under the statute, it is clear that the owner or lessee of the 
sidewalks had the authority to exclude the organizers.  But 
there is no dispute (with one possible exception) that Farm 
Fresh was not the owner or lessee.  The NLRB relied 
instead on the statutory language authorizing a "custodian or 
other person lawfully in charge" to bar entry.  The Board 
concluded that the provisions of the lease agreements requir-
ing Farm Fresh to keep the sidewalks clean were sufficient to 
place the company within those categories.  We disagree.

     The Colonial Avenue lease agreement is typical.  In the 
relevant paragraph, Farm Fresh agreed to "keep the demised 
premises, entryways and sidewalks adjacent to said premises 
clean and free from obstruction, rubbish, dirt, snow and ice."  

Lease p 14 (J.A. at 381-82).  Although this provision may give 
Farm Fresh the power to remove "rubbish, dirt, snow and 
ice," Union organizers do not fall within those categories.  
Nor may they be categorized as "obstruction[s]"--there is no 
evidence that they obstructed the entrances in any way.

     It is true that the leases' maintenance provisions might 
permit Farm Fresh to be characterized as a "custodian" in 
the sense of "janitor," but there is no indication that Virginia 
law permits janitors to file trespass actions against citizens 
who stand on Virginia sidewalks.  Rather, the canon of 
ejusdem generis ("of the same kind or class") counsels that 
we read the phrase "custodian or other person lawfully in 
charge" as indicating that "custodian" means a person who is 
"in charge," or is "in control."  See Hall v. Commonwealth, 
49 S.E.2d 369, 371 (Va. 1948) ("The only purpose of this law is 
to protect the rights of the owners or those in lawful control 
of private property.").  And there is no evidence in the leases 
that Farm Fresh was intended to have control over the 
appurtenant sidewalks.  To the contrary, each lease makes 
clear that with respect to the sidewalks, Farm Fresh has 
nothing more than a right to "the use in common with" the 
other co-tenants.  J.A. at 373 p 2 (Colonial Ave.).6  Indeed, 
with respect to at least one of the stores, Merrimack Trail, it 
is quite clear that Farm Fresh does not have control, as the 
lease expressly states that the "sidewalks ... shall be at all 
times subject to the exclusive control and management of 
landlord."  J.A. at 523.7  Farm Fresh's mere shared right of 

__________
     6 See J.A. at 523 (Merrimack Trail) (granting use of the sidewalks 
in common with other tenants of landlord in the shopping center);  
J.A. at 196 (Shore Drive) ("All portions of the shopping center land 
... not covered by buildings, shall be common area equally avail-
able and shared in common by all tenants of the shopping center, 
their employees, agents, customers and invitees.").

     7 NLRB counsel contend that we must ignore this paragraph of 
the Merrimack Trail lease because the Union did not specifically 
call it to the Board's attention.  But the entire lease was in 
evidence, the Board expressly relied on its provisions, and the 
Union argued that taking the lease as a whole Farm Fresh lacked 
the right to control the sidewalk.  See J.A. at 690-91 (Union Br. in 

use strongly suggests that it lacks the power to exclude those 
it dislikes from the shopping center's common sidewalks.  
Indeed, to permit Farm Fresh to eject Union organizers 
would be to permit it to expel Salvation Army bell-ringers,8 a 
power we are loathe to assume a shopping center landlord 
intended to convey to its tenants.

     The Board based its contrary conclusion on its view that, 
under the statute, "it is clear that the right to invoke the 
trespass statute is not restricted to the owner or lessee of the 
property;  rather it extends broadly to a 'custodian' or 'person 
lawfully in charge' of the property."  Farm Fresh, Inc., 326 
N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 5.  This is not analysis;  it is mere 
restatement of the statutory language.  Yes, the statute does 
not restrict its scope to owners or lessees;  it also extends to 
custodians and others lawfully in charge.  However, that fact 
does not cast light on the definition of the latter category, or 
justify the Board's description of the statute as "broad" and 
"expansive."  Id.  The NLRB cited only a single Virginia 
case in support of its position, Hall v. Commonwealth, 49 
S.E.2d 369 (Va. 1948).  But Hall says nothing more than that 
"[t]he only purpose of this law is to protect the rights of the 
owners or those in lawful control of private property."  Id. at 
371.  If anything, this quotation supports the conclusion, 
drawn above, that the statutory term "custodian" was simply 
intended as a synonym for one "in lawful control."  Nor is the 
analysis advanced by learning that, unsurprisingly, the stat-
ute's "underlying purpose" is "protecting private property 
rights."  Farm Fresh, Inc., 326 N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 5.  The 
question at issue is whether Farm Fresh has a property right 

__________
Answer to Farm Fresh's Exceptions).  That is sufficient to take the 
issue out of NLRA s 10(e), 29 U.S.C. s 160(e), which precludes a 
reviewing court from considering an objection that has not been 
urged before the Board.

     8In fact, if Farm Fresh were permitted to exclude the organizers, 
it could be required to exclude other solicitors, including in some 
circumstances charitable solicitors, in order to avoid a charge of 
anti-union discrimination.  See Lucile Salter Packard Children's 
Hosp. v. NLRB, 97 F.3d 583, 587 & n.4 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

that gives it the power to exclude others from the premises 
involved.

     In its intervenor brief, Farm Fresh offers another ground 
for sustaining the Board's decision.  Although it is unable to 
find a Virginia case on point, it urges us to adopt the District 
of Columbia Court of Appeals' interpretation of that jurisdic-
tion's unlawful entry statute.  In Woll v. United States, 570 
A.2d 819 (D.C. 1990), the Court of Appeals concluded that a 
clinic located in an office building could invoke the statute to 
eject protesters, who were blocking patients' access, from an 
interior corridor shared in common with the landlord and 
other tenants.  Farm Fresh argues that the Virginia statute 
should be read the same way, and hence should permit it to 
expel the Union organizers from the sidewalks it shares with 
other shopping center tenants.

     We do expect that Virginia courts would recognize some-
thing akin to an implied easement of necessity on behalf of a 
lessee to ensure access to its leased property over the proper-
ty of the landlord.9  The existence of such an easement may 
be established if its advocate can show, inter alia, that "the 
easement is reasonably necessary for the enjoyment of the 
parcel" and that "other reasonable means of ingress and 
egress are lacking."  Cartensen v. Chrisland Corp., 442 
S.E.2d 660, 663 (Va. 1994);  see Russakoff v. Scruggs, 400 
S.E.2d 529, 532 (Va. 1991).  This requires "more than simple 
convenience," and "generally will depend upon the circum-
stances of the particular case."  Russakoff, 400 S.E.2d at 533 
(internal quotation omitted).  Moreover, where an easement 
is implied by necessity, its scope "must reflect the necessity 
which justifies the easement's existence."  7 Thompson on 
Real Property 466 (1994);  see Hudson v. American Oil Co., 
152 F. Supp. 757, 765 (E.D. Va. 1957) (stating that "the 

__________
     9 Cf. Cartensen v. Chrisland Corp., 442 S.E.2d 660, 663 (Va. 1994) 
(recognizing that implied easement can be established for one land 
owner over property of another originating from common grantor);  
Keen v. Paragon Jewel Coal Co., 122 S.E.2d 543, 546, 547 (Va. 1961) 
(finding implied easement for lessee over land owned by entity that 
granted fee to lessee's landlord).

circumstances for which the implication arises, are to be 
looked to in order to ascertain the scope and extent of the 
easement") (internal citation omitted).  Since "there is no 
express agreement, courts will be careful in interpreting how 
far the use of such an easement may go."  7 Thompson on 
Real Property 466.

     We are unable to see why the power to expel peaceful 
organizers from an adjacent sidewalk is reasonably necessary 
for the use of leased property.  To the contrary, both the 
courts and the Board itself have repeatedly rejected the 
notion that easements of access entitle employers to exclude 
union representatives from adjacent common areas.  See, e.g., 
O'Neil's Markets v. United Food and Commercial Workers 
Union, 95 F.3d 733, 739 (8th Cir. 1996) (holding that under 
Missouri law, neither a "non-exclusive easement of ingress, 
egress, and parking," nor "the exercise of control over the 
sidewalk and parking areas by repairing and maintaining the 
property," authorize employer to exclude organizers from 
sidewalk).10  We have unearthed no Virginia case in which an 
easement was implied, or the scope of an easement defined, 
by reference to anything other than the extent of the need for 
access.11  Indeed, even in Woll, the only case cited by Farm 

__________
     10 See Weis Markets, 325 N.L.R.B. 871, 883-85 (1998) (holding 
under Pennsylvania law that employer's nonexclusive right to use 
common areas is insufficient to exclude union picketers from side-
walk);  Food for Less, 318 N.L.R.B. 646, 649-50 (1995) (holding 
under Missouri law that employer failed to demonstrate that its 
"maintenance of the parking lot transformed the easement interest 
set forth in the lease into a more substantial property right 
providing the legitimate power to expel"), enforced in pertinent 
part sub nom., O'Neil's Markets, 95 F.3d at 739;  Johnson & 
Hardin, 305 N.L.R.B. at 690, 694-95 (holding under Ohio law that 
possessor of access easement cannot expel organizers unless they 
interfere with ingress or egress);  Giant Food, 295 N.L.R.B. 330, 
332 (1989) (same as Weis Markets).

     11 See, e.g., Carter v. County of Hanover, 496 S.E.2d 42, 46 (Va. 
1998) ("[A]n easement by necessity will not be found if there is 
another way of access, although less convenient and which will 
involve some labor and expense to develop.");  Russakoff, 400 

Fresh in support of its argument, the D.C. Court of Appeals 
found that the protesters who were expelled had "impeded 
patients seeking to enter and leave" the clinic.  570 A.2d at 
820;  see also O'Neil's Markets, 95 F.3d at 739 (holding that 
employer cannot exclude handbillers unless they interfere 
with the right of employer, employees and customers to use 
the easement property).  But there is nothing in the facts of 
this case to support a claim that the right to eject the 
organizers was reasonably necessary to effectuate an implied 
easement of access.  There was no allegation that the Union's 
representatives impeded access to the stores or that they 
interfered in any way with Farm Fresh's obligation to clean 
and maintain the sidewalks.

     Accordingly, we find that Farm Fresh lacked the requisite 
property interest to exclude the organizers from those side-
walks not covered by its leases.  Although we reach this 
conclusion without reference to any burdens of proof, we note 
that the applicable burdens further confirm our analysis.  
Under Indio, it is the employer that has the "threshold 
burden ... to establish that it had ... an interest which 
entitled it to exclude individuals from the property."  323 
N.L.R.B. at 1141.  Lacking any language in its lease agree-
ments or any case law regarding an implied easement theory 
that would support a right to exclude the organizers, Farm 
Fresh is unable to meet that burden.  Moreover, under 
Virginia law, the burden is also on the advocate of an implied 
easement to establish "by clear and convincing evidence" that 
the easement is reasonably necessary for the enjoyment of its 
property--a determination that depends on "the facts and 
circumstances" of each case.  Cartensen, 442 S.E.2d at 663-
64.  Hence, even if Virginia law would in some circumstances 
support an implied easement of the scope urged by Farm 

__________
S.E.2d at 532-33 (finding easement for lakeside land owner without 
which it could not attain access to lake);  Keen, 122 S.E.2d at 546 
("[T]he only way by which defendant can reach the public highway 
with coal mined from its leased land is ... over [plaintiff's] land.");  
see also Cartensen, 442 S.E.2d at 663-64 (holding that lack of 
vehicular access alone does not necessarily justify implication of 
easement for the enjoyment of a parcel of land).

Fresh, the company has failed to meet its burden of proof in 
this case because it has offered no evidence whatsoever to 
support the need for an easement of that scope at the four 
stores at issue here.

     Finally, we note that although the Board wrongly conclud-
ed that Farm Fresh had the requisite property interest based 
solely on the maintenance provisions of its leases, the lease of 
one of the four stores appears to grant Farm Fresh the lease 
to the sidewalk itself.12  The Board may, of course, consider 
this point on remand.

                               III

     We conclude that the NLRB's determination that Union 
organizers were lawfully ejected from the snack bar of one of 
Farm Fresh's stores was based upon a factual finding that is 
unsupported by substantial evidence.  We further conclude 
that the Board's determination that organizers were lawfully 
excluded from the sidewalks of four other stores was based 
on an erroneous reading of Virginia law.  Accordingly, we 
grant the Union's petition for review and remand the case for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  In addition, 
because the employer has not challenged the Board's findings 
that it violated section 8(a)(1) in those respects reflected in 
the Decision and Order below, the Board's cross-petition for 
enforcement of its Order against the company is granted.

__________
     12 See J.A. at 219 (Victory Boulevard) ("The demised premises 
... include the building ... existing thereon and the side-
walk....").  But see Farm Fresh, Inc., 326 N.L.R.B. No. 81, at 19 
(ALJ Decision) (finding inconsistent provisions and resolving ambi-
guity against Farm Fresh because of Indio burden).

                                             