                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 7, 2001   Decided December 11, 2001 

                           No. 01-7023

                         Valerie Thomas, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

          National Football League Players Association, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 91cv03332)

     Joseph A. Yablonski argued the cause the for appellant.

     David L. Rose argued the cause for the appellee.  Joshua 
N. Rose was on brief for the appellee.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson,  Circuit Judge:  The National 
Football League Players Association (NFLPA) appeals an 
award of attorney's fees to Valerie Thomas, a successful 
plaintiff in a discrimination action against the NFLPA, and 
the denial of costs against Rita Raymond and Julie Taylor-
Bland,1 unsuccessful plaintiffs in the same action.  For the 
reasons set out below, we affirm the fee award to Thomas and 
remand for entry of an award of costs to the NFLPA against 
Raymond and Taylor-Bland.

                                I.

     At a March 1988 board meeting, the NFLPA's Board of 
Directors decided to lay off eleven per cent of its workforce.  
After the meeting a number of employees, including Thomas 
and Taylor-Bland, met with the new Board president, George 
Martin.  Thomas, who had previously filed a charge of race 
and gender discrimination with the Equal Employment Op-
portunity Commission, complained of the lack of promotional 
opportunities for blacks and women at the NFLPA.  At a 
second staff meeting the following month, Thomas again 
raised these concerns.  Subsequently, Martin and NFLPA 
Board vice president Mike Davis conducted private interviews 
with employees, including Thomas, Taylor-Bland and Ray-
mond.

     On March 18, 1988 Gene Upshaw, NFLPA Executive Di-
rector, after conferring with Martin and Davis, laid off Thom-
as, Raymond and four other employees.  On April 12, 1988 
Upshaw terminated all but one of the six laid-off employees 
"for cause," namely that they "made libelous and slanderous 
statements concerning NFLPA's executive personnel, violat-
ed the confidentiality and trust required [of them], were 
disloyal to NFLPA, and engaged in other acts which were 
intended to undermine NFLPA's effectiveness in serving the 
interests of its members."  Joint Appendix (JA) 154.  Accord-
ing to Upshaw's trial testimony, he fired Thomas and Ray-
mond because of statements they had made to Martin and 
Davis and because he believed they were responsible for 

__________
     1 Julie Taylor-Bland was formerly Julie Bland.

circulating a pamphlet critical of the NFLPA's treatment of 
employees.  A short time later Taylor-Bland, who had been 
Upshaw's secretary, was reassigned to what she considered 
an inferior position.  She resigned on June 13, 1988.  Thomas 
and Raymond pursued union grievances over their termi-
nation resulting in an arbitrator's award ordering them rein-
stated.  The NFLPA, however, did not reinstate them.

     Thomas, Raymond and Taylor-Bland filed this suit in De-
cember 1991 pursuant to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, 42 U.S.C.A. ss 2000e et seq.  Their Fourth Amended 
Complaint alleged the NFLPA (1) failed to promote all three 
plaintiffs as a part of a pattern of racial and gender discrimi-
nation in promotions;  (2) laid off Thomas and Raymond and 
transferred Taylor-Bland on account of their race and gender 
and in retaliation for Thomas's filing a discrimination charge, 
Raymond's filing a grievance2 and the three employees' vocal 
opposition to discriminatory practices;  (3) discharged Thomas 
and Raymond and constructively discharged Taylor-Bland on 
account of their race and gender and in retaliation for their 
opposition to discriminatory practices;  (4) failed to reinstate 
Thomas and Raymond pursuant to the arbitrator's award on 
account of their race and gender and in retaliation for their 
protected activities;  and (5) failed to pay Thomas a salary 
equal to those of male employees doing substantially the same 
work.

     During a bench trial in December 1995, the district court 
dismissed the arbitration claim and granted judgment as a 
matter of law in the NFLPA's favor on the pattern of 
discrimination claim.3  After trial the district court issued a 
memorandum opinion and order on July 24, 1996 granting 
judgment in favor of Thomas on her retaliation claims and 
awarded her back pay and benefits of $70,840 (plus prejudg-
ment interest) for the period from her March 1988 lay-off to 
December 1989, by which time, the court concluded, Thomas 

__________
     2 In 1987 Raymond had complained to her local of race and 
gender discrimination after being denied a promotion for which she 
applied.

     3 The equal pay claim had been dismissed by stipulated order on 
October 13, 1995.

would have been re-employed had she diligently sought new 
employment.  At the same time the court granted judgment 
in favor of the NFLPA on all of Raymond's and Taylor-
Bland's claims.  JA 167.

     On August 1, 1996 the NFLPA filed a bill of costs, assert-
ing it was the prevailing party and therefore entitled to 
recover costs against Raymond and Taylor-Bland "totally and 
completely" and "on eight of the ten race, sex, and retaliation 
claims asserted by Thomas."  JA 168.  The district court 
denied the NFLPA its costs in an order filed October 15, 1996 
and in a memorandum filed November 26, 1996.

     The NFLPA appealed the judgment in favor of Thomas.  
This court affirmed the judgment but remanded for the 
district court to reconsider the amount of prejudgment inter-
est.  Thomas v. National Football League Players Ass'n, 131 
F.3d 198 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (as vacated in part on rehearing 
Feb. 25, 1998).4

     After remand the district court issued a memorandum 
order and an amended judgment on March 25, 1999 awarding 
Thomas $73,390.60 in back pay, fringe benefits and pre-
judgment interest, plus post-judgment interest from October 
21, 1996.  JA 213-15.  On May 28, 1999 Thomas filed a 
motion for costs, including attorney's fees pursuant to 42 
U.S.C. s 2000e-5(k),5 of $563,637, JA 216, which she correct-
ed to $505,138.23 on June 30, 1999, JA 406.  In a memoran-
dum opinion and order filed March 29, 2000 the district court 
denied the motion but granted leave to file a new motion 
conforming to guidelines set out in the opinion.  JA 457.

__________
     4 The NFLPA also appealed the denial of its costs but the court 
did not reach the issue.

     5 This section provides:

     In any action or proceeding under this subchapter the court, in 
     its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the 
     Commission or the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee 
     (including expert fees) as part of the costs, and the Commission 
     and the United States shall be liable for costs the same as a 
     private person.
     
     Thomas filed a new motion on August 29, 2000 seeking total 
costs of $394,950, including attorney's fees of $355,193.  JA 
466.  In a memorandum order filed December 15, 2000 the 
district court reduced the fee award to approximately 
$338,000.6  JA 501-10.

     The NFLPA appealed both the amount of the attorney's 
fees awarded and the denial of its costs.  We address the 
challenges separately.

                               II.

     On appeal we may overturn the district court's award of 
attorney's fees " 'only if it represents an abuse of discretion.' " 
Williams v. First Government Mortgage and Investors Corp., 
225 F.3d 738, 746 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (quoting Copeland v. 
Marshall, 641 F.2d 880, 901 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (en banc)).  
Further, the district court's underlying findings of fact will be 
sustained unless clearly erroneous.  See City of Riverside v. 
Rivera, 477 U.S. 561, 572 (1986).  Applying these standards 
we uphold the district court's attorney's fee award.

     The NFLPA contends the amount of the attorney's fee 
award is excessive for three reasons.  First, it challenges the 
fee award on the ground it is excessive in relation to the 
limited success achieved, given that only one of three plain-
tiffs prevailed on only two of her claims.  In Hensley v. 
Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424 (1983), the United States Supreme 
Court laid out the standards for awarding fees to a plaintiff 
who, like Thomas, achieves only limited success:

     Where the plaintiff has failed to prevail on a claim that is 
     distinct in all respects from his successful claims, the 
     hours spent on the unsuccessful claim should be excluded 
     in considering the amount of a reasonable fee.  Where a 
     lawsuit consists of related claims, a plaintiff who has won 
     substantial relief should not have his attorney's fee re-
     
__________
     6 The court provided only an estimate of the new figure in 
recognition that "the several deductions required by the rulings set 
forth in [its] memorandum w[ould] have to be calculated by plain-
tiff's counsel (and a new form submitted)."  JA 507.

     duced simply because the district court did not adopt 
     each contention raised.  But where the plaintiff achieved 
     only limited success, the district court should award only 
     that amount of fees that is reasonable in relation to the 
     results obtained.
     
461 U.S. at 440.  We conclude the district court reasonably 
applied the Hensley factors in calculating Thomas's fee 
award.

     "Evaluation of the interrelatedness of several claims within 
a single lawsuit, and of the legal work done on those claims, is 
most appropriately a task for the district court that heard and 
decided the case...."  Hensley, 461 U.S. at 453 (Brennan, J., 
concurring). The district court adequately performed the task 
here.  In the March 29, 2000 decision denying Thomas's 
initial fee petition the district court acknowledged the limited 
nature of her success and properly segregated Thomas's 
successful claims from the unsuccessful ones.  The court 
expressly found that "her unsuccessful claims of discriminato-
ry layoff and discharge were related to her successful claim of 
discrimination" but that her "pattern and practice claim of 
discriminatory failure to promote was 'distinctly different' 
from her other claims" and that her counsel therefore "may 
recover no fees for their work on that claim."  JA 462.  The 
court also concluded, appropriately, that Thomas should not 
recover fees "for segregable time devoted to the failed indi-
vidual claims of Ms. Raymond and Ms. Taylor-Bland."  JA 
462.  While noting that Thomas's counsel had "already 
backed out of the fee petition 'time and expenses unique to 
the factual proof of the pattern of promotions claim and to the 
individual claims of Raymond and Bland,' " JA 462-63,7 the 
court emphasized that the resubmitted costs motion should be 
limited to fees incurred "in connection with Ms. Thomas's 
claim of retaliation and of discriminatory layoff and dis-

__________
     7 According to Thomas's counsel's declaration, they had "excluded 
approximately $42,000 of time and expenses from the amount 
claimed ... based on lack of success on the Raymond and Bland 
claims and on the statistical promotion case."  JA 451.

charge."  See JA 463.  After Thomas resubmitted her motion, 
the court noted that the new fee amount was "some 22 
percent less than the amount previously requested," JA 501, 
and found that counsel had "made a good-faith effort to 'back 
out' time principally related to plaintiff's pattern and practice 
claims and the failed individual claims of Ms. Raymond and 
Ms. Taylor-Bland," JA 507.  We cannot say this finding is 
clearly erroneous.  Nonetheless, the court further reduced 
the time claimed by 23.75 hours based on the NFLPA's 
specific objections, see JA 501-03, and found that the result-
ing award of approximately $338,000 was not "unreasonable 
in relation to the overall result achieved" given the length of 
the litigation and the "dilatory" defense waged, JA 508-09.8  
This finding too must be sustained.  That the fees awarded 
are, as the district court acknowledged, "nearly five times the 
amount of plaintiff's recovery," JA 507, does not make them 
excessive.  See City of Riverside, 477 U.S. at 576 ("[R]eason-
able attorney's fees under s 1988 are not conditioned upon 
and need not be proportionate to an award of money dam-
ages.");  cf. Williams, 225 F.3d at 747 ("declin[ing] to read a 
'rule of proportionality' into the [District of Columbia Con-
sumer Protection Procedures Act]").

     The NFLPA further challenges the fee award on the 
ground Thomas did not offer adequate billing records to 
substantiate the apportionment of time among the successful 
and unsuccessful claims.  We reject this contention as well.  
The district court acknowledged that the records "were not in 
the best of shape,"--and accordingly reduced the costs 
awarded Thomas for time spent responding to the NFLPA's 
interrogatories about the records.  JA 502-03.  Nevertheless, 
the court found the records sufficient to support the fee 
awarded and, reviewing the record, we cannot say its finding 
was clearly erroneous.

__________
     8 The court characterized the defense as " 'dilatory' in the classic 
sense, ... not to state or imply that the defense was in any way 
improper, or harassing, or oppressive" but "simply the unfortunate 
stuff of modern, knock-down, drag-out litigation."  JA 508.

     Finally, the NFLPA asserts that under Rule 68 Thomas is 
ineligible for any costs, including attorney's fees, incurred 
after August 14, 1995.  Rule 68 provides in relevant part:

     At any time more than 10 days before the trial begins, a 
     party defending against a claim may serve upon the 
     adverse party an offer to allow judgment to be taken 
     against the defending party for the money or property or 
     to the effect specified in the offer, with costs then 
     accrued.  If within 10 days after the service of the offer 
     the adverse party serves written notice that the offer is 
     accepted, either party may then file the offer and notice 
     of acceptance together with proof of service thereof and 
     thereupon the clerk shall enter judgment.  An offer not 
     accepted shall be deemed withdrawn and evidence there-
     of is not admissible except in a proceeding to determine 
     costs. If the judgment finally obtained by the offeree is 
     not more favorable than the offer, the offeree must pay 
     the costs incurred after the making of the offer.
     
Fed. R. Civ. P. 68.  The NFLPA contends that its August 14, 
1995 offer of $60,000 to the three plaintiffs shifted all post-
offer costs, including attorney's fees, to Thomas because the 
offer exceeded her final recovery which, if pre-judgment 
interest were calculated at the 52-week Treasury-Bill rate as 
of that date, was only $59,018.70, that is, below the $60,000 
offer of judgment.  We reject this argument for two reasons.

     First, the district court in fact calculated pre-judgment 
interest at the prime rate of interest rather than at the 
Treasury-Bill rate.  See JA 167.  The NFLPA does not 
dispute that with interest calculated at the higher prime rate 
Thomas's final recovery exceeds the NFLPA's $60,000 offer 
of judgment.  Nor can the NFLPA effectively challenge the 
propriety of using the prime rate.  See Forman v. Korean 
Air Lines Co., Ltd., 84 F.3d 446, 451 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 
519 U.S. 10 (1996) ("[W]e think the Seventh Circuit is cor-
rect--that the prime rate is not merely as appropriate as the 
Treasury Bill rate, but more appropriate....") (emphasis 
original;  citing In re Oil Spill by the Amoco Cadiz Off the 
Coast of France, 954 F.2d 1279, 1332 (7th Cir.1992)).

     Second, we agree with the Seventh Circuit's decision in 
Gavoni v. Dobbs House, Inc., 164 F.3d 1071, 1075 (7th Cir. 
1999), that an unallocated offer of judgment to multiple 
defendants is not effective under Rule 68.  The Seventh 
Circuit rested its decision on two grounds:  (1) "A judgment 
less favorable than the offer requires that a plaintiff pay the 
defendant's usually substantial post-offer costs and [t]here 
must therefore be a clear baseline from which plaintiffs may 
evaluate the merits of their case relative to the value of the 
offer" and (2) "courts also need easily comparable sums."  
164 F.3d at 1076.  Because the record does not reflect that 
the individual plaintiffs knew the value to each of them of the 
lump-sum offer, they "simply could not have evaluated the 
individualized values of the offer" and "without two precise 
figures to compare, the district court was in no position to 
resolve the lack of precision."  Id.  Accordingly, we conclude 
the joint offer of judgment did not trigger Rule 68's cost-
shifting provision.

     For these reasons we conclude the district court's award of 
attorney's fees to Thomas should be affirmed.9

__________
     9 The NFLPA also contends the district court was required to 
consider as a factor in awarding fees that Thomas and her counsel 
adopted "unreasonable settlement positions" during the litigation.  
See Brief for Appellant at 38-40.  The district court has discretion 
to consider settlement negotiations in determining the reasonable-
ness of fees but it is not required to do so. See Sands v. Runyon, 28 
F.3d 1323, 1334 (2d Cir. 1994) ("[T]he Postal Service made an offer 
of judgment in December 1992 that would have given plaintiff a 
back pay award equal to the amount calculated by his own expert, 
and paying his attorney one-half of her requested fees. The district 
court remarked that this offer was strikingly similar to the court's 
eventual judgment in 1993. This is a factor a court may use in 
considering the attorney's fee award.");  Vocca v. Playboy Hotel of 
Chicago, Inc., 686 F.2d 605, 608 (7th Cir. 1982) ("Counsel's refusal 
to settle the case earlier for an amount only slightly less than the 
amount ultimately agreed upon, accompanied by his statement that 
Playboy could afford to pay more, provide sufficient support for the 
district court's conclusion that he had unreasonably prolonged the 
litigation.").  The court's decision not to do so below was not an 
abuse of its discretion.

                               III.

     Finally, the NFLPA contends the district court should have 
awarded it costs insofar as it was the "prevailing party" 
against Raymond and Taylor-Bland.10  As noted above, the 
NFLPA filed a bill of costs on August 1, 1996, seeking 
$11,112.35 for transcripts, copies of trial exhibits and copying 
costs.  JA 168.  In a memorandum opinion dated November 
26, 1996 the district court concluded the NFLPA was not 
entitled to costs because "the court consider[ed] plaintiff 
Thomas to be the prevailing party."  JA 179.  We agree with 
the NFLPA that this ruling was an abuse of the district 
court's discretion.

     Rule 54(d)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
provides in relevant part:  "Except when express provision 
therefor is made either in a statute of the United States or in 
these rules, costs other than attorneys' fees shall be allowed 
as of course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise 
directs...."  Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(d)(1).  While Thomas may 
have been the sole prevailing party on her own claims against 
the NFLPA, it is uncontestable that the NFLPA was the sole 
prevailing party on the claims asserted by Raymond and 
Taylor-Bland.  Thus, under the plain language of Rule 
54(d)(1) the NFLPA is entitled to recover costs against them 
"as a matter of course."  See Byers v. Dallas Morning News, 
209 F.3d 419, 425-26 (5th Cir. 2000) (successful Title VII 
employer is entitled to costs under express language of Rule 
54)d)(1)).11

     For the preceding reasons we affirm the award of attor-
ney's fees to Thomas and remand to the district court to 
award the NFLPA costs under Rule 54(d)(1) as the "prevail-
ing party" against Raymond and Taylor-Bland.

                                                                      So ordered.
__________
     10 As noted above, the NFLPA's bill of costs below sought costs 
against Thomas as well.  On appeal the NFLPA appears not to do 
so.  See Brief for Appellant at 41-42.

     11 Thomas's counsel contend that the bill of costs filed August 1, 
1996 was "premature" because it was submitted before a judgment 
was filed.  We are aware of no support for this contention, either in 
Rule 54 or case law, and, accordingly, reject it summarily.                                