                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 8, 2001      Decided June 29, 2001 

                           No. 00-1170

                  Honeywell International, Inc.,
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

       International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace & 
           Agricultural Implement Workers of America, 
                         UAW, Local 376, 
                            Intervenor

                        Consolidated with 
                           No. 00-1274

          On Petitions for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

                            ---------

     Philip Allen Lacovara argued the cause for petitioner 
Honeywell International, Inc.  With him on the briefs was 
Charles P. O'Connor.

     Thomas W. Meiklejohn argued the cause and filed the brief 
for petitioner United Automobile Workers of America.  Gregg 
D. Adler entered an appearance.

     David A. Fleischer, Senior Attorney, National Labor Rela-
tions Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were John H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, 
and Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel.  
David S. Habenstreit, Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Philip Allen Lacovara and Charles P. O'Connor were on 
the brief for intervenor Honeywell International, Inc.

     Thomas W. Meiklejohn was on the brief for intervenor 
United Automobile Workers of America.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  From 1984 until October 1994, 
Textron Corporation operated the United States Army's 
Stratford Army Engine plant.  Under contract with the 
Army, Textron produced gas turbine engines for helicopters, 
airplanes and tanks.

     The United Auto Workers Union, Local Nos. 376 and 1010, 
represented many of the workers at the Stratford Army 
Engine plant.  The unions had a collective bargaining agree-
ment with Textron that was set to expire on May 30, 1994.  
On May 12, 1994, while negotiations for a new collective 
bargaining agreement were underway, Textron announced 
that it was to be acquired by AlliedSignal.  (AlliedSignal has 
since been acquired by Honeywell International, the named 
petitioner in this case.)

     Concerned about the impact of the change in ownership, 
the unions demanded that Textron collectively bargain about 
the effects of the proposed acquisition.  The ensuing negotia-

tions resulted in three agreements.  On June 19, 1994, the 
unions and Textron signed a new collective bargaining agree-
ment which incorporated two other agreements concerning 
"conditions and benefits which shall be applicable in the event 
that the Company should sell its assets to a third-party 
purchaser."  These agreements were known as the Effects 
Bargaining Agreement and the Competitiveness Agreement.

     Understanding the Competitiveness Agreement requires an 
understanding of the business at the Stratford plant.  The 
plant produced engines for both civilian and military custom-
ers in the Army's facility under a dual lease.  For many 
years, the plant had focused on producing tank engines for 
the military, but the Army was planning no further purchases 
of AGT-1500 engines, the plant's main product.

     Despite this, AlliedSignal found Textron's Stratford busi-
ness attractive because of likely additional government fund-
ing.  A "blue ribbon" defense panel had recommended that 
the government maintain the Stratford plant's capacity to 
produce tank engines, should they be needed in the future as 
well as to continue to make improvements to current engines.  
The panel also recommended that the Stratford plant contin-
ue operations under a dual lease that would allow the plant's 
operator to produce both military and civilian engines.  In all, 
AlliedSignal anticipated some $30 to $40 million a year in 
government support for its operations at the Stratford site.

     Recognizing this need for continued government support, 
the Competitiveness Agreement included the following lan-
guage:

     ... AlliedSignal intends to make application to appropri-
     ate officials of the United States Government for finan-
     cial arrangements in an amount considered by AlliedSig-
     nal to be adequate to support the future of the Stratford 
     Plant by AlliedSignal on a stand-by basis for the produc-
     tion of the AGT1500 engine, if active procurement of the 
     engine should cease.  AlliedSignal and the Union shall 
     exert their best efforts to work together and to coordi-
     nate actively in the efforts to obtain such adequate 
     
     financial arrangements from either the federal govern-
     ment or some alternative governmental funding source.
     
     ....
     
          After AlliedSignal makes such an application to the 
     Government, if no provision to fund such financial ar-
     rangements in the amount sought by AlliedSignal shall 
     be made in the federal budget as thereafter enacted by 
     the Congress of the United States, then at any time after 
     such next enactment of a federal budget, AlliedSignal 
     may terminate this Competitiveness Agreement....
     
     Pursuant to the Competitiveness Agreement, AlliedSignal 
and the unions worked during the summer of 1994 to obtain 
funding for the military's plan to maintain the Stratford 
plant's capacity.  In September 1994, shortly before Allied-
Signal completed its purchase of the plant, Congress approp-
riated more than $47 million to the Army to maintain the 
plant for fiscal year 1995.

     In February 1995 the Secretary of Defense recommended 
closing the Stratford plant as part of ongoing efforts to 
reduce the size of the military.  The recommendation was 
taken up by the Defense Base Closure and Realignment 
Commission.  See Defense Base Closure and Realignment 
Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-510, 104 Stat. 1808 (amended 
1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996).  While awaiting the Commis-
sion's decision, the Defense Department refused to release 
the funds appropriated for the Stratford plant, thinking it 
wasteful to spend money to maintain a plant likely to be 
closed.  The withheld funds and the ongoing review by the 
Commission touched off more lobbying efforts.

     In April 1995, a coalition consisting of the unions, AlliedSig-
nal and federal, state and local political representatives con-
vinced the Department of Defense to release the funds ear-
marked for 1995.  Efforts to influence the Commission were 
less successful.  On June 23, 1995, the Commission decided in 
favor of closing the Stratford facility.  Under the provisions 
of the Base Closure and Realignment Act, the Commission's 
recommendation was then sent to the President for review.  
The President accepted the Commission's recommendations 

and forwarded them to Congress, which had 45 days to 
disapprove of the recommendations.  When it did not do so, 
the Stratford plant was officially slated to be closed.  On July 
15, 1995, the company sent the Stratford employees a letter 
explaining the Commissions's decision and saying that it did 
not think "an economic case c[ould] be made to remain in 
Stratford without the ownership and support of the Army."  
The unions took this as a signal that AlliedSignal intended to 
close the Stratford plant.  On September 29, 1995, AlliedSig-
nal informed the unions that it was terminating the Competi-
tiveness Agreement.  The unions contended that AlliedSignal 
could not terminate the Competitiveness Agreement because 
the company had received funds for fiscal year 1995.

     Local 1010 filed two charges against the company stem-
ming from these events.  The first charge accused the compa-
ny of "fail[ing] to bargain in good faith with the ... UAW by 
unilaterally withdrawing the competitiveness agreement, re-
fus[ing] to provide relevent [sic] information and refusing to 
bargain the decision and effects of the plant closure."

     In prosecuting the case before the Board, the General 
Counsel claimed that AlliedSignal had violated s 8(a)(5) of the 
National Labor Relations Act by terminating the contract.  
See 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5).  Section 8(a)(5) requires that the 
company "bargain collectively with the representatives of his 
employees."  29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5).  The Act further indi-
cates that collective bargaining includes the requirement that 
"no party to such a contract shall terminate or modify such 
contract, unless the party" follows certain procedures not 
relevant here.  29 U.S.C. s 158(d).  It is an unfair labor 
practice for a company to terminate or modify contract 
provisions regarding mandatory subjects of bargaining when 
the contract's term has not ended.  See Allied Chem. & 
Alkali Workers v. Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., 404 U.S. 157, 
159 (1971);  UAW v. NLRB, 765 F.2d 175, 1799-80 (D.C. Cir. 
1985).  In essence the General Counsel charged that Allied-
Signal had violated s 8(a)(5) by terminating all of the contract 
provisions before the contract's term had expired.

     The Administrative Law Judge treated the question wheth-
er the term of the AlliedSignal contract had ended as a 
matter of contract interpretation;  both parties, the ALJ 
thought, had reasonable arguments about the meaning of the 
termination clause.  See AlliedSignal Aerospace, 330 
N.L.R.B. No. 175, slip op. at 12 (NLRB Apr. 12, 2000).  The 
ALJ drew on a long line of Board cases holding that, when an 
issue is one solely of contract interpretation, it will not decide 
the matter if the company had a "sound arguable basis" for 
its interpretations and the actions it took pursuant to that 
interpretation.  See NCR Corp., 271 N.L.R.B. 1212, 1213 
(1984).  The ALJ therefore ruled that AlliedSignal had not 
violated the Act.

     The Board reversed.  To its mind, the "sound arguable 
basis" test did not apply because AlliedSignal was "alleged to 
have repudiated the CA in its entirety."  AlliedSignal, slip 
op. at 4.  To the Board, "the issue of whether the Respondent 
could lawfully cancel the CA is more than a mere contract 
dispute.  It is situated at the threshold of matters going to 
the heart of the collective bargaining relationship...."  Id. 
[JA 6] Thus, the Board concluded that AlliedSignal had 
violated s 8(a)(5) of the Act by refusing to bargain over a 
mandatory subject matter.  See 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5).  Mem-
ber Hurtgen dissented on the basis that the "sound arguable 
basis test" applied because this was a contract dispute.

     The Board's decision was contrary to its own precedents. It 
distorted the nature of the Competitiveness Agreement on 
the basis of an arbitrary distinction it had no power to make 
in the first place.  As to its precedents, the Board claims that 
it has refrained from applying the "sound arguable basis" test 
when "the circumstances involved more than a mere matter 
of contract interpretation."  Id.  The three cases the Board 
cites hold no such thing.  In Trojan Yacht, the Board de-
clined to apply the "sound arguable basis" test because the 
dispute centered on a provision of a "side agreement" not 
incorporated into the collective bargaining agreement.  319 
N.L.R.B. 741, 744 n.5 (1995).  If anything, Trojan Yacht 
indicates that the Board forgoes the "sound arguable basis" 
test not when a contract provision is central to the collective 

bargaining relationship--as it claims the Competitiveness 
Agreement is here--but when the contract issue is peripheral 
to the relationship.  Flatbush Manor is also of no help to the 
Board.  In that case, the Board upheld an ALJ's determina-
tion that an employer had committed an unfair labor practice 
by failing to make contractually-required pension plan pay-
ments.  315 N.L.R.B. 15, 21 (1994).  Responding to a "sound 
arguable basis" claim, the Board concluded that the payments 
had "indisputably accrued" and adopted the ALJ's order.  Id. 
at 15 n.1.  The only way to read this is that the Board 
rejected the notion that there was even a sound arguable 
basis for the company's defense.  This is in marked contrast 
to the case at hand, where the ALJ concluded--and the 
Board did not dispute--that both parties had reasonable 
arguments about the meaning of the contract provisions.

     Also puzzling is the Board's citation to Oak Cliff-Golman 
Baking Company as support for its decision here.  In that 
case, one member of the Board indicated that he would affirm 
the finding of an unfair labor practice because there was no 
sound arguable basis for the employer's contract defense.  
See 207 N.L.R.B. 1063 (1973), enforced, 505 F.2d 1302 (5th 
Cir. 1974).  The other two members said that they would 
affirm the ALJ because they did not agree with the policy 
underlying the Board's general practice of deferring to con-
tractual arbitration procedures.  See id.

     The short of the matter is that none of the precedents cited 
in the Board's opinion supported its decision regarding the 
arguable basis test.  The reason is obvious. The Board's 
decision is not consistent with the its past practice.  For 
example, in Cement Masons, Local 627, the Board faced the 
question whether a short-term collective bargaining agree-
ment had been properly terminated.  See 274 N.L.R.B. 1286, 
1286-87 (1985).  The Board invoked the "sound arguable 
basis" doctrine and found that both parties had reasonable 
interpretations of the agreement's terms.  Therefore no un-
fair labor practice had occurred.  See id. at 1287-88.  Cement 
Masons is indistinguishable from this case.  Without more, 
the Board's departure from precedent without a reasoned 
analysis renders its decision arbitrary and capricious.  See 

Wisconsin Valley Improvement Co. v. FERC, 236 F.3d 738, 
748 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

     In any event, this case may fit the Board's newly-devised 
"heart of the collective bargaining relationship" distinction 
only by distorting its facts.  The Competitiveness Agreement 
was but one of three separate agreements between the unions 
and the company.  They had also entered into a master 
collective bargaining agreement and an Effects Bargaining 
Agreement.  It is undisputed that neither of these agree-
ments was terminated when the company decided to termi-
nate the Competitiveness Agreement.  So, it cannot be true 
that the company's decision to terminate the Competitiveness 
Agreement constituted a repudiation of the entire bargaining 
relationship.

     Factual distortions aside, the Board's approach to this case 
flies in the face of this court's clear precedent construing the 
Board's power to interpret contracts.  The Board is empow-
ered to interpret collective bargaining agreements when do-
ing so is necessary to determine whether an unfair labor 
practice has occurred.  See NLRB v. C & C Plywood Corp., 
385 U.S. 421, 429 (1967).  But the federal courts, not the 
Board, are legislatively empowered to be the primary inter-
preters of contracts.  See Litton Fin. Printing Div. v. NLRB, 
501 U.S. 190, 202-03 (1991);  see also 29 U.S.C. s 185 (grant-
ing federal district courts jurisdiction over breach of contract 
claims arising out of collective bargaining contracts).  The 
boundaries of the Board's interpretive jurisdiction are 
marked in C & C Plywood:  the Board may interpret a 
contract "only so far as ... necessary to determine" what 
statutory rights the party has given up by agreeing to a 
particular contract.  See C & C Plywood, 385 U.S. at 428.

     This principle is at the root of the "contract coverage" 
doctrine.  When an "employer acts pursuant to a claim of 
right under the parties' agreement, the resolution of the 
refusal to bargain charge rests on an interpretation of the 
contract at issue."  NLRB v. United States Postal Serv., 8 
F.3d 832, 837 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  And as we have often 
reminded the Board, when a contract's terms cover a manda-

tory subject of bargaining, the contract represents the result 
of the union's exercise of its bargaining rights.  See BP 
Amoco Corp. v. NLRB, 217 F.3d 869, 872-73 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  
United States Postal Serv., 8 F.3d at 836;  Connors v. Link 
Coal Co., 970 F.2d 902, 905 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  An employer 
cannot be deemed to have "refuse[d] to bargain collectively," 
29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5), over a particular subject when it has 
bargained over that subject matter and memorialized the 
results in a contract.  Once the Board determines that a 
contract covers a mandatory subject of bargaining, its inter-
pretive task is at an end.  If the parties wish to enforce their 
contract, they may do so pursuant to an arbitration clause or 
by bringing suit under 29 U.S.C. s 185.

     The Board in this case made no attempt to determine 
whether the contract covers the issue of the conditions prece-
dent to termination.  This is of no moment, as we review the 
Board's construction of contracts de novo.  See Litton Fin. 
Printing, 501 U.S. at 202-03.  It is inconceivable that the 
clause does not cover the conditions under which the agree-
ment can be terminated.  The Competitiveness Agreement 
plainly indicates that if certain conditions are met, the compa-
ny may terminate the contract.

     The Board's own language demonstrates that this is the 
case.  It notes that the "parties do not dispute that section 6 
expressly required the Respondent to take certain steps 
before it was permissible to cancel the agreement short of its 
term."  AlliedSignal, slip op. at 4.  The Board then offered a 
protracted analysis of the question whether the conditions 
precedent had actually been met.  See id. at 4-5.  Among the 
arguments it considered was AlliedSignal's claim that seeking 
further funding was futile in light of the fact that the plant 
was slated for closure.  See id. at 5.  Futility, of course, is an 
age-old contract defense.  See 2 E. Allen Farnsworth, Farns-
worth on Contracts ss 9.5-9.9a (1990).  Likewise, the ques-
tion whether AlliedSignal made sufficient efforts to fulfill its 
end of the bargain is one of contract interpretation.  See id. 
s 9.1a.  By injecting itself into a purely contractual dispute, 
the Board assumed a role Congress denied it through 29 
U.S.C. s 185.

     The petition for review is granted and the Board's decision 
is set aside.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                                             