                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued December 7, 2001    Decided March 5, 2002 

                           No. 01-5013

                    State of Arizona, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                       Tommy G. Thompson, 
           Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
       Dennis P. Williams, Acting Assistant Secretary for 
                     Management and Budget, 
          U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv00860)

     Charles A. Miller argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellants.  Phyllis D. Thompson entered an appearance.

     Anne Murphy, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause for appellees.  With her on the brief was Scott 
R. McIntosh, Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Six states seek review of a di-
rective of the Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS) that bars them from using Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families (TANF) grants to pay for the common costs 
of administering the TANF, Medicaid, and Food Stamp pro-
grams.  We conclude that HHS erroneously determined that 
it was without discretion to permit those expenditures.

                                I

     Prior to 1996, three important federal programs provided 
assistance to people in need:  Aid to Families with Dependent 
Children (AFDC), 42 U.S.C. s 601 et seq. (1994);  Medicaid, 
id. s 1396a et seq.;  and the Food Stamp program, 7 U.S.C. 
s 2011 et seq.  In 1996, Congress passed the Personal Re-
sponsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, 
referred to by the parties as the "Welfare Reform Act," Pub. 
L. No. 104-193, 110 Stat. 2105 (codified as amended in 
scattered sections of Title 42 and other titles of U.S.C.).  The 
Welfare Reform Act replaced AFDC with the TANF pro-
gram.  Unlike AFDC, which was an individual entitlement 
program, TANF provides federal block grants that states 
may use for their own public assistance programs.  See 42 
U.S.C. s 601 et seq.;  H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 104-725, at 261 
(1996);  H.R. Rep. No. 104-651, at 1322 (1996).  The amount of 
a state's TANF grant is based on the amount of the reim-
bursement paid to the state under AFDC during an historical 
base period.  See 42 U.S.C. s 603.  In order to receive a 
TANF grant, a state must submit a state plan, which HHS 
must approve, describing how the state intends to use the 
grant.  Id. s 602.  A state may spend its grant "in any 
manner that is reasonably calculated to accomplish the pur-
pose of" the TANF program, or "in any manner that the 

State was authorized to use amounts received" under AFDC.  
Id. s 604(a).

     This case involves the use of TANF grants to pay the costs 
of program administration.  Prior to the enactment of the 
Welfare Reform Act, the federal government reimbursed 50% 
of most state administrative expenditures for each of the 
three programs--AFDC, Medicaid, and Food Stamps--with-
out a dollar limit on the amount of administrative expendi-
tures eligible for federal reimbursement.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 603(a)(3) (1994) (AFDC);  id. s 1396b(a)(7) (Medicaid);  7 
U.S.C. s 2025(a) (Food Stamps).  This partial reimbursement 
scheme continues for Medicaid and Food Stamps.  As noted, 
however, TANF is a block grant program, under which a 
state receives a fixed amount of federal funds.  A state may 
use those funds to administer the TANF program, but "shall 
not expend more than 15 percent of the grant for administra-
tive purposes."  42 U.S.C. s 604(b)(1).

     The specific point at issue here is whether states may use 
their TANF funds to pay for all of the costs that are common 
to the administration of TANF, Medicaid, and Food Stamps.  
Such costs may include, for example, the expense of deter-
mining the eligibility of applicants for assistance where the 
relevant criteria are common to all three programs, the cost 
of leasing offices and hiring employees who administer all of 
the programs, and the cost of administering databases con-
taining the records of individuals who receive benefits under 
all of the programs.

     For the past thirty years, the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) has issued government-wide standards con-
cerning the allocation of the costs of government programs.1  
OMB Circular A-87 provides that, ordinarily, costs that bene-
fit multiple programs funded by federal grants must be 
allocated among the benefiting programs "in accordance with 
relative benefits received," rather than allocated to a single 
program.  Cost Principles for State, Local, and Indian Tribal 

__________
     1 See, e.g., Exec. Order No. 11,541 s 1(a), (b), 35 Fed. Reg. 10,737 
(July 2, 1970).

Governments, OMB Circular A-87, Attach. A, p C.3.a (1997).2  
The parties refer to this principle as "benefiting program 
allocation."  Since 1988, HHS has incorporated by reference 
OMB Circular A-87 in its own regulations and guidance 
documents.  See 45 C.F.R. s 92.22;  see also id. s 74.27 
(adopted in 1994);  Implementation Guide for OMB Circular 
A-87, Cost Principles and Procedures for Developing Cost 
Allocation Plans and Indirect Cost Rates for Agreements with 
the Federal Government, ASMB C-10 (HHS April 1997).3

     Notwithstanding the benefiting program allocation princi-
ple of OMB Circular A-87, during the life of the AFDC 
program HHS permitted states to allocate entirely to AFDC 
all costs that were common to administration of the AFDC, 
Medicaid, and Food Stamp programs.  The parties refer to 
this approach, in which common costs are allocated to a single 
program, as "primary program allocation."  Its application to 
the AFDC program was regarded as an exception to the 
general rule of Circular A-87.4

     Following passage of the Welfare Reform Act and creation 
of the TANF program, HHS moved to stop states from 

__________
     2 The current version of Circular A-87 is a 1997 amendment of 
the 1995 version.  See Government Wide Grants Management 
Requirements, 62 Fed. Reg. 45,934 (OMB Aug. 27, 1997) (amending 
Cost Principles for State, Local, and Indian Tribal Governments, 60 
Fed. Reg. 26,484 (OMB May 17, 1995)).  The 1995 version was, in 
turn, a revision of a document published in 1981.  See Cost Princi-
ples for State and Local Governments, 46 Fed. Reg. 9548 (OMB 
Jan. 28, 1981) (reissuing Federal Management Circular 74-4 as 
OMB Circular A-87).  The provision cited in the text above has 
remained substantively the same throughout these amendments and 
revisions.

     3 Although HHS issued a revised version of its Implementation 
Guide in 1997, after the enactment of TANF, it did so in response 
not to TANF but rather to OMB's 1995 revision of Circular A-87.  
The Guide does not take account of the TANF legislation.  See 
Appellees' Br. at 12 n.12.

     4 See OGAM Action Transmittal 98-2 (HHS Sept. 30, 1998);  
Appellants' Br. at 5-6;  Appellees' Br. at 13-14.

continuing to employ primary program allocation.  On Sep-
tember 30, 1998, without notice or opportunity for comment, 
HHS' Office of Grants and Acquisition Management (OGAM) 
issued OGAM Action Transmittal 98-2.  The Action Trans-
mittal reconfirms that, as a general rule, Circular A-87 
requires that:

     [I]f any program benefits from an activity or cost, then 
     costs must be allocated to each program.  Where multi-
     ple programs are involved, a single program may not be 
     designated as the sole benefiting program (primary pro-
     gram).
     
OGAM Action Transmittal 98-2 (HHS Sept. 30, 1998).  Al-
though the Action Transmittal recognizes that there are 
exceptions to this general rule, it further declares that:

     Cost shifting [to a primary program] is not permitted by 
     most program statutes, except where there is a specific 
     legislative provision allowing such cost shifting.  While 
     the former AFDC program allowed such an exception, 
     the TANF legislation that replaced AFDC does not 
     permit it being designated as the sole benefiting or 
     primary program.  Therefore, the TANF program is 
     subject to the cost allocation principles of A-87.
     
Id. (emphasis added).  Starting with state fiscal years begin-
ning on or after October 1, 1998, the Action Transmittal 
requires state cost allocation plans for the TANF program to 
comply with the benefiting program allocation principle.  Id.

     Six states5 filed suit in the United States District Court for 
the District of Columbia seeking to prevent HHS from en-
forcing Action Transmittal 98-2.  The States alleged that 
they incur common administrative costs that benefit TANF, 
Medicaid, and Food Stamps, and that the Welfare Reform 
Act permits them to "use their TANF grants to cover costs 
that benefit TANF and other programs simultaneously."  
Compl. at 18-19.  In their papers in the district court, the 

__________
     5 These include original plaintiffs Arizona, Maryland, Michigan, 
New York, and Tennessee, as well as intervenor Florida (hereinaf-
ter "the States").

plaintiffs explained that "because of the fall in welfare case-
loads, states have been unable to use their full TANF grants, 
so that they are better off financially by charging all common 
costs to the TANF program."  Plaintiffs' Mot. for Summ. J. 
at 20 n.5.

     The States' complaint charged that Action Transmittal 98-2 
violated the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) because, 
inter alia, it was not in accordance with law (i.e., with the 
TANF provisions of the Welfare Reform Act), and because it 
was issued without notice and comment.  See 5 U.S.C. 
ss 553, 706(2)(A), (D).  The district court rejected these 
contentions and granted summary judgment in favor of HHS.  
Arizona v. Shalala, 121 F. Supp. 2d 40 (D.D.C. 2000).  The 
court concluded that HHS' interpretation of the Welfare 
Reform Act deserved judicial deference under Chevron 
U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 
(1984), that the Department reasonably interpreted the legis-
lation to bar states from applying the primary program 
allocation approach to their TANF grants, that notice and 
comment procedures were not required in this case, and that 
the plaintiffs' other arguments were without merit.6

                                II

     We review the district court's grant of summary judgment 
against the States' APA claims de novo.  See Independent 
Petroleum Ass'n of Am. v. DeWitt, 2002 WL 191748, at *2 
(D.C. Cir. Feb. 8, 2002);  Dr. Pepper/Seven-Up Cos. v. FTC, 
991 F.2d 859, 862 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  We begin--and, in Part 
III, end--with the States' first argument:  that the Action 
Transmittal is "not in accordance with law," 5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A), because its interpretation of the TANF provi-
sions of the Welfare Reform Act is inconsistent with the 
statute.  HHS contends that its interpretation of the legisla-

__________
     6 The district court also concluded that Action Transmittal 98-2 
constituted final agency action, a prerequisite for review under the 
APA.  See 5 U.S.C. s 704.  HHS does not dispute that conclusion 
on appeal, and we agree with the district court's analysis.  See 
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 177-78 (1997).

tion must be accorded substantial deference under the rule 
announced in Chevron.  The States contend, and we agree 
albeit for a different reason, that Chevron deference is inap-
propriate in this case.

     Chevron instructs reviewing courts to apply a two-step 
framework to issues of statutory construction.  First, we 
must ask "whether Congress has directly spoken to the 
precise question at issue," in which case we "must give effect 
to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress."  Chev-
ron, 467 U.S. at 842-43.  If the "statute is silent or ambigu-
ous with respect to the specific issue," we move to the second 
step and must defer to the agency's interpretation as long as 
it is "based on a permissible construction of the statute."  Id. 
at 843.

     The States contend that the Supreme Court's recent deci-
sion in United States v. Mead Corp., 121 S. Ct. 2164 (2001), 
which was issued after the district court's decision in this 
case, makes Chevron deference inapplicable to agency action 
of the kind embodied in the Action Transmittal.  They point 
out that in Mead, the Court said:  " '[I]nterpretations con-
tained in policy statements, agency manuals, and enforcement 
guidelines' ... are beyond the Chevron pale."  Id. at 2175 
(quoting Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576, 587 
(2000)).  Action Transmittal 98-2 is a policy statement, the 
States contend, and thus does not deserve judicial deference.7

     We need not decide whether HHS' decision to announce its 
statutory interpretation in the form of an Action Transmittal 
deprives that interpretation of judicial deference, because the 
Department's pronouncement does not warrant deference for 
another reason.  The Court's direction in Chevron was to 
accord deference to an agency's reasonable policy choice 
where Congress delegated to the agency the discretion to 
make such a choice.  See Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44, 845, 
865-66.  The problem here, however, is that in barring 
primary program allocation, HHS did not purport to exercise 

__________
     7 See generally OGAM Action Transmittal 98-1 (HHS Sept. 30, 
1998) ("Action Transmittals ... transmit interpretive rules or gen-
eral statements of policy.").

discretion.  To the contrary, the Action Transmittal declares 
that "the TANF legislation ... does not permit it being 
designated as the ... primary program."  Action Transmittal 
98-2 (emphasis added).  Confirming the point, HHS' briefs 
state the Department's view that it has no choice but to 
require benefiting program allocation.  See Appellees' Br. at 
42 (contending that "it is the intent of Congress, rather than 
of HHS, that obliges the States to cover costs allocated 
outside TANF from programs other than TANF" (emphasis 
added));  see also id. at 27.  In Chevron terms, then, the 
agency itself has stopped at step one:  HHS believes that the 
statute clearly bars primary program allocation, and that it is 
without discretion to reach another result.

     Deference to an agency's statutory interpretation "is only 
appropriate when the agency has exercised its own judg-
ment," not when it believes that interpretation is compelled 
by Congress.  Phillips Petroleum Co. v. FERC, 792 F.2d 
1165, 1169 (D.C. Cir. 1986);  see Transitional Hosps. Corp. v. 
Shalala, 222 F.3d 1019, 1029 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  Prill v. NLRB, 
755 F.2d 941, 942, 948, 956 (D.C. Cir. 1985).  The question of 
whether benefiting program allocation is actually compelled 
by statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.  See 
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843 n.9;  Transitional Hosps., 222 F.3d 
at 1026.  It is to that question that we now turn.8

__________
     8 In 1999, after notice and comment, HHS issued TANF regula-
tions that, the agency contends, incorporate the benefiting program 
allocation principle by requiring conformity with OMB Circular 
A-87.  See Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program, 64 
Fed. Reg. 17,720, 17,842, 17,895 (Apr. 12, 1999) (codified at 45 
C.F.R. s 263.11(b)).  Although the present lawsuit challenges only 
the 1998 Action Transmittal and not the 1999 regulations, HHS 
contends that the use of notice and comment in promulgating the 
1999 regulations moots the Mead issue and qualifies the Depart-
ment's determination for Chevron treatment.  However, in conclud-
ing that deference is inappropriate here, we have relied not on the 
form in which HHS announced its cost allocation principle, but 
rather on the Department's conclusion that it was without discretion 
to adopt any other position.  The 1999 Federal Register notice does 

                               III

     The States cite several provisions of the Welfare Reform 
Act in support of their challenge to HHS' belief that the 
TANF legislation bars the use of primary program allocation.  
We need not consider all of the States' arguments, as two key 
provisions, subsections (1) and (2) of 42 U.S.C. s 604(a), are 
sufficient to decide the case.9  Section 604(a) provides:

     [A] State to which a grant is made under [TANF] may 
     use the grant--
     
          (1) in any manner that is reasonably calculated to 
          accomplish the purpose of this part ...;  or
          
          (2) in any manner that the State was authorized to use 
          amounts received under part A [the AFDC and Emer-
          gency Assistance programs] or F [the Job Opportuni-
          ties and Basic Skills program] of this subchapter, as 
          these parts were in effect on September 30, 1995....
          
42 U.S.C. s 604(a).  We consider these two subsections be-
low.

                                A

     Citing s 604(a)(1), the States contend that they may pay 
common administrative costs out of their TANF grants be-
cause such expenditures are "reasonably calculated to accom-
plish the purpose of" the TANF program.  That purpose, as 
described in 42 U.S.C. s 601(a), is "to increase the flexibility 
of the states in operating a program" designed to assist needy 
families and end dependence on government benefits.10
__________
not reflect any new understanding that the Department has discre-
tion in the matter.

     9 Moreover, because we conclude that these provisions establish 
that Action Transmittal 98-2 is "not in accordance with law," 5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(A), we need not consider the States' alternative 
argument that it was issued "without observance of procedure 
required by law," id. s 706(2)(D), namely the notice-and-comment 
procedure of 5 U.S.C. s 553.

     10 Section 601(a) states:

     HHS does not dispute that states may pay the costs of 
administering the TANF program itself out of their TANF 
grants.  Indeed, a contrary position would be hard to square 
with s 604(b)(2), which, in limiting expenditures for adminis-
trative purposes to "15 percent of the grant," clearly assumes 
that some such expenditures will be made.  HHS contends, 
however, that allocating costs of administering Medicaid and 
Food Stamps to TANF is not "reasonably calculated" to 
accomplish the purpose of the TANF legislation.  TANF, the 
Department argues, does not benefit from the payment of 
costs that are the responsibility of other programs.

     But the costs at issue here are not costs that are solely 
applicable to other programs.  This case is about common 
costs, such as the expense of determining eligibility for 
programs that have the same eligibility criteria.  These are 
costs that TANF would have to bear even if the other 
programs did not exist, and that are incurred in order to 
ensure that a state's TANF program accomplishes its objec-
tives.  Accordingly, there is no question but that the TANF 
program "benefits" from payment of these common costs;  
indeed, the premise of "benefiting program allocation" is that 
the costs subject to allocation "benefit" all of the programs at 
issue.  See Action Transmittal 98-2 (requiring that "costs be 
allocated to all benefiting programs based on relative benefits 
derived" (emphasis added)).11
__________
     The purpose of this part is to increase the flexibility of States 
     in operating a program designed to--
     
          (1) provide assistance to needy families so that children may 
     be cared for in their own homes ...;
     
          (2) end the dependence of needy parents on government 
     benefits by promoting job preparation, work, and marriage;
     
          (3) prevent and reduce the incidence of out-of-wedlock preg-
     nancies ...;  and
     
          (4) encourage the formation and maintenance of two-parent 
     families.    
42 U.S.C. s 601(a).

     11 For the same reason, we reject HHS' contention that the 
congressional intent behind the provisions for 50% federal partic-

     HHS further argues that the statutory 15% limitation on 
administrative expenditures demonstrates congressional con-
cern about excessive administrative spending, and supports 
the view that expenditure of TANF funds on administrative 
costs allocable to Medicaid and Food Stamps is unauthorized.  
Only the first half of this argument is correct.  There is no 
doubt that Congress imposed a 15% cap in order to limit 
administrative expenditures:  what other purpose could such a 
limit have?  But nothing in the primary program allocation 
approach preferred by the plaintiffs would permit a state to 
spend more than that the 15% limit on administrative funds.  
Moreover, while the existence of a cap reflects a concern 
about limiting expenditures, it may also indicate Congress' 
view that the cap alone is sufficient to satisfy that concern, 
and that there is no need to tell the states how to spend their 
grant money within that cap as long as the expenditures are 
otherwise calculated to advance the purpose of the program.

     Finally, HHS contends that OMB Circular A-87 represent-
ed "a well-established background of cost principles for feder-
al grants" against which Congress enacted the TANF pro-
gram.  Appellees' Br. at 43.  Circular A-87 was in effect 
when Congress enacted the Welfare Reform Act, HHS ar-
gues, and "if Congress had wished TANF to be exempt from 
these principles, it could have expressly so provided."  Id.  
Because it did not do so, the Department continues, "it is 
reasonable to suppose that Congress understood that TANF 
costs would be allocated within the parameters of Circular 
A-87."  Id.  The problem with this argument is that the 
"background" against which Congress enacted the Welfare 

__________
ipation in the costs of administering the Medicaid and Food Stamp 
programs, 42 U.S.C. s 1396b(a)(7);  7 U.S.C. s 2025(a), would be 
violated if states were allowed "to shift Medicaid and Food Stamp 
costs into TANF so that the full amount of those administrative 
costs will be paid in federal dollars."  Appellees' Br. at 45.  As 
noted in the text, primary program allocation does not permit the 
shift of "Medicaid and Food Stamp costs," but rather of costs that 
those programs share in common with TANF.  Neither of the cited 
provisions addresses the question of common costs or purports to 
disallow expenditures separately authorized by s 604(a)(1).

Reform Act included both Circular A-87's general principle of 
benefiting program allocation and its well-recognized excep-
tion for the AFDC program.  See supra Part I.  Although 
that background may not compel the conclusion that Con-
gress intended to continue the AFDC exception for its succes-
sor program, TANF, it hardly proves the opposite.

     The benefiting program allocation principle may well be an 
appropriate tool for accounting for common costs, but it is 
only that--an accounting tool, not a statutory command.  It is 
not possible to read s 604(a)(1)--which permits a state to use 
its TANF grant "in any manner that is reasonably calculated 
to accomplish the purpose" of the TANF legislation--as 
barring HHS from permitting a state to spend its grant 
money on the costs of running the TANF program merely 
because those expenditures help run other programs as well.  
That conclusion is further reinforced by Congress' declaration 
that the "purpose" referenced in s 604(a)(1) is "to increase 
the flexibility of States in operating [the] program."  Id. 
s 601(a);  see also H.R. Rep. No. 104-81, pt. 1, at 15 (1995) 
(noting "that a major purpose of the [TANF legislation] is to 
allow States maximum flexibility in the use of Federal dol-
lars").  Although we do not foreclose the possibility that HHS 
could, in the exercise of its discretion, determine that the 
allocation of common costs to TANF is not reasonably calcu-
lated to accomplish TANF's purpose, the statute does not 
require HHS to reach that conclusion.

                                B

     The States also contend that authorization for primary 
program allocation may independently be found in the 
"grandfather clause" of s 604(a)(2).  That subsection permits 
a state to use a TANF grant "in any manner that the state 
was authorized to use amounts received" under the AFDC 
program.  42 U.S.C. s 604(a)(2).  Since states were autho-
rized to use amounts received under AFDC to pay the 
common administrative costs of AFDC, Medicaid, and Food 
Stamps, the States argue that subsection (a)(2)--like subsec-
tion (a)(1)--authorizes HHS to permit primary program allo-

cation.  HHS disputes this view of s 604(a)(2) for two rea-
sons.

     First, the Department contends that the key phrase, "au-
thorized to use," refers solely to expenses that were autho-
rized under "state plans," which described the substantive 
assistance programs the state intended to run.  See 45 C.F.R. 
ss 201.2, 201.3 (1995).  Administrative costs, by contrast, 
were addressed in the states' "cost allocation plans," which 
set forth the states' accounting methods.  See id. s 95.505 
(1995).  Since the use of AFDC funds for common adminis-
trative costs was authorized not under "state plans," but 
rather under state "cost allocation plans," HHS contends that 
the use of TANF funds for such a purpose is not encom-
passed by the grandfather clause of s 604(a)(2).

     We disagree.  There is nothing in the phrase "authorized 
to use" that dictates that it be read as "authorized to use 
under a state plan," rather than "authorized to use under a 
state cost allocation plan."  Once again, although we do not 
foreclose the possibility that HHS could, in the exercise of its 
discretion, interpret the phrase in that way, it is certainly not 
required to do so.

     Nor does HHS' reference to the legislative history of s 604 
advance its claim that "authorized to use" refers only to 
substantive programs.  The Department refers us to a sen-
tence in the Conference Report on the Welfare Reform Act, 
which states that "activities now authorized under" AFDC 
are also authorized under TANF.  H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 
104-430, at 320 (1995) (emphasis added).  HHS contends that 
the word "activities" means substantive programs rather than 
administrative functions, but again we are not persuaded that 
the word can bear only the former meaning.  Many adminis-
trative functions can readily be characterized as "activities," 
including the hiring of staff, the determination of eligibility, 
and the maintenance of databases.  We see no indication that 
the Conference Report used a general word like "activities" to 
signal an intent to exclude common administrative costs from 
the compass of s 604(a)(2).

     HHS also offers a second argument for rejecting the 
States' claim that primary program allocation is authorized by 
s 604(a)(2):  the only reason such allocation was permitted 
under AFDC, HHS contends, was that the AFDC statute 
specifically allowed it.  Since TANF contains no such specific 
authorization, the Department continues, grandfathering 
plainly was not intended.  See Action Transmittal 98-2.

     The problem with this argument is its premise:  in fact, the 
AFDC statute did not specifically authorize primary program 
allocation.  When pressed to identify the statutory provision 
allegedly at issue, HHS' counsel conceded that there was no 
language in the AFDC statute that addressed the allocation 
issue, one way or the other.  Instead, HHS relies on the fact 
that the eligibility criteria for the three programs were 
identical under the prior statutory regime, while TANF per-
mits but does not require the states to use common eligibility 
criteria.12  HHS also relies on the fact that, under the prior 
regime, it made no difference from the standpoint of the 
federal fisc whether administrative costs were allocated to 
AFDC or shared among all three programs, because the 
federal government paid 50% of those costs for each pro-
gram.13  That is no longer true for TANF, since a state may 
pay all of its administrative costs out of its federal grant, 
subject only to the 15% cap.  See 42 U.S.C. s 604(b)(1).

     Once again, these are arguments of policymaking discretion 
rather than law.  Although the differences between AFDC 
and TANF may justify a decision by HHS to depart from the 

__________
     12 Prior to the Welfare Reform Act, the statutes setting forth 
eligibility criteria for Medicaid and Food Stamps each referenced 
part A of Title IV of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. s 601 et seq. 
(1994), the former AFDC statute.  See id. s 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(I) 
(Medicaid);  7 U.S.C. s 2014(a) (Food Stamps).  The Welfare Re-
form Act largely permits the states to determine the eligibility 
criteria for TANF, see 42 U.S.C. s 602(a)(1)(B)(iii), but leaves the 
criteria for Medicaid and Food Stamps unchanged, see id. s 1396u-
1(a).

     13 See 42 U.S.C. s 603(a)(3) (1994) (AFDC);  7 U.S.C. s 2025(a) 
(Food Stamps);  42 U.S.C. s 1396b(a)(7) (Medicaid).

method of cost allocation it accepted under the former pro-
gram, they do not compel it to do so.  Nor do they establish 
that it would be unreasonable for the Department to approve 
the allocation method preferred by the States.  Although 
states are not required to use the same eligibility rules for 
TANF as for Medicaid and Food Stamps, they are permitted 
to do so.  See id. s 602(a)(1)(B)(iii) (leaving criteria for TANF 
eligibility up to the states).  And, according to the plaintiffs, 
in most states many eligibility determinations remain com-
mon to all three programs.  See Appellants' Reply Br. at 4.  
If it was the existence of common eligibility rules and hence 
common costs that justified primary program allocation be-
fore, it is not readily apparent why that justification disap-
pears merely because the common rules are now the result of 
voluntary state decisions rather than federal mandates.14  
Similarly, although primary program allocation may not have 
cost the federal government additional money under the prior 
regime, nothing in the TANF legislation compels the conclu-
sion that saving federal (as compared to state) money must be 
the guide for cost allocation, particularly since Congress 
provided its own solution to the problem of excessive adminis-
trative costs in the form of the 15% cap.15

__________
     14 Moreover, some of the common administrative costs subject to 
primary program allocation under AFDC did not relate to eligibility 
determination at all, but rather to such things as the renting of 
space for welfare offices.  It is not apparent why a change in 
eligibility requirements would be relevant to the question of wheth-
er such non-eligibility costs were grandfathered by s 604(a)(2).

     15 The district court found additional, although "hardly disposi-
tive," support for HHS' interpretation of s 604(a)(2) in s 502 of the 
Agricultural Research Extension and Education Reform Act of 
1998, codified at 7 U.S.C. s 2025(k).  See Arizona, 121 F. Supp. 2d 
at 54-55.  Section 502 directs the Secretary of Agriculture to 
calculate the amount included in a state's TANF grant for what the 
state would have historically received under AFDC for the common 
costs of determining AFDC and Food Stamp eligibility;  the Secre-
tary is then directed to reduce, by that amount, the federal payment 
to the state for the administrative costs of the Food Stamp pro-
gram.  7 U.S.C. s 2025(k)(2)(B), (3)(A).  We do not view s 502 as 

                                C

     Finally, we address a contention pressed by HHS at oral 
argument:  that whatever the import of s 604(a), OMB Circu-
lar A-87 independently deprives the Department of discretion 
to permit the use of primary program allocation.  According 
to HHS, this is because the Circular requires all federal 
agencies to use benefiting program allocation in the adminis-
tration of federal grants.  Putting to one side questions 
raised by the plaintiffs concerning the legal force of Circular 
A-87, we reject this contention because the Department did 
not regard the Circular as having an effect independent of the 
TANF legislation when it issued Action Transmittal 98-2.  
See Bowen v. Georgetown Univ. Hosp., 488 U.S. 204, 212 
(1988) (" 'The courts may not accept appellate counsel's post 
hoc rationalizations for agency [orders].' " (quoting Burling-
ton Truck Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962))).

     Although Circular A-87 provides that common costs must 
ordinarily be allocated among benefiting programs, Action 
Transmittal 98-2 recognizes that there are exceptions to that 
rule.  In particular, it acknowledges that an exception was 
made for the former AFDC program because, the Transmit-
tal states, there was "a specific legislative provision allowing 
such cost shifting."  Although in fact there was no such 
specific provision in the AFDC statute, see supra Part III.B, 
the statement in the Action Transmittal reflects HHS' under-
lying view that Circular A-87 does not independently con-
strain the Department if a statute allows an alternative 
allocation method.  That view is also reflected in HHS' 

__________
supporting HHS' conclusion that Congress barred states from using 
their TANF grants to pay for all common administrative costs.  
Rather, s 502 reflects Congress' understanding that historical 
"common costs for administering public assistance programs ... 
were included in the calculation of each State's new TANF grant," 
and Congress' determination that Food Stamp reimbursements 
should therefore be reduced to prevent states from "receiv[ing] a 
second reimbursement for common costs in the Food Stamp (and 
Medicaid) programs, while retaining their full TANF block grant."  
H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 105-492, at 115-16 (1998) (emphasis added).

Implementation Guide for OMB Circular A-87, ASMB C-10, 
which states that, while Circular A-87 requires the use of 
benefiting program allocation, primary program allocation 
may be used "where the head of an awarding agency deter-
mines that the agency's enabling legislation permits" it.  Id. 
p 2.11 at 2-13.  In accord with this analysis, the Action 
Transmittal's rationale for applying the general rule of Circu-
lar A-87 to TANF is simply that TANF does not permit an 
exception:  "[T]he TANF legislation ... does not permit it 
being designated as the sole benefiting or primary program.  
Therefore, the TANF program is subject to the cost allocation 
principles of A-87."  Action Transmittal 98-2 (emphasis add-
ed).

     In short, HHS' determination that Circular A-87 applies to 
TANF was not made without reference to the Department's 
construction of the TANF legislation.  To the contrary, that 
determination was made in reliance on HHS' mistaken belief 
that the statute gave it no choice in the matter.  Although 
nothing we have said necessarily precludes HHS, in the 
exercise of its discretion, from relying on the principles of 
Circular A-87 to determine the most appropriate cost alloca-
tion rule to apply to TANF, that is not the course the 
Department followed in this case.

                                IV

     HHS' Action Transmittal 98-2 does not represent a deter-
mination by the Department that it is reasonable to interpret 
the Welfare Reform Act as barring states from allocating 
their common administrative costs to TANF.  Rather, it 
reflects HHS' incorrect assumption that such an interpreta-
tion is the only one that is permissible.  As we have said 
before, "an agency regulation must be declared invalid, even 
though the agency might be able to adopt the regulation in 
the exercise of its discretion, if it 'was not based on the 
[agency's] own judgment but rather on the unjustified as-
sumption that it was Congress' judgment that such [a regula-
tion is] desirable' " or required.  Prill, 755 F.2d at 948 
(quoting FCC v. RCA Communications, 346 U.S. 86, 96 

(1953)) (alterations in original).16  Accordingly, the decision of 
the district court is reversed, and the case is remanded to 
that court with instructions to remand to HHS for further 
consideration consistent with this opinion.17

                                                        Reversed and remanded.

__________
     16 See Transitional Hosps., 222 F.3d at 1029 (remanding where 
HHS erroneously interpreted the Medicare statute as barring the 
treatment of certain hospitals as "long-term" care facilities);  Prill, 
755 F.2d at 942 (remanding where the NLRB adopted a definition 
of "concerted activities" that it erroneously regarded as "mandated" 
by the National Labor Relations Act).

     17 Because HHS did not adopt the interpretation contained in the 
Action Transmittal as an exercise of its discretion, we have no 
occasion to decide whether, if it did so, the same interpretation 
would be sustained if promulgated in a form warranting Chevron 
deference.  See Transitional Hosps., 222 F.3d at 1028.

                           