                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 8, 2000     Decided July 6, 2001 

                           No. 99-5064

    Tenet HealthSystems HealthCorp., f/k/a OrNda Healthcorp., 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                 Tommy G. Thompson, Secretary of 
                   Health and Human Services, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv02723)

     Anne Murphy, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs were 
David W. Ogden, Assistant Attorney General, Anthony J. 
Steinmeyer, Assistant Director, and Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. 
Attorney at the time the briefs were filed.  R. Craig Law-
rence and Scott S. Harris, Assistant U.S. Attorneys, entered 
appearances.

     Joanne B. Erde argued the cause for appellee.  With her 
on the brief was Harry R. Silver.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Tenet HealthSystems Health-
Corp., a Medicare provider, contends that the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) inadequately reimbursed 
it for its losses on the sale of a hospital.  The district court 
agreed and remanded the case to HHS for redetermination of 
the amount due.  We disagree and reverse the judgment of 
the district court.

                                I

     We begin with an exposition of the Medicare regulations 
applicable to this appeal, and then describe the proceedings 
below.

                                A

     During the period relevant to this case, and with caveats 
unnecessary to discuss here, HHS reimbursed health care 
providers for their capital-related costs in providing services 
to Medicare patients.1  Under the pertinent regulations, 
these costs include Medicare's share of a provider's deprecia-
tion expenses and capital losses.2  The regulations use the 
"cost basis" of the depreciable assets of a provider's hospital 
in determining both the provider's annual depreciation allow-
ances and its gain or loss when the hospital is sold.  42 
C.F.R. s 413.134(f), (g).  Annual depreciation is calculated as 
a yearly fraction of the hospital's basis, distributed over its 
useful life.  42 C.F.R. s 413.134(d).  Gain or loss upon sale is 

__________
     1  See 42 U.S.C. ss 1395f(b)(1), 1395x(v)(1)(A)(i);  42 C.F.R. 
ss 412.113(a), 413.130;  see also 42 C.F.R. s 412.304 (implementing 
prospective payment system for capital costs beginning October 
1991, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(g)).

     2  See 42 C.F.R. ss 413.50, .53, .130, .134;  42 U.S.C. 
s 1395x(v)(1)(A)(i), (v)(1)(O).

determined by subtracting (with appropriate adjustments) the 
hospital's basis from its selling price.3  Hence, the higher the 
basis, the higher the depreciation expenses that HHS will 
reimburse and the smaller the gain or greater the loss it will 
calculate upon sale.  See Nursing Ctr. of Buckingham & 
Hampden, Inc. v. Shalala, 990 F.2d 645, 646 (D.C. Cir. 1993).

     The Medicare regulations permit a provider that purchased 
a hospital after July 31, 1970 and before July 18, 1984--as 
Tenet did--to "step-up," or increase, the basis of the facility 
above that of the previous owner.  See Nursing Ctr., 990 F.2d 
at 646.4  Pursuant to 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(g)(1) and (2), the 

__________
     3  See Health Care Fin. Admin., Medicare Provider Reimburse-
ment Manual, HCFA Pub. 15-1, s 104.10(C), ex. 5 [hereinafter 
Provider Manual];  see also Whitecliff, Inc. v. Shalala, 20 F.3d 488, 
489 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

     4  In the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (DEFRA), Congress 
limited the basis in a hospital purchased on or after July 18, 1984 to 
"the lesser of the allowable acquisition cost of such asset to the 
owner of record as of the date of the enactment of [DEFRA], ... or 
the acquisition cost of such asset to the new owner."  Pub. L. 
98-369, s 2314(a), 98 Stat. 494, 1079 (current version at 42 U.S.C. 
s 1395x(v)(1)(O)(i)).  HHS has stated that:  "The practical effect of 
DEFRA is that Medicare will no longer allow a 'write-up' from the 
historical cost basis of the acquired depreciable assets.  It is 
possible, however, for a 'write-down' of assets to occur, when the 
limitation is applied."  Health Care Fin. Admin., Medicare Interme-
diary Manual, HCFA Pub. 13, s 4508.1(B) [hereinafter Intermedi-
ary Manual];  see 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(g)(3).  According to the 
legislative history, Congress imposed the DEFRA limitation out of 
concern "that Medicare ha[d] been paying for the same capital 
assets more than once."  H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 98-861, at 1339 (1984).  
In the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Congress further amended the 
Medicare statute to provide simply that, for hospitals acquired on or 
after August 5, 1997, the basis "shall be the historical cost of the 
asset ... less depreciation allowed, to the owner of record as of the 
date of enactment of the [Act]."  Pub. L. 105-33, s 4404(a)(1)(D), 
111 Stat. 251, 400 (codified at 42 U.S.C. s 1395x(v)(1)(O)(i));  see 42 
C.F.R. s 413.134(g)(4).

basis of such a hospital's depreciable assets may not exceed 
the lowest of:  (1) the allocated price paid for the facility by 
the purchaser, (2) the allocated fair market value of the 
facility at the time of the sale, or (3) the "current reproduc-
tion cost depreciated on a straight-line basis over the life of 
the asset to the time of the sale."  Id.5  The last category, 
depreciated reproduction cost, reflects the depreciated cost of 
reproducing the assets at current market prices.6
__________
     5  42 C.F.R. s 413.134(g)(1) and (2) provide in relevant part:
     (g) Establishment of cost basis on purchase of facility as an 
     ongoing operation--(1) Assets acquired after July 1, 1966 and 
     before August 1, 1970.  The cost basis for the assets of a 
     facility purchased as an ongoing operation after July 1, 1966, 
     and before August 1, 1970, is the lowest of the--   
          (i) Total price paid for the facility by the purchaser, as 
     allocated to the individual assets of the facility;  [or]
     
          (ii) [and (iii)] ... fair market value of the facility at the time 
     of the sale, as allocated to the individual assets....  
     
          (2) Assets acquired after July 31, 1970 and, for hospitals 
     and SNFs [skilled nursing facilities], before July 18, 1984.  
     For depreciable assets acquired after July 31, 1970 and, for 
     hospitals and SNFs, before July 18, 1984, in addition to the 
     limitations specified in paragraph (g)(1) of this section, the cost 
     basis of the depreciable assets may not exceed the current 
     reproduction cost depreciated on a straight-line basis over the 
     life of the asset to the time of the sale.
     
     6  "Current reproduction cost" is the "cost at current prices, in a 
particular locality or market area, of reproducing an item of proper-
ty or a group of assets."  42 C.F.R. s 413.134(b)(6).  The term is 
further defined in the Provider Manual as "the cost of reproducing 
substantially identical assets of like type, quality, and quantity at a 
price level in a bona fide market as of the date of acquisition."  
Provider Manual s 134.  Section 413.134(g)(2) of the Medicare 
regulations requires that the appraiser account for the age of the 
facility using straight-line depreciation, which distributes current 
reproduction cost "in equal amounts over the period of the estimat-
ed useful life of the asset," 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(b)(3).

 HHS describes depreciated reproduction cost "as an accounting 
check against purchase price and fair market value," which "incor-
porates the common-sense principle that a purchaser would not pay 

     A health care provider generally establishes its entitlement 
to Medicare reimbursement by submitting a cost report to a 
fiscal intermediary.  See 42 U.S.C. ss 1395f(a), 1395h;  42 
C.F.R. ss 413.24(f), 421.1-.128.  If the provider is dissatisfied 
with the intermediary's determination of the amount due, it 
may seek review from HHS' Provider Reimbursement Re-
view Board.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(a), (b).  The Board's 
decision in a case is final, unless the Administrator of the 
Health Care Financing Administration accepts the case for 
review.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(f);  42 C.F.R. s 405.1875.  
After a final administrative decision, providers may obtain 
judicial review.  42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(f).

                                B

     In September 1983, Tenet purchased two hospitals, Nauti-
lus Memorial Hospital and Gibson General Hospital, from 
Humana of Tennessee, Inc.7  Tenet paid Humana $12,100,000 
for both hospitals.  Based on an appraisal performed by 
Valuation Counselors Southwestern, Inc., Tenet allocated 
$4,516,202 of the total purchase price to Nautilus Memorial.

     Tenet changed Nautilus Memorial's name to Three Rivers 
Community Hospital and operated it as an acute care facility 
for the next six years.  In its first Medicare cost report for 
Three Rivers, covering the period from October 1, 1983 to 
August 31, 1984, Tenet claimed depreciation allowances calcu-

__________
more for a used building than the cost of constructing exactly the 
same building today."  HHS Br. at 24.  Others have described it as 
"an economically meaningless application of up-to-date prices to 
out-of-date properties."  Bonbright et al., Principles of Public 
Utility Rates 294 (1988);  see also Farmers Union Cent. Exch., Inc. 
v. FERC, 734 F.2d 1486, 1520 n.68 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  We have no 
occasion to comment on the accuracy of either description.

     7  Throughout this opinion, we use "Tenet" to include Tenet 
HealthSystems HealthCorp. and all of its predecessors in interest.  
American Healthcare Management, Inc. was the original purchaser 
of the hospitals in 1983.  In 1984, OrNda Healthcorp. purchased 
American Healthcare, and in 1997 OrNda was itself purchased by 
Tenet.

lated by using a stepped-up basis that reflected the allocated 
price it paid in 1983.  That price, Tenet said, was lower than 
both the hospital's fair market value and its depreciated 
reproduction cost as determined by the Valuation Counselors 
appraisal, and was thus the appropriate figure for the hospi-
tal's basis pursuant to 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(g).8  However, the 
Medicare intermediary, Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Tennes-
see, refused to recognize the step-up on the ground that 
Tenet had failed adequately to document the hospital's depre-
ciated reproduction cost.  Instead, Blue Cross limited Tenet's 
basis to that of the previous owner, adjusted for subsequent 
capital improvements, disposals, and accumulated deprecia-
tion, which it referred to as the hospital's "net book value" as 
of the date of Tenet's 1983 purchase.  As a consequence of 
the lower basis, Blue Cross reduced Tenet's allowable depre-
ciation expenses for 1984.

     Tenet did not appeal Blue Cross' 1984 determination.  
Nonetheless, Tenet continued to claim depreciation allow-
ances using the stepped-up basis (with adjustments) in each 
of its next four annual cost reports.  Each time, Blue Cross 
limited Tenet's basis to adjusted 1983 net book value, and 
reduced Tenet's allowable depreciation expenses accordingly.  
Tenet did not appeal any of those four annual determinations.

     In 1989, Tenet sold Three Rivers for $1,000,000, with the 
purchase agreement between Tenet and the buyer allocating 
$770,000 of the sales price to depreciable assets.  That year, 
Tenet submitted a cost report that again used the 1983 
purchase price (with adjustments) as the hospital's basis.  
Using that basis, Tenet calculated its loss on the sale as 
$5,062,801 and billed Medicare for its share.  See 42 C.F.R. 
s 413.134(f).  Once again, Blue Cross reduced Tenet's basis 
to the adjusted 1983 net book value of the assets.  The 
substitution of net book value for Tenet's claimed basis 
reduced Tenet's loss from $5,062,801 to $642,512.9  For the 

__________
     8  According to Tenet, the fair market value and depreciated 
reproduction cost were the same.  See Tenet Br. at 20.

     9  Tenet calculated its basis as $5,832,801, and its loss on the 
sale as $5,062,801.  See J.A. at 206.  Blue Cross reduced Tenet's 
basis to $1,412,512, and its loss to $642,512.  See J.A. at 209.

first time, Tenet appealed the reduction of the basis to the 
Provider Reimbursement Review Board (PRRB).

     After an evidentiary hearing, the PRRB sustained the 
intermediary's decision.  The Board held that, under the 
Medicare regulations, a hospital's basis may not exceed its 
depreciated reproduction cost, and that Tenet "had failed to 
adequately document ... its value for current depreciated 
reproduction cost."  Three Rivers Cmty. Hosp., PRRB Dec. 
No. 97-D97, at 11 (Sept. 10, 1997) [hereinafter "PRRB Op."]. 
The Board further held that because a reliable value for 
depreciated reproduction cost was unavailable, a stepped-up 
basis was inappropriate and the intermediary's decision to use 
the previous owner's basis (net book value) was reasonable.  
Id.  The Administrator of the Health Care Financing Admin-
istration declined to review the Board's decision, rendering 
that decision final.

     Tenet then filed suit against HHS in the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia.  On cross-motions 
for summary judgment, the court found the PRRB's decision 
arbitrary and capricious, principally because the court read 
the Medicare regulations to bar the use of net book value as a 
purchaser's basis.  Tenet HealthSystems HealthCorp. v. Sha-
lala, No. 97cv2723, slip op. at 1 (D.D.C. Jan. 12, 1999).  HHS 
now appeals.

                                II

     Our standard for reviewing a decision of the PRRB is the 
same as that which the district court must apply:  We may set 
aside a Board decision only if it is "unsupported by substan-
tial evidence," or if it is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law."  5 
U.S.C. s 706(2)(E), (A);  see 42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(f)(1) (provid-
ing that judicial review of PRRB decisions shall be pursuant 
to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. ss 701 et seq.);  HCA Health 
Servs. of Okla., Inc. v. Shalala, 27 F.3d 614, 616 (D.C. Cir. 
1994).  In addition, we must defer to HHS' reading of its own 
regulations, unless that reading is "plainly erroneous or in-
consistent with the regulation[s]."  Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S. 

452, 461 (1997) (internal quotation omitted);  see Thomas 
Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala, 512 U.S. 504, 512 (1994).  Because 
we apply the same standard of review as the district court, we 
proceed de novo, as if Tenet had brought the case here on 
direct appeal.  See County of L.A. v. Shalala, 192 F.3d 1005, 
1012 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  Biloxi Reg'l Med. Ctr. v. Bowen, 835 
F.2d 345, 348-49 (D.C. Cir. 1987).

     Tenet emphasizes that it does not challenge the lawfulness 
or reasonableness of the Medicare regulations, but rather 
only the way in which the PRRB applied them to its reim-
bursement request.  Tenet Br. at 11-14.  The provider raises 
two principal objections to the PRRB decision, contending 
that:  (1) the Board's determination that the Valuation Coun-
selors appraisal was inadequate to warrant a stepped-up basis 
is unsupported by substantial evidence;  and (2) the Board's 
determination that net book value was a reasonable basis for 
the hospital is arbitrary, capricious, and not in accordance 
with law.  We consider these two arguments below.

                                A

     The PRRB did not dispute that Tenet would have been 
eligible for a stepped-up basis had it submitted adequate 
supporting data.  PRRB Op. at 10-11.  It concluded, howev-
er, that Tenet failed to do so.  Id. at 11.  Although Tenet 
contends that this conclusion is unsupported by substantial 
evidence in the record, we disagree.

     As the PRRB explained, and as Tenet concedes, the basis 
for Three Rivers Hospital may not exceed the lowest of its:  
(1) purchase price, (2) fair market value, or (3) depreciated 
reproduction cost.  42 C.F.R. s 413.134(g)(1), (2).  Under the 
Medicare regulations, "[p]roviders receiving payment on the 
basis of reimbursable cost must provide adequate cost data," 
42 C.F.R. s 413.24(a)--i.e., data that is "accurate and in 
sufficient detail to accomplish the purposes for which it is 
intended," 42 C.F.R. s 413.24(c).  Blue Cross accepted the 
figures offered by Tenet for the hospital's purchase price and 
fair market value.  But it concluded, and the Board agreed, 
that Tenet failed to meet its burden of submitting reliable 

evidence of the third regulatory criterion:  the hospital's 
depreciated reproduction cost.10  Accordingly, Tenet could 
not establish that its proffered basis was less than or equal to 
depreciated reproduction cost, and hence could not meet the 
step-up requirements of s 413.134(g).  PRRB Op. at 10-11.

     In support of its claim to a stepped-up basis, Tenet submit-
ted the appraisal prepared by Valuation Counselors at the 
time of the 1983 sale.  Although the Board and the intermedi-
ary listed a number of flaws in the appraisal, we consider only 
the most important one here:  As the Board correctly noted, 
the 1983 appraisal simply "did not provide detailed documen-
tation to support how it arrived at its depreciated reproduc-
tion cost[ ]."  Id. at 11.  The appraisal listed a bottom-line 
figure for the depreciated reproduction cost of the hospital 
buildings, but it included no supporting analysis or data.  
Appraisal at 9 (J.A. at 16).  Although Valuation Counselors 
attached an item-by-item, priced inventory of the hospital's 
equipment, it attached no similar schedule for the hospital's 
buildings--notwithstanding that the buildings constituted al-
most 90% of the facility's total appraised value.  See id. at 10 
(J.A. at 17).  Indeed, the appraisal did not even use the term 
"depreciated reproduction cost" to describe the value it listed, 
but rather the term "depreciated replacement cost."  Id. at 7 
(J.A. at 14).  Although Tenet contends that Valuation Coun-
selors regarded the latter as equivalent to the former, without 
a more detailed description of the appraiser's methods and 
results it is impossible to determine whether that was so.11

__________
     10  Tenet argues that under 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(f)(2)(iv), when 
an intermediary is dissatisfied with an appraisal, it is the intermedi-
ary rather than the provider that is obligated to seek a new 
appraisal.  The cited regulation, however, applies only when a lump 
sum sales price must be allocated among various assets, and when 
"the buyer and seller cannot agree on an allocation of the sales 
price, or ... there is insufficient documentation of the current fair 
market value of each asset" to make the allocation.  Id.  There was 
no dispute about the allocation of the lump sum sales price in this 
case.

     11  We have previously referred to "reproduction cost" as the 
"present cost of reproducing the same physical assets," while refer-

     In sum, the appraisal submitted by Tenet left the interme-
diary's auditors without "auditable evidence" from which they 
could determine the depreciated reproduction cost of the 
Three Rivers facility.  Intermediary's Position Paper, PRRB 
Case. No. 92-1576, at 13 (J.A. at 161).  Because that figure is 
essential to the calculation set forth in s 413.134(g), this flaw 
is sufficient to support the Board's conclusion that the ap-
praisal was inadequate to warrant a stepped-up basis.12

     Twelve years after it purchased the Three Rivers facility, 
Tenet endeavored to cure the flaw in the 1983 Valuation 
Counselors appraisal by submitting a list of the items that 
purportedly comprised the 1983 valuation of the buildings' 
reproduction cost.  The PRRB was not satisfied with the 
degree of detail submitted.  PRRB Op. at 8.  Although Tenet 
neither included this list in the parties' Joint Appendix, nor 
referred to it in its brief, at oral argument Tenet's counsel 
directed us to the appropriate pages of the agency record.  
We have examined those pages and concur in the PRRB's 

__________
ring to "replacement cost" as the "present cost of building a like 
enterprise taking advantage of modern technology."  Farmers Un-
ion Cent. Exch. v. FERC, 584 F.2d 408, 412 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 1978);  see 
also, e.g., Dickler v. Cigna Prop. & Cas. Co., 957 F.2d 1088, 1100 (3d 
Cir. 1992).  The Valuation Counselors appraisal described its "re-
placement cost" figure as "the cost of producing new duplicate 
assets on the basis of current prices using the same or similar 
materials," Appraisal at 1 (J.A. at 8) (emphasis added), while the 
Provider Manual defines "reproduction cost" as the "cost to repro-
duce the actual facility in like kind, and should not be inflated by 
such factors as ... different construction types,"  Provider Manual 
s 134.2.

     12  In addition to this flaw, the Board also found, inter alia, that 
the depreciation figure used in the appraisal was so low as to cast 
doubt on the appraisal's overall validity.  PRRB Op. at 11.  The 
intermediary had noted that Valuation Counselors' calculation 
"yields an accumulated depreciation of only $406,300 from the 
construction date [1969] to the point of sale [1983]."  Id. at 8.  That 
figure, the intermediary observed, corresponds to "a useful life in 
excess of 175 years"--a facially implausible assumption given "the 
standard estimated useful life of a building of 40 years."  Id. at 8.

assessment.  The new material does no more than list thir-
teen gross components of the Three Rivers buildings 
("floors," "roof," "ceilings," etc.) and attach dollar figures to 
each.  Administrative Record (A.R.) at 740.  It does not 
indicate how those figures were calculated;  it does not even 
state whether they were the original 1983 calculations or 
simply retrospective reconstructions.

     It was not only the Valuation Counselors appraisal itself 
that caused the Board concern about accepting Tenet's pro-
posed basis.  Another valuation of the hospital, conducted for 
Tenet by the firm of Marshall and Stevens, Inc., raised still 
further doubts.  PRRB Op. at 11.  The Marshall and Stevens 
report valued the depreciated reproduction cost of the hospi-
tal buildings at $3,000,000 lower than had Valuation Counsel-
ors, as of approximately the same date.  Id. at 9.  "There are 
no reasonable explanations for this large variance," the Board 
said, "which leads to the conclusion that the data is unreliable 
for computation of loss on sale of the facility."  Id. at 9 
(summarizing intermediary's view).

     Finally, we note that Tenet itself created the evidentiary 
difficulty it now faces.  Although Blue Cross pointed out the 
inadequacy of Tenet's appraisal data as early as 1984, Tenet 
"neither appealed the Intermediary's decision when it was 
made, nor did it request a reopening of the cost report within 
three years of the original" decision.  Id. at 11.  Tenet also 
failed to challenge Blue Cross' determination in any of the 
four succeeding cost years, and never offered a new appraisal 
that corrected the flaws in the original.  Although HHS has 
not argued that this constitutes a waiver, the agency does 
reasonably contend that Tenet's failure to appeal the first 
cost report has made the determination of the hospital's basis 
all the more problematic.  See, e.g., 15 Mertens, Law of 
Federal Income Taxation s 59:11 (1997) (noting the "difficul-
ty of establishing the value of property a number of years 
after the valuation date" and that, as a result, a valuation 
made at such time "will be regarded as lacking in probative 
value").  Hence, Tenet has no one but itself to blame for its 
present predicament.  We conclude that the PRRB's determi-
nation, that the Valuation Counselors report "failed to ade-

quately document the basis of its value for current depreciat-
ed reproduction cost," PRRB Op. at 11, is supported by 
substantial evidence in the record before the agency.13

                                B

     We next consider Tenet's contention that the PRRB's 
decision was arbitrary, capricious, and not in accordance with 
law.  Tenet makes two arguments in this regard.  First, 
Tenet argues that Medicare acted arbitrarily in rejecting the 
Valuation Counselors appraisal for the purpose of determin-
ing Tenet's basis in the hospital, while accepting the appraisal 
for the purpose of computing Humana's gain on the same 
sale.  Second, Tenet argues that the Medicare regulations bar 
HHS from using net book value as a hospital's basis.

                                1

     Tenet correctly points out that, although Blue Cross reject-
ed the Valuation Counselors appraisal for the purpose of 
determining Tenet's basis in the hospital it purchased from 
Humana, the intermediary accepted that appraisal for the 
purpose of computing Humana's gain on the sale.14  Specifi-
cally, the intermediary accepted the appraisal's allocation of 
$4,516,202 of the total sales price to Three Rivers.  By 

__________
     13  We reject Tenet's contention that Blue Cross' refusal to rely 
on the 1983 Valuation Counselors appraisal was inconsistent with a 
letter in which the intermediary stated that the appraisal "met the 
Medicare Guidelines [for] an acceptable appraisal."  See May 7, 
1992 Blue Cross Letter at 1 (J.A. at 196).  That statement follows 
directly after a sentence in which Blue Cross wrote that "[t]his 
appraisal was based on the fair market value (FMV) method," id., 
and, as we have noted above, Blue Cross did in fact find the 
appraisal acceptable for calculating the hospital's fair market value.  
The sentences that follow, however, make absolutely clear that Blue 
Cross regarded the appraisal as unacceptable for calculating the 
facility's depreciated reproduction cost.  Id.

     14  As discussed below, when a provider sells a depreciable asset 
for a gain, Medicare recaptures its previous depreciation payments 
from that gain.  See 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(f)(1).

accepting the appraisal for this purpose, while rejecting it for 
calculating Tenet's basis in the hospital, Tenet contends that 
Medicare acted arbitrarily and capriciously.  Indeed, Tenet 
continues, this treatment gave Medicare a "windfall," because 
Medicare was able to use the higher valuation to recapture 
the depreciation expenses it had paid to Humana, while using 
the lower valuation to pay lower depreciation reimbursements 
to Tenet.  We conclude, however, that there is nothing arbi-
trary about the conclusion that the appraisal was acceptable 
for one purpose but inadequate for the other.

     First, and foremost, the Medicare regulations expressly 
require different data for valuing a property for the purpose 
of calculating the purchaser's basis than for the purpose of 
calculating the seller's gain.  As noted above, the regulations 
provide that the purchaser's basis in depreciable assets is the 
lowest of three figures:  purchase (sales) price, fair market 
value, and depreciated reproduction cost.  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.134(g)(1), (2).  As further noted, because the intermedi-
ary reasonably concluded that the Valuation Counselors ap-
praisal of depreciated reproduction cost was unsupported, it 
was also reasonable for it to conclude that the appraisal was 
unacceptable for the purpose of calculating Tenet's basis.

     The regulations governing the seller's gain, however, are 
different.  Gain is determined by subtracting the seller's 
adjusted basis from the sales price.  The seller's adjusted 
basis is its net book value, which is unaffected by the sale.  
See Provider Manual s 104.10(c), ex. 5;  see also Whitecliff, 20 
F.3d at 489.  The sales price is "determined by allocating the 
lump sum sales price among all the assets sold, in accordance 
with the fair market value of each asset."  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.134(f)(2)(iv).  Accordingly, for purposes of calculating 
the seller's gain, valuation of the property at the time of the 
sale requires only two figures:  total sales price and fair 
market value, the latter being required to allocate the sales 
price when more than one asset is sold.  As we have noted, 
the intermediary accepted Valuation Counselors' figures for 
both the total sales price and the fair market value, and hence 
of the allocated sales price of the hospital facilities.  Because 
the only figure disputed by the intermediary--depreciated 

reproduction cost--does not enter into the formula for calcu-
lating Humana's gain, it was not arbitrary to accept the 
appraisal for the purpose of calculating Humana's gain while 
rejecting it for the purpose of calculating Tenet's basis.

     Second, although Tenet is correct that the consequence of 
using the appraisal for calculating the seller's gain was to 
permit Medicare to recapture its prior depreciation payments 
to Humana, there is nothing arbitrary about that result.  
Rather, it flows directly from the operation of regulations 
that are not themselves challenged here.  Under those regu-
lations, providers are permitted "[a]n appropriate allowance 
for depreciation on buildings and equipment used in the 
provision of patient care."  42 C.F.R. s 413.134(a).  When a 
provider sells a depreciable asset for a gain, Medicare recap-
tures its previous depreciation payments from that gain.  See 
42 C.F.R. s 413.134(f)(1).  Because annual depreciation allow-
ances are only estimates of the true depreciation of the asset, 
recapture permits Medicare to recover when actual deprecia-
tion--as reflected in the sales price--turns out to be less than 
anticipated.  See generally Whitecliff, 20 F.3d at 489.  And 
this means that the amount of money the seller actually 
receives for the property--the allocated sales price--is the 
key variable.

     By contrast, establishing the purchaser's basis is not in-
tended to permit Medicare to recover for past overpayments 
generated by using estimates of actual depreciation, but 
rather to provide the initial value from which future esti-
mates--i.e., the purchaser's depreciation allowances--will be 
calculated.  42 C.F.R. s 413.130(a)(1), .134.  As set forth in a 
regulation that Tenet has not challenged, 42 C.F.R. 
s 413.134(g), depreciated reproduction cost is one of the three 
variables needed to determine the purchaser's basis.  There 
is nothing arbitrary about rejecting an appraisal that did not 
reliably establish the magnitude of that variable.15

__________
     15  We also note that while the accuracy of the appraisal of 
Tenet's basis was important to both Medicare and Tenet, the 
accuracy of the appraisal of Humana's sales price was not equally 
significant to either Medicare or Humana.  Since the amount of 

                                2

     Tenet also argues that the Medicare regulations bar HHS 
from using net book value as a hospital's basis.  As the 
provider correctly points out, paragraphs (1) and (2) of 42 
C.F.R. s 413.134(g) do not mention net book value as a 
permissible basis:  They mention only purchase price, fair 
market value, and depreciated reproduction cost.  As HHS 
correctly notes in response, however, these paragraphs re-
quire the intermediary to select the lowest of those three 
variables as the basis, and are simply silent as to what should 
be done if the data are insufficient to support one or more of 
them.  The paragraphs do not mention net book value at all, 
let alone expressly forbid its use.

     When an agency regulation is silent or ambiguous with 
respect to the specific point at issue, we must defer to the 
agency's interpretation as long as it is reasonable.  Indep. 
Petroleum Ass'n of Am. v. Babbitt, 92 F.3d 1248, 1256 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996);  see Foothill Presbyterian Hosp. v. Shalala, 152 
F.3d 1132, 1134, 1135 (9th Cir. 1998).  Indeed, the Supreme 
Court has advised that "[t]his broad deference is all the more 
warranted" when the regulation concerns a "complex and 
highly technical regulatory program" like Medicare, "in which 
the identification and classification of relevant criteria neces-
sarily require significant expertise and entail the exercise of 
judgment grounded in policy concerns."  Thomas Jefferson 
Univ., 512 U.S. at 512 (internal quotation omitted).  More-
over, as the Court has further explained, HHS does not have 
a statutory duty to promulgate regulations that "address 
every conceivable question in the process of determining 
equitable reimbursement."  Shalala v. Guernsey Mem'l 
Hosp., 514 U.S. 87, 96 (1995).  Rather, for "particular reim-
bursement details not addressed by" regulations, HHS prop-
erly "relies upon an elaborate adjudicative structure which 

__________
Humana's gain was well above the level that would permit Medicare 
to completely recapture its depreciation payments, neither Humana 
nor Medicare had any reason to dispute the precise amount of the 
gain.  See HHS Reply Br. at 9 & n.3;  A.R. at 460.

includes the right to review by the [PRRB]."  Id.  The 
agency reasonably relied on that structure here.

     Lacking an acceptable figure for depreciated reproduction 
cost, the intermediary concluded that it could not determine 
which of the three values listed in the regulation was the 
lowest, and hence could not step-up the basis under 
s 413.134(g).  In such circumstances, Blue Cross recognized, 
a literal reading of the regulation could require it to assign a 
basis of zero:  "Without the determination of ... current 
depreciated reproduction costs, the lesser ... of these three 
variables becomes -0- and the Provider's asset basis thus 
becomes -0-."  Intermediary's Position Paper at 8 (J.A. at 
156).  Instead of adopting such a Draconian position, howev-
er, Blue Cross permitted Tenet to use the basis of the 
previous owner.  "This basis was chosen," the intermediary 
said, "because it would not exceed the purchase price, fair 
market value, or depreciated reproduction cost" of the hospi-
tal.  May 7, 1992 Blue Cross Letter at 2 (J.A. at 197).  In 
addition, the previous owner had maintained "adequate docu-
mentation ... on the assets which properly supported their 
net book value."  Id.  Finally, Blue Cross had been applying 
net book value as Tenet's basis, without appeal, for each of 
the previous five years.  Under these circumstances, the 
PRRB determined, and we agree, that "the intermediary's 
use of the net book value was reasonable."  PRRB Op. at 11.

     We also note that relegating the provider to the basis of 
the previous owner is consistent with the agency's long-
standing characterization of s 413.134 as a regulation that 
permits a purchaser to "step-up" the property's basis from 
that of the prior owner.  See HHS Br. at 9;  see also 
Intermediary Manual s 4508.1 (referring to the calculation as 
a " 'write-up' from the historical cost basis of the acquired 
depreciable assets").  Although the regulation does not itself 
use the term "step-up," Tenet also characterizes it as a "step-
up" regulation, see Tenet Br. at 6, as has this court, see 
Nursing Ctr., 990 F.2d at 646;  Richey Manor, Inc. v. 
Schweiker, 684 F.2d 130, 133 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  The logical 
consequence of such a characterization is that a purchaser 
who fails to satisfy the regulation's requirements will not be 

permitted to step-up the basis, and hence will appropriately 
be left with that of the prior owner.16

     In a further attack on the intermediary's assignment of the 
seller's basis to Tenet, Tenet contends that another para-
graph of s 413.134(g) expressly bars the use of the seller's 
basis unless the sale was not bona fide.  See Tenet Br. at 25-
29 (citing para. (5)).  Since there has never been any sugges-
tion that Humana's sale to Tenet was anything but bona fide, 
Tenet concludes that HHS was barred from assigning Three 
Rivers a basis equivalent to the prior owner's net book value.

     This argument simply misreads the cited paragraph.  Para-
graph (5) of s 413.134(g), entitled "Transactions other than 
bona fide," states that "[i]f the purchaser cannot demonstrate 
that the sale was bona fide, in addition to the limitations 
specified in paragraph[s] (g)(1) [and] (2) ... of this section, 
the purchaser's cost basis may not exceed the seller's cost 
basis, less accumulated depreciation."  This paragraph does 
provide that if a sale was not bona fide, the purchaser's basis 

__________
     16  The district court was concerned that limiting the purchaser 
to the prior owner's net book value "would cause all assets that 
have exceeded their estimated useful life to have a depreciable basis 
of $0 assigned to them upon sale," a result the court thought 
inconsistent with the PRRB's recognition in a prior case that fully 
depreciated assets may continue to have value.  Tenet HealthSys-
tems, slip op. at 14 (citing Unity Hospital, PRRB Dec. No. 78-D86, 
Medicare & Medicaid Guide (CCH) p 29,590 (Dec. 21, 1978)).  This 
concern is unwarranted.  First, although it is true that the applica-
tion of straight-line depreciation can reduce an asset's depreciable 
basis to zero, that would ordinarily occur only at the end of the 
asset's useful life, which had not been reached here.  Second, this 
result is not arbitrary, but rather the logical consequence of the 
straight-line method of depreciation, which is embedded in Medi-
care regulations not themselves challenged by Tenet.  See 42 
C.F.R. s 413.134(b)(3), (g)(2).  Finally, the PRRB did not hold that 
every purchaser should be relegated to the seller's net book value, 
only that this was an appropriate result in Tenet's case because 
Tenet had failed to satisfy the regulatory requirements for a step-
up.  As discussed in the text above, that determination was reason-
able.

is limited to that of the seller.  But paragraph (5) does not 
say that the only time the intermediary may use the seller's 
basis is when the sale was not bona fide.  To the contrary, 
paragraph (5) says nothing at all about how to calculate the 
basis when the transaction was bona fide, and instead refers 
the reader to paragraphs (g)(1) and (2) of the same section.  
Those are the paragraphs already considered above, which 
require the use of the lowest of purchase price, fair market 
value, and depreciated reproduction cost, and which the 
PRRB reasonably read as permitting use of the seller's basis 
when the figure offered for depreciated reproduction cost is 
not reliable.  We therefore reject Tenet's contention that the 
Board's decision is "not in accordance with law."

                               III

     The PRRB's decision to approve a cost basis for Tenet's 
hospital that was equal to that of the prior owner is supported 
by substantial evidence and is not arbitrary, capricious, or 
contrary to law.  Indeed, the use of that basis represented 
Medicare's reasonable effort to be fair to a purchaser that 
could not satisfy the regulatory requirements for a stepped-
up basis.  Accordingly, the judgment of the district court is

                                                                  Reversed.

             