                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 5, 2001     Decided June 15, 2001 

                           No. 00-1055

          National Exchange Carrier Association, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

           National Telephone Cooperative Association, 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Richard A. Askoff argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Kenneth A. Levy and Judith L. 
Harris.

     L. Marie Guillory and Daniel Mitchell were on the brief 
for intervenor National Telephone Cooperative Association.

     Laurel R. Bergold, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents.  With her on the 
brief were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, John E. 
Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, A. Douglas Me-
lamed, Acting Assistant Attorney General at the time the 
brief was filed, U.S. Department of Justice, Robert B. Nichol-
son and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Per curiam:  The National Exchange Carrier Association 
challenges an order of the Federal Communications Commis-
sion adopting a formula for distributing money from the 
Universal Service Fund (USF) to subsidize high-cost tele-
phone service providers and thereby promote telephone sub-
scribership.  The petitioner claims that the Commission's 
order violates the Administrative Procedure Act because it 
arbitrarily and capriciously undercompensates telephone ser-
vice providers, and it was adopted without adherence to the 
applicable procedures for public notice and comment.  The 
NECA, however, fails to articulate an intelligible explanation 
of its substantive claim, and its procedural claim lacks merit.  
Accordingly, we deny the petition for review.

                          I. Background

     Telephone service in the United States is provided within 
each geographical area by a single local exchange carrier 
(LEC).  The LEC connects long-distance calls originated by 
its subscribers to the long-distance carriers of their choice 
and connects long distance calls originated elsewhere to its 
subscribers.  For providing this "exchange access" the LEC 
may obtain compensation from the long distance carriers 
either by filing its own access tariff with the Commission or 
by accepting compensation under a generally applicable for-
mula adopted by the Commission.  In order to effectuate the 
latter option, the Commission established an independent 

organization, the NECA, "to prepare and file access charge 
tariffs on behalf of all telephone companies that do not file 
separate tariffs."  47 C.F.R. s 69.601(a).  Among those non-
filers (called average schedule companies), any company 
whose local loop costs are 115% or more of the national 
average may receive additional compensation from the Com-
mission, paid out of the Universal Service Fund pursuant to a 
set formula.  47 C.F.R. s 36.631.

     In October 1998 the NECA proposed a formula for calcu-
lating the USF payments to be made to average schedule 
companies in the coming year and the Common Carrier 
Bureau invited public comments on the proposal.  The Bu-
reau determined that using the proposed formula would 
substantially increase the number of companies receiving 
payments and increase by 33% the total amount paid to 
average schedule companies.  The Bureau also expressed 
concern that the proposed formula did not well approximate 
the per loop costs of average schedule companies.  In particu-
lar, the Bureau found that the formula overstated costs for 
two thirds of the average schedule companies sampled;  in-
deed, more than half the companies that would receive USF 
payments under the NECA's formula were below the 115% 
threshhold of eligibility.  Ultimately, the Bureau rejected the 
proposed formula and issued an order retaining the 1998 
formula, as adjusted to reflect growth in the number of local 
loops served by the average schedule companies.  See Staff 
Order, 14 FCC Rcd 4049, 4053 p 9.

     The NECA filed an application for Commission review of 
the order, challenging it on both substantive and procedural 
grounds.  The Commission denied the application, and the 
NECA filed a petition for review in this court.

                           II. Analysis

     The NECA argues that the Commission acted in an arbi-
trary and capricious manner, in violation of the Administra-
tive Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A), by rejecting the 
NECA's proposed 1999 USF formula and adhering to the 
1998 formula with an upward adjustment.  The NECA ad-

mits, however, that its proposed formula does not accurately 
estimate the LECs' per loop costs.  Its strategy is to confess 
and avoid, maintaining that the "cost per loop approach is 
problematic because it systematically understates USF pay-
ments to average schedule companies."  Br. for Petitioner at 
7.  In a footnote, the NECA adds cryptically, "The reasons 
for this are complex, having to do with the fact that the USF 
rules contain a sharp payment 'thresholds' [sic] that limits 
USF payments to companies with loop cost in excess of 115% 
of the national average."  Id. n.14.

     The reasons may be complex, but if the NECA wanted to 
demonstrate that retaining the incumbent formula was arbi-
trary and capricious, then it needed to explain the reasons to 
the court.  Instead, the petitioner purports to show the 
superiority of its own proposed approach, as follows:

     Instead of attempting to model cost per loop amounts, 
     NECA ... calculates the actual USF payment that each 
     sample company would receive if it were to conduct a 
     cost study.  These calculated USF expense adjustments 
     (payments) are then compared to available demand varia-
     bles, and a formula is developed that predicts USF 
     payments for individual companies.
     
     This "expense adjustment" modeling approach not only 
     avoids the systematic underpayment problem inherent in 
     the cost per loop approach, it appears to conform more 
     closely with the language of section 69.606 which requires 
     that formulas simulate "disbursements" of representative 
     cost companies (not "cost per loop" amounts or other 
     intermediate steps in the process).
     
Without a grasp of what is wrong with the Commission's 
approach, however, the court cannot deem it arbitrary and 
capricious, much less appreciate the supposed superiority of 
the NECA's alternative.

     Separately, the NECA argues, or at least observes, that 
"average schedule formulas are only intended to achieve a 
reasonable balance between accuracy and ease of administra-
tion," and no schedule will fit all companies perfectly.  While 

no doubt true, that point falls well short of establishing that 
the Commission acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner 
in adjusting the prior year's formula.

     Most likely there is more to the NECA's claim or it would 
not have litigated it to this point, but we are unable to tell 
what that more might be.  Neither the petitioner nor the 
court gets any help from the Commission in this regard 
either;  the Commission responds to the petitioner's brief 
more or less in kind, leaving the court with no greater grasp 
of what the parties are arguing about than what little we 
could glean from the petitioner's brief.  The burden of per-
suasion being with the petitioner, however, the Commission's 
failings will not succor the NECA's case.  Nor is it the court's 
duty to identify, articulate, and substantiate a claim for the 
petitioner.  As we have said before, "this court tries not to 
base its decisions on mind reading."  Goos v. Nat'l Ass'n of 
Realtors, 997 F.2d 1565, 1572 (1993).

     In sum, the NECA has failed to make intelligible to the 
court any coherent argument in support of its substantive 
claim.  That may reflect the court's own limitations as much 
as any failure on the petitioner's part;  but that is a limitation 
with which both bench and bar must live.  For the court's 
part, we take some comfort in thinking we have previously 
understood cases a good deal more complicated than this one.

     The NECA also raises a procedural argument, namely that 
the Commission violated s 553 of the Administrative Proce-
dure Act by failing to follow notice and comment procedures 
in making the upward adjustment to the prior year's USF 
formula.  The Commission first suggests that the petitioner 
lacks standing to challenge an adjustment in its favor, as 
though it were not injured by getting less of an adjustment 
than it sought.  More seriously, the Commission argues that 
additional notice and comment were not required before it 
issued the order adjusting the prior year's formula because 
the adjustment was a "logical outgrowth" of the rule it had 
put out for comment.  See Fertilizer Institute v. EPA, 935 
F.2d 1303, 1311 (D.C. Cir. 1991).

     As this court has explained, "the logical outgrowth test 
normally is applied to consider whether a new round of notice 
and comment would provide the first opportunity for interest-
ed parties to offer comments that could persuade the agency 
to modify its rule."  Arizona Public Service Co. v. EPA, 211 
F.3d 1280, 1299 (2000);  see also Association of Battery 
Recyclers, Inc. v. EPA, 208 F.3d 1047, 1059 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  
First Am. Discount Corp. v. Commodity Futures Trading 
Comm'n, 222 F.3d 1008, 1014 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  In this case, 
the NECA has had ample opportunity to argue to the Com-
mission that the 1998 rule should be modified so as to 
increase USF payments to average schedule companies;  in-
deed, that has been the NECA's purpose throughout.  The 
NECA even argued specifically that, should the Bureau reject 
the NECA's proposed formula and retain the 1998 one in-
stead, then it should not limit any upward adjustment in the 
1998 formula to the rate of loop growth.  Clearly, a new 
round of notice and comment would not provide the NECA its 
"first opportunity ... to offer comments" upon the order.

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is

                                                                      Denied.

                              