                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 14, 2002     Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 01-1151

              Process Gas Consumers Group, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

    Tennessee Gas Pipeline Company and East Tennessee Group, 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     James M. Bushee argued the cause for petitioners and 
supporting intervenors.  With him on the briefs were Bar-
bara K. Heffernan, Debra Ann Palmer, Roy R. Robertson 
Jr., Jennifer N. Waters, Edward J. Grenier Jr. and Joshua 
L. Menter.

     Lona T. Perry argued the cause for respondent.  On the 
brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission, Dennis Lane, Solicitor, and 
Laura J. Vallance, Attorney.

     G. Mark Cook and Howard L. Nelson were on the brief 
for intervenor Tennessee Gas Pipeline Company.  Shemin V. 
Proctor entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners challenge the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission's approval of Tennessee Gas 
Pipeline Company's proposed method for awarding pipeline 
capacity and allocating meter amendments.  Finding that the 
Commission engaged in reasoned decision making with re-
spect to both issues, we affirm.

                                I.

     The Natural Gas Act ("NGA"), 15 U.S.C. s 717, et seq., 
requires that natural gas companies charge "just and reason-
able" rates for the transportation and sale of natural gas.  Id. 
s 717c(a).  To promote compliance with this mandate, the Act 
requires gas pipelines to file rate schedules with the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission and to notify the Commis-
sion of any subsequent changes in rates and charges.  Id. 
s 717c(c), (d).  On submission of a tariff revision, the Com-
mission may hold a hearing to determine whether the pipeline 
has met its burden to show that the amended rates and 
charges are "just and reasonable."  Id. s 717c(e).

     This case involves a proposed tariff revision that Tennessee 
Gas Pipeline Company ("Tennessee") filed with FERC in 
1996.  In that revision, the company proposed adopting a net 
present value, or "NPV," method to allocate pipeline capacity 
and to process so-called "meter amendments."  Two aspects 
of the revision are relevant here:  whether Tennessee must 
impose a cap on the length of bids for pipeline capacity, and 
whether it must credit existing gas shippers' contracts for 

mainline capacity in evaluating meter amendment requests.  
We considered both issues in Process Gas Consumers Group 
v. FERC ("PGC I") and, finding FERC's reasoning defective, 
remanded to the Commission for further proceedings.  177 
F.3d 995, 997 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Here, we explain each issue in 
turn, first outlining FERC's original position, then summariz-
ing our decision in PGC I, and finally describing the Commis-
sion's orders on remand--the subject of this petition.

                       Capacity Allocation

     Tennessee transports natural gas through a pipeline sys-
tem stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to New England.  
Historically, the company awarded "firm capacity"--transpor-
tation for which the pipeline guarantees delivery, as distinct 
from "interruptible capacity," for which delivery can be de-
layed if and when the pipeline has insufficient capacity to 
meet all customers' demands, see PGC I, 177 F.3d at 997 n.1 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted)--on a first-
come, first-served basis.  The first shipper to submit a re-
quest received the available capacity, even if the shipper only 
requested service for a few days or weeks while others sought 
transportation for longer periods.

     Recognizing the inefficiency of this capacity allocation 
method, Tennessee's 1996 tariff revision proposed adoption of 
an NPV method, under which the company would announce 
an "open season" whenever it wanted to sell capacity, accept a 
range of bids, compare the bids by discounting the value of 
each bid to the present, and accept the bid with the highest 
NPV.  This new system, the pipeline argued, would permit it 
to award firm capacity to those shippers who value the 
capacity most--that is, since rates are capped, to those 
shippers offering the longest contracts.

     Responding to Tennessee's proposal, various parties, in-
cluding petitioner Process Gas Consumers Group, an associa-
tion of industrial users of natural gas, warned that although 
FERC sets the maximum rate Tennessee may charge for 
transporting gas, the pipeline could exercise its market power 
to induce shippers to bid for longer contracts than they would 

in a competitive market.  In other words, the commenters 
worried that shippers would "us[e] long contract duration as a 
price surrogate to bid beyond the maximum approved rate," 
United Distribution Cos. v. FERC, 88 F.3d 1105, 1140 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996) ("UDC"), thereby giving Tennessee insurance 
against future instability in the natural gas market.  The 
commenters urged FERC to address this concern by capping 
the duration of bids Tennessee could consider in its NPV 
calculations, "to simulate the end product of a competitive 
market."  PGC I, 177 F.3d at 998.

     Ultimately, FERC approved Tennessee's proposed switch 
from the first-come, first-served to the NPV approach.  Tenn. 
Gas Pipeline Co., 76 F.E.R.C. p 61,101, at 61,522 (1996).  In 
response to the commenters' market power concerns, howev-
er, the Commission suggested that the pipeline "include a 
uniform cap" on the length of bids submitted during open 
seasons.  Id. at 61,519.  Acquiescing, Tennessee proposed a 
twenty-year cap, explaining that it chose such a high cap 
because "bids beyond the [twentieth] year are unlikely to 
have a significant impact on the NPV analysis."  PGC I, 177 
F.3d at 998-99 (internal quotation marks and citation omit-
ted).

     Following another comment period, FERC approved the 
twenty-year cap.  The Commission dismissed Process Gas's 
objection that the cap was too long to provide adequate 
protection against the pipeline's market power on the ground 
that " '[b]idders are not forced into the maximum duration [of 
twenty years]....  Rather, the primary issue here, is ... 
when two shippers both desire new capacity should that 
capacity go to a shipper who values it more, i.e., for a longer 
term, than another shipper who might value it less.' "  Id. at 
999-1000 (quoting Tenn. Gas Pipeline Co., 79 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,297, at 62,339 (1997)).  Unsatisfied with this response, 
Process Gas filed a petition for review, contending that 
FERC "failed to engage in reasoned decision making" in 
accepting the twenty-year cap.  Id. at 997.

     In our first encounter with these issues in PGC I, we found 
Process Gas's argument persuasive.  Noting FERC's ac-

knowledgment that "the market served by Tennessee's pipe-
line has monopolistic characteristics," we held that the Com-
mission had not adequately justified its conclusion that a 
twenty-year cap would "prevent the NPV method from com-
pelling shippers to offer the pipeline longer contracts than 
they would in a competitive market."  Id. at 1003.  We 
pointed out that the data on which FERC based its approval 
of the cap--"three previous Commission decisions involving 
ten and fifteen year ... agreements"--in fact suggested that 
"competitive market contracts typically run to no more than 
fifteen years."  Id.  In light of that evidence, we continued, 
"a twenty-year cap would allow Tennessee's market power to 
induce excessively long bids."  Id.  We recognized the legiti-
macy of FERC's "goal of encouraging the allocation of pipe-
line capacity to parties willing to pay the most for it," but 
reminded the Commission of its "need to balance th[at] goal 
with its duty to prevent exploitation of Tennessee's monopoly 
power."  Id. at 1004.  Observing that "the orders suggest ... 
FERC approved the twenty-year cap because, functionally, 
twenty years would amount to no cap at all," we remanded to 
the Commission, directing it to "take the problem [of Tennes-
see's monopoly power] seriously and confront it with a forth-
right explanation of why a twenty-year cap would not aug-
ment that power."  Id. at 1005.

     FERC then took an entirely different tack.  Noting that 
when orders are remanded, an agency generally has "discre-
tion to reconsider the whole of its original decision," Tenn. 
Gas Pipeline Co., 94 F.E.R.C. p 61,097, at 61,398 (2001) 
("Rehearing Order") (internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted), aff'g 91 F.E.R.C. p 61,053 (2000) ("Remand Order"), 
FERC not only declined to impose a shorter cap on capacity 
bids, but removed the cap altogether, explaining that, for 
various reasons, there is little risk that Tennessee will exer-
cise its monopoly power to force shippers into excessively 
long contracts.  Process Gas sought rehearing, but the Com-
mission denied its petition.  Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 
61,401.

                         Meter Amendments

     The second relevant aspect of Tennessee's 1996 tariff revi-
sion involves meter amendments.  PGC I explained this term 
as follows:

     When natural gas is shipped through a pipeline, the 
     points at which the gas enters and leaves the system are 
     called "receipt" and "delivery" points, respectively.  A 
     firm transportation shipper selects "primary" receipt and 
     delivery points ... [as] part of its contract with the 
     pipeline.  Designating a point as primary guarantees the 
     shipper use of the point, an important right when the 
     pipeline lacks sufficient capacity at the point to satisfy 
     demand.  Firm shippers can select other points on a 
     secondary basis, but can only use those points if there is 
     sufficient capacity beyond that taken by shippers using 
     them on a primary basis.  A change in a primary receipt 
     or delivery point is ... referred to as a "meter amend-
     ment" because gas is measured at these points.
     
177 F.3d at 1000.

     The issue here concerns Tennessee's method for allocating 
new primary points as they become available.  Historically, 
Tennessee permitted existing shippers to switch primary 
points on a first-come, first-served basis as long as the chosen 
new points were available and the shippers notified the 
pipeline far enough in advance.  When Tennessee adopted its 
new NPV method for allocating mainline capacity, however, 
the company indicated that it also intended to use this 
method to allocate primary points.  Thus, "[a] meter amend-
ment request would trigger an open season[,] and the reques-
ter would have to compete with other interested shippers on 
the basis of NPV."  Id. at 1001.

     This new approach generated considerable controversy be-
cause in calculating the NPV of competing bids for a particu-
lar primary point, Tennessee declined to credit existing ship-
pers' preexisting promise to pay for firm capacity on the 
company's mainline.  That is, the pipeline proposed to assign 
promised future payments an NPV of zero.  Under this 

system, therefore, an existing shipper wishing to switch its 
primary delivery point from City A to City B could not 
compete against a new shipper wanting to purchase mainline 
capacity with a primary delivery point in City B:  The existing 
shipper's promise to continue paying for its firm capacity 
would have an NPV of zero, while the new shipper's promise 
to pay for as-yet unallocated mainline capacity would have a 
positive NPV.

     Various parties objected to the proposed change, claiming 
that applying this method to meter amendments was "incon-
sistent with FERC's professed aim of assuring that [existing] 
firm shippers have receipt and delivery point flexibility."  
PGC I, 177 F.3d at 1001.  The Commission sided with 
Tennessee, however, emphasizing that " 'allocating capacity to 
parties who value it the most' " would foster " 'economic 
efficiency,' " and further, that nothing in the new NPV policy 
would prevent existing shippers from using the desired 
"points on a secondary basis."  Id. (quoting Tennessee Gas, 
79 F.E.R.C. at 62,337).  The objecting parties sought rehear-
ing and, when FERC declined to change its position, filed a 
petition for review.

     Considering meter amendments in PGC I, we agreed with 
the commenters that FERC's approval of the NPV method 
emphasized "maximization of pipeline revenue" at the ex-
pense of "the ability of existing shippers to change primary 
points."  Id. at 1005.  We rejected FERC's notion that 
"shippers unable to obtain a point on a primary basis" could 
simply use the point on a secondary basis because the latter 
option would "not guarantee access to the point over any 
fixed period of time."  Id. at 1005, 1006.  "At the end of the 
day," we observed, "FERC's position is that regardless of the 
ability of existing shippers to compete" for points, "it is best 
to award primary point capacity on the basis of the amount of 
additional revenue generated for Tennessee.  If existing ship-
pers are injured, so be it."  Id. at 1006.  Rejecting this 
approach, we remanded the meter amendment issue to the 
Commission, explaining that, as we understood the situation:

     Existing shippers entered into their contracts with Ten-
     nessee with the expectation of a certain amount of pri-
     mary point flexibility.  When the pipeline proposes to 
     take away that flexibility altogether or reduce it substan-
     tially, FERC is obligated to provide a better explanation 
     of why the shippers' resultant loss cannot be taken into 
     account in a more balanced application of the NPV 
     pricing system.
     
Id.

     On remand, the Commission reconsidered its meter amend-
ment ruling but again concluded "it is just and reasonable" 
for Tennessee to use an "allocation method that gives a 
priority to bids [for primary points] which include a request 
for the related mainline capacity."  Remand Order, 91 
F.E.R.C. at 61,192.  In response to Process Gas's petition for 
rehearing, the Commission reaffirmed its order.  See Rehear-
ing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,402.

                               II.

     Seeking review again, Petitioners challenge the Commis-
sion's approval of Tennessee's procedures for capacity alloca-
tion and meter amendments, reiterating many of the chal-
lenges raised in PGC I and arguing that the Commission's 
Remand and Rehearing Orders ignore that decision's express 
requirements.  In reviewing these arguments, we "uphold 
FERC's factual findings if supported by substantial evidence 
and ... endorse its orders so long as they are based on 
reasoned decision making," Texaco, Inc. v. FERC, 148 F.3d 
1091, 1095 (D.C. Cir. 1998), and responsive to PGC I.

     With these standards in mind, we begin with the capacity 
allocation issue.  In its Remand and Rehearing Orders, 
FERC offers several explanations for its decision to revoke 
the cap on the duration of bids for pipeline capacity.  Most 
important, the Commission argues that existing regulatory 
controls already limit Tennessee's market power, thereby 
"minimiz[ing any] danger" that the pipeline will "withhold ... 
capacity from the market" to "create [the] artificial scarcity" 
necessary to force shippers to bid for supercompetitive con-

tract terms.  Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,398.  Spe-
cifically, FERC cites its regulations (1) setting the maximum 
rate Tennessee may charge for its transportation services, 
and (2) requiring Tennessee to sell all available capacity to 
shippers willing to pay that maximum rate.  Id.  Given these 
regulatory limitations, the Commission contends, "the only 
way Tennessee could withhold capacity to force shippers to 
accept longer contract terms is by refusing to build additional 
capacity" to meet increased demand.  Remand Order, 91 
F.E.R.C. at 61,191.  But, FERC continues,

     [T]here is little reason for the pipeline to exercise market 
     power by withholding new capacity because the maxi-
     mum rates established by the Commission prevent [the 
     pipeline] from charging rates above the just and reason-
     able rates based on its cost of service.  As a result, even 
     if the pipeline refused to build new capacity, its annual 
     revenues in any given year would be capped at its annual 
     cost of service.  All that the pipeline could potentially 
     accomplish by withholding new capacity is getting the 
     customers to sign up for longer term contracts than they 
     otherwise might....  But this gives the pipeline no 
     immediate benefit in the form of increased revenues or 
     profits.  It just reduces its long-term risk somewhat by 
     enabling it to obtain contracts with longer terms.  By 
     contrast, if the pipeline built new capacity to serve the 
     increased demand, it could increase its current revenue 
     and profits....  As a result, even without a term match-
     ing cap, it would appear that a pipeline has a greater 
     incentive to build new capacity to serve all the demand 
     for its service, rather than withhold capacity (by refusing 
     to build new capacity) in order to create scarcity.
     
Id. (footnote omitted).  According to FERC, therefore, to the 
extent shippers are bidding for longer contract terms than 
they would in a competitive market, they are motivated not 
by "pipeline monopoly power" but by competition with other 
shippers for scarce pipeline capacity.  Id.

     Reinforcing this argument, the Commission points out that 
if Tennessee ever refused to build new capacity to meet 

shippers' demands, the shippers "could file a complaint with 
the Commission."  Id.  Moreover, applicable rules, see 18 
C.F.R. pt. 161, prohibit Tennessee from "favoring or colluding 
with its affiliates" "to manipulate the market through sham 
bids," Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,398, 61,400, so 
longer bids truly reflect shippers' desire to establish longer-
term contracts with the pipeline.

     Finally, the Commission explains that absent a "widespread 
competitive market for primary pipeline capacity," there is 
"no way of estimating what contract terms [such] a ... 
market ... would produce."  Id. at 61,399 n.8.  Any cap 
would therefore be arbitrary--and imposing an arbitrary cap 
could "distort[ ] efficient operation of the market" by "pre-
vent[ing] a shipper [who] is willing to offer a longer contract 
term ... from doing so."  Id. at 61,399.  Thus, the only 
efficient solution, FERC contends, is to eliminate the cap 
altogether and to rely on other regulatory controls to limit 
Tennessee's market power.

     These several rationales for uncapping the NPV bidding 
process not only satisfy our deferential standard of review but 
also address our principal concern in PGC I--FERC's failure 
to articulate how a twenty-year cap would prevent Tennessee 
from exploiting its monopoly power.  No longer relying on a 
cap to accomplish that objective, FERC now explains that 
other regulatory constraints adequately limit Tennessee's 
ability, as well as any incentive, to induce lengthy contracts.  
We think this persuasive for two reasons.  First, because the 
Commission already regulates the rates pipelines may charge 
and requires them to sell all available capacity at those rates, 
we agree with FERC that Tennessee has neither the legal 
ability to withhold existing capacity nor an incentive to refuse 
to build new capacity.  Second, any effort by Tennessee 
affirmatively to manipulate the bidding process would violate 
other Commission rules and would therefore presumably be 
actionable.  Accordingly, as FERC argues, the fact that 
shippers may at times bid up contract length likely reflects 
not an exercise of Tennessee's market power, but rather 
competition for scarce capacity.  See Remand Order, 91 
F.E.R.C. at 61,190.  The data the Commission cites, more-

over, indicate that the recent trend has been toward shorter 
capacity contracts and, relatedly, that the average length of 
post-1997 contracts is only 5.8 years--empirical facts demon-
strating that, as FERC predicted, most of the time shippers 
have been able to obtain firm capacity without submitting 
excessively long bids.  Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 
61,401.

     Even if we were skeptical of the Commission's conclusion 
regarding existing regulatory controls, however, that conclu-
sion embodies precisely the sort of prediction about the 
behavior of a regulated entity to which--in the absence of 
contrary evidence--we ordinarily defer.  As we have re-
peatedly observed, "it is within the scope of the agency's 
expertise to make ... a prediction about the market it 
regulates, and a reasonable prediction deserves our deference 
notwithstanding that there might also be another reasonable 
view."  Envtl. Action, Inc. v. FERC, 939 F.2d 1057, 1064 
(D.C. Cir. 1991).

     Challenging FERC's decision to remove the cap on bid 
duration, Petitioners repeatedly compare the bidding process 
for new capacity--at issue here--to the bidding process for 
capacity that becomes available on expiration of an existing 
shipper's contract.  Some understanding of the latter situa-
tion is necessary to see why this comparison falls short.  Put 
simply, under FERC's current rules, when an existing ship-
per's contract for firm capacity expires, the shipper has the 
right "to retain its service from the pipeline under a new 
contract by matching the rate and duration offered by the 
highest competing bid--up to the maximum 'just and reason-
able' rate approved by FERC."  Interstate Natural Gas 
Ass'n of Am. v. FERC ("INGAA"), 285 F.3d 18, 51 (D.C. Cir. 
2002).  In a series of opinions, we have questioned FERC's 
position regarding the need for and the proper length of a cap 
on the duration of such "right-of-first-refusal bids," to protect 
existing shippers from routinely losing their firm capacity to 
new customers offering longer terms.  See id. at 51-53.  The 
situation is currently in flux, with this court having remanded 
a twenty-year and, more recently, a five-year cap to the 
Commission, first "for failing to explain the length" and then 

for "failing to explain the brevity."  Id. at 53 (citing UDC, 88 
F.3d at 1140-41).

     Regardless of what cap, if any, the Commission eventually 
prescribes (and adequately supports) for right-of-first-refusal 
bids, however, that cap has nothing to do with the issue now 
before us.  True, in PGC I, we cautioned FERC that its 
attempt to distinguish the right-of-first-refusal context from 
new capacity allocation "seem[ed] ... a distinction without a 
difference."  PGC I, 177 F.3d at 1004.  If the data underlying 
the cap on right-of-first-refusal bids are irrelevant in the 
context of new capacity allocation, we continued, "FERC has 
yet to tell us why."  Id.  We now understand why.  As 
INGAA explains, the requirement to protect existing ship-
pers from pipeline market power derives directly from Sec-
tion 7(b) of the Natural Gas Act, which "generally prohibits 
'natural-gas compan[ies]' from ceasing to provide service to 
their existing customers unless, after 'due hearing,' FERC 
finds 'that the present or future public convenience or neces-
sity permit such abandonment.' " 285 F.3d at 51 (quoting 15 
U.S.C. s 717f(b)) (alteration in original).  No comparable 
statutory provision requires FERC to protect new shippers 
from competition for limited capacity (provided the final rates 
are just and reasonable).  With no entrenched interests re-
quiring protection, the Commission is free to conclude that an 
uncapped bidding process maximizes market efficiency by 
identifying which shipper is willing to pay the most--in terms 
of contract length--to obtain such capacity.

     This brings us to meter amendments.  Addressing that 
issue, FERC's Remand and Rehearing Orders make two 
principal points.  First, Tennessee's FERC-approved rate 
schedule only permits existing shippers to " 'elect to substi-
tute new [primary points] ... in [their] service agreement[s] 
... if there is [ ]adequate capacity available to render this 
new service.' "  Remand Order, 91 F.E.R.C. at 61,192 (quot-
ing Schedule 4.7 of Tennessee's Rate Schedule FT-A).  Sig-
nificantly, neither this schedule nor relevant Commission 
orders address potential "conflicts" between "existing and 
new shippers for primary point capacity that may become 
available."  Id.  Thus, FERC maintains, while existing ship-

pers do have "an expectation of a certain amount of primary 
point flexibility," PGC I, 177 F.3d at 1006, that expectation 
extends only to available primary points;  nothing in an 
existing shipper's relationship with Tennessee entitles it to 
win contested primary points from new shippers wishing to 
purchase the point and associated mainline capacity.  See 
Remand Order, 91 F.E.R.C. at 61,192, 61,193 ("[W]e do not 
find that [an existing shipper's] contract, the pipeline's tariff 
or our policy guarantees complete portability of ... capacity 
at all times.");  Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,402 
("[T]hat Tennessee's tariff gives shippers the ability to elect 
to amend primary points where capacity is available does not 
decide the issue of how to choose between two shippers 
seeking primary rights at a point, where there is only suffi-
cient capacity for one ... to have primary rights.").  Given 
this framework, the Commission continues, Tennessee has no 
obligation to treat existing shippers any differently from new 
shippers when awarding contested primary points.  Rather, 
the pipeline may design any "reasonable" point allocation 
method.  Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,402.

     Continuing from this premise, FERC's second argument is 
that Tennessee's chosen point allocation method, which as-
signs existing shippers' firm capacity contracts an NPV of 
zero and therefore "consider[s] only new, incremental revenue 
in awarding ... points," id., is "just and reasonable," Remand 
Order, 91 F.E.R.C. at 61,192.  According to the Commission, 
it is entirely reasonable for Tennessee to adopt a point 
allocation method that "produce[s] greater revenue for the 
pipeline" by assuring the sale of additional mainline capacity.  
Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,402.  Moreover, the sale 
of such capacity increases "throughput on the system," so "at 
such time as Tennessee ... file[s] a new rate case, there will 
be a greater number of units of service over which to spread 
Tennessee's fixed costs"--a development that will "benefit[ ] 
all [of] Tennessee's shippers by allowing Tennessee's rates to 
be lower than they otherwise would be."  Id.;  see also 
Remand Order, 91 F.E.R.C. at 61,193.  The Commission also 
points out that even before Tennessee adopted the NPV 
method, existing shippers only had the right to change to 

available primary points;  they never had a guarantee that 
any particular point would be available at any particular time.  
Consequently, those shippers "should have been prepared to 
rely on [their contractually designated] point[s] for purposes 
of bringing gas supplies onto the pipeline for the term of 
the[ir] contract[s]."  Rehearing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,402.  
Finally, FERC observes that (1) even after adoption of the 
NPV method, about ninety percent of existing shippers' "re-
quests to change primary points have been granted," Remand 
Order, 91 F.E.R.C. at 61,193;  (2) Tennessee's system has 
much greater point capacity than mainline capacity, Rehear-
ing Order, 94 F.E.R.C. at 61,402;  and (3) "Tennessee must 
provide for pooling of [gas] supplies at points downstream of 
its primary receipt points," enabling "shippers to obtain sup-
plies that originate from many different upstream receipt 
points," id. at 61,402-03.  As the Commission notes, these 
three factors suggest that existing shippers will rarely have 
to rely solely on their contractual primary points for receipt 
of gas.  Id.

     Again, we find these explanations adequate to satisfy both 
our standard of review and PGC I.  Now that FERC has 
clarified the nature of existing shippers' "expectation ... of 
primary point flexibility," PGC I, 177 F.3d at 1006, we 
understand that Tennessee has no obligation to give such 
shippers a preference in competitive bidding for contested 
primary points.  In the absence of such an obligation, we 
think it eminently reasonable for Tennessee to adopt a point 
allocation method that promotes the sale of available mainline 
capacity.  Not only does Tennessee's chosen method benefit 
the pipeline in the short term (and existing shippers when 
and if the pipeline files a new rate case), but it ensures that 
available points go to shippers who value them most--those 
willing to pay for associated mainline capacity.

                               III.

     In sum, we disagree with Petitioners that the Commission's 
latest orders "ignore" PGC I. Pet'rs' Reply Br. at 3.  That 
decision required only that FERC better explain its reason-

ing in setting a twenty-year cap on bids for new mainline 
capacity and approving the NPV method for evaluation of 
meter amendment requests.  On remand, the Commission 
fully complied with that requirement, reevaluating both issues 
and satisfactorily explaining its ultimate decisions to eliminate 
the bid cap altogether and to reaffirm the meter amendment 
ruling.  The petitions for review are denied, and the orders of 
the Commission are affirmed.

                                                                 So ordered.

                           