                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 22, 2002      Decided July 2, 2002 

                           No. 01-5391

                    Federal Trade Commission, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                        GlaxoSmithKline, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 01ms00163)

     Melvin A. Schwarz argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were Stephen A. Saltzburg and Stephen A. 
Stack Jr.

     Melvin H. Orlans, Special Litigation Counsel, Federal 
Trade Commission, argued the cause for appellee.  With him 
on the brief was John F. Daly, Deputy General Counsel for 
Litigation.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Henderson and 
Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  In the course of investigating 
whether a manufacturer of drugs listed its patents properly in 
the compilation maintained by the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration, the Federal Trade Commission issued a subpoena 
directing the company to produce documents relating to a 
particular drug.  When the company resisted, claiming the 
attorney-client privilege shields the documents, the Commis-
sion repaired to the district court, which enforced the subpoe-
na.  We reverse the decision of the district court because the 
court both relied upon an argument to which the company 
had no opportunity to respond and ruled erroneously that, by 
failing to keep confidential the contents of the documents, the 
company had waived the attorney-client privilege.

                          I. Background

     GlaxoSmithKline manufactures paroxteine hydrochloride 
hemihydrate under the brand name Paxil, the annual sales of 
which in the United States exceed $1 billion.  See FTC v. 
GlaxoSmithKline, 203 F.R.D. 14, 15 (D.D.C. 2001).  Several 
companies have applied to the Food and Drug Administration 
for permission to sell generic versions of Paxil when GSK's 
patents expire.  The Federal Trade Commission is investigat-
ing whether GSK, in an attempt to prevent or delay competi-
tion from generic versions of Paxil, has abused the process 
for listing its patents in the FDA's compilation of "Approved 
Drug Products with Therapeutic Evaluations."  Id. at 16.

     The Commission issued a subpoena directing GSK to pro-
duce two types of documents.  First, the Commission sought 
all documents concerning Paxil that the United States Dis-
trict Court for the Northern District of Illinois had directed 
GSK to disclose when GSK had sued two manufacturers of 
generic pharmaceuticals for infringement of its patents -- the 
so-called Chicago documents, see SmithKline Beecham Corp. 
v. Apotex Corp., 193 F.R.D. 530, aff'd, No. 98C3952, 2000 WL 
1310669 (Sept. 13, 2000).  Second, the Commission wanted all 

"documents related to the manufacturing and marketing of 
Paxil, the listing and use of any patents regarding Paxil, and 
any filings with the FDA regarding Paxil."  GlaxoSmith-
Kline, 203 F.R.D. at 16.  GSK and the Commission re-
solved their differences over the inclusion or exclusion of 
thousands of documents, but because GSK declined to pro-
duce hundreds of others -- primarily on the ground that they 
were shielded by the attorney-client privilege -- the Commis-
sion petitioned the district court to enforce the subpoena.

     The parties then agreed upon a procedure for presenting 
their positions to the district court.  See Stipulation Estab-
lishing Schedule & Procedure for Resolving FTC's Enforce-
ment Pet. (April 20, 2001).  First, each would submit its 
contentions about the Chicago documents.  See id. p 1.  If the 
court compelled GSK to produce those documents, then the 
parties would contest the second category of documents as 
follows.  The Commission would "identify for GSK ... every 
responsive (and allegedly privileged) document that the Com-
mission [sought] to have produced and the reason(s) why each 
privilege claim [was] invalid."  Id. p 3(a).  GSK would then 
either produce the document or list it in a "privilege log 
identifying any documents as to which it continue[d] to assert 
privilege."  Id. p 3(b).  Accordingly, only after the Commis-
sion had informed GSK of its objections to the Company's 
claims of privilege would the parties seek judicial resolution.  
See id. p 3(c).  At that final stage the court would either call 
for oral argument or resolve summarily "[a]ny issues submit-
ted to [it] in connection with the FTC's enforcement petition."  
Id. p 5.

     The district court did enforce the subpoena with respect to 
the Chicago documents.  FTC v. GlaxoSmithKline, 202 
F.R.D. 8, 12 (D.D.C. 2001).  The parties then resolved 
through negotiation their disputes about the disclosure of 
hundreds more documents, leaving unresolved the status of 
only 91.  GSK asserted that all 91 documents were protected 
by the attorney-client privilege and that 34 of them were 
protected also by the privilege for attorney work product.  
The Commission told GSK it considered the assertions of 
privilege invalid for two reasons:  (1) GSK had forfeited its 

claim to confidentiality by disseminating all 91 documents 
widely both within GSK and to consultants and other third-
parties;  and (2) the decision in Apotex estopped GSK from 
asserting that the 34 documents were attorney work product, 
that is, were prepared in anticipation of litigation.  In re-
sponse to these objections, GSK compiled a privilege log 
describing each of the 91 documents, and the parties present-
ed their arguments to the district court.

     In its opening brief to the district court, the Commission 
raised the two objections it had previously presented to GSK.  
The Commission also introduced in that brief a new argu-
ment:  Regardless whether Apotex foreclosed the Company's 
claim of attorney work product, GSK's privilege log "fail[ed] 
to provide facts demonstrating that the document[s] w[ere] 
created in anticipation of litigation."  When GSK objected 
that the Commission had not made this argument during pre-
motion negotiations, the Commission withdrew the argument.  
It explained in a Stipulation approved by the district court 
that it had "inadvertently failed to provide GSK with the 
agreed advance notice regarding the grounds for challenging 
the documents."  Stipulation & Order with Respect to Cer-
tain Docs. in FTC's Req. for Enforcement (Sept. 6, 2001) at 
p 1.

     GSK submitted its responsive brief to the district court and 
attached thereto the Company's privilege log and the affidavit 
of Charles Kinzig, GSK's Vice President and Director of 
Corporate Intellectual Property.  For each document, the log 
described the contents;  listed the author, intended recipients, 
and date of creation;  and noted whether the author or 
intended recipients were attorneys.  A supplement to the log 
indicated the title or titles of each person therein named who 
was not an attorney.  The Kinzig Declaration stated that the 
documents had been disseminated to various "teams" of com-
pany employees and contractors, and explained the duties of 
each team.  According to Kinzig, all the teams were "involved 
in seeking or giving legal advice and/or gathering and record-
ing information in anticipation of or preparation for litiga-
tion."  The Kinzig Declaration states also that every employ-
ee and contractor named in the privilege log was "bound not 

to disclose confidential information to persons outside [GSK]" 
without receiving permission from a high-ranking official of 
the Company.

     The Commission then filed a reply brief in which it made 
yet another argument for the first time:  The attorney-client 
privilege does not shield the documents because they contain 
no confidential information.

     The district court ordered GSK to produce the 91 docu-
ments.  The court rejected GSK's claims of attorney-client 
privilege on the grounds that (1) "GSK ha[d] not sustained its 
burden of demonstrating that the relevant documents were 
distributed on a 'need to know' basis or to employees that 
were 'authorized to speak or act' for GSK," 203 F.R.D. at 19, 
and (2) the Company had "failed to provide sufficient evi-
dence that the information contained therein is confidential," 
id. at 20.  The court rejected GSK's claims of attorney work 
product for the reason withdrawn by the Commission, name-
ly, that "GSK fail[ed] to set forth objective facts that support 
the corporation's assertion that the relevant documents were 
created in anticipation of litigation."  Id. at 21.  Having 
determined that "even if GSK is not precluded from asserting 
the privilege [for attorney work product], it has failed to 
satisfy its burden of showing the applicability of the doctrine 
to the relevant documents," the district court found it unnec-
essary to resolve whether the decision in Apotex estopped 
GSK from claiming otherwise.  Id. at 22 n.3.  GSK sought 
and we granted a stay pending appeal.

                           II. Analysis

     GSK contends the district court erred both by rejecting its 
claims of privilege based upon arguments the Commission did 
not raise properly and by misapplying the standard for 
determining whether a corporation has kept confidential the 
contents of a communication.  The Commission defends the 
decision of the district court and argues that GSK is collater-
ally estopped in any event, by reason of the Apotex litigation, 
from claiming the 34 documents are attorney work product.

     Preliminarily, the parties disagree about the proper stan-
dard of review.  The Commission claims we should defer to 
the district court unless it committed a clear error, whereas 
GSK argues that because the circumstances of this case "are 
procedurally identical to an appeal of a ruling on a motion for 
summary judgment," we should review the decision of the 
district court de novo.  This debate need not detain us long;  
our standard of review is well established.  We review a 
decision to enforce a subpoena "only for arbitrariness or 
abuse of discretion."  In re Sealed Case, 146 F.3d 881, 883 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  We will affirm the decision unless it "rests 
upon a misapprehension of the relevant legal standard or is 
unsupported by the record."  In re Subpoena Served upon 
the Comptroller of the Currency, 967 F.2d 630, 633 (D.C. Cir. 
1992).

     The district court held that GSK failed to establish either 
of two prerequisites for recognition of the attorney-client 
privilege -- that the documents contain confidential informa-
tion and that they have been kept confidential.  See Glaxo- 
SmithKline, 203 F.R.D. at 17-18.  As the Company points 
out, during the parties' negotiations the Commission did not 
dispute that the documents contain confidential information.  
The Commission did not even raise the argument in its 
opening brief before the district court, waiting instead until 
its reply brief and thereby depriving GSK of any opportunity 
to respond.

     The Commission had agreed, pursuant to the Scheduling 
Stipulation approved by the district court, to inform GSK of 
its reasons for disputing the Company's claims of privilege 
before asking the court for a ruling.  The Commission there-
fore was bound not to put before the district court any 
objection not first raised with its adversary.  Accordingly, the 
district court abused its discretion when it ruled against GSK 
based upon an argument that was raised not only in violation 
of the Scheduling Stipulation but so belatedly that the Com-
pany had no chance to respond to it.

     The Commission acknowledges that the parties intended 
the Scheduling Stipulation to "enable them to narrow, 

through pre-motion negotiations, the claims and documents 
that would require judicial resolution," but it contends that 
"nothing in the Stipulation barred the Commission from 
making -- or the district court from considering -- additional 
arguments simply because they had not been presented to 
GSK during pre-motion negotiations."  On its face, the 
Scheduling Stipulation -- which required the Commission to 
raise in negotiations with GSK "the reason(s) why each 
privilege claim is invalid" -- refutes this claim, as does the 
implausibility of the idea that parties would establish elabo-
rate procedures to narrow their dispute through negotiation 
with the foreknowledge that their adversary might again 
expand the dispute before the district court.  It is not sur-
prising, therefore, that the Commission itself had previously 
viewed the Stipulation as binding:  Recall it withdrew from 
the court another objection not raised in pre-motion negotia-
tions because, in its own words, it had "inadvertently failed to 
provide GSK with the agreed advance notice regarding the 
grounds for challenging the documents."  Stipulation & Or-
der (Sept. 6, 2001) at p 1.

     Nor is it true, as the Commission claims, that "GSK 
suffered no possible prejudice" in having to overcome the 
Commission's objections in front of the district court because 
GSK bore the burden in any event "to present to the court 
sufficient facts to establish the privilege."  In re Sealed Case, 
737 F.2d 94, 99 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  If the district court had 
held the Commission to the terms of its agreement, then the 
court would not have required GSK to prove that the docu-
ments were confidential and had been kept in confidence 
because the issue would have been conceded.  As we have 
held in the analogous context of a pretrial scheduling order 
entered pursuant to Rule 16 of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure, "[e]ven a prima facie element of the plaintiff's case 
may be removed from dispute" pursuant to a stipulation.  
Smith v. Washington Sheraton Corp., 135 F.3d 779, 784 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).  The concerns underlying Rule 16 compel the 
same result for the analogous Scheduling Stipulation agreed 
to by the Commission and GSK in this case.  Cf. Meadow 
Gold Prods. Co. v. Wright, 278 F.2d 867, 869 (D.C. Cir. 1960) 

(pretrial procedures aimed at "eliminating unnecessary proof 
and issues, lessening the opportunities for surprise and there-
by expediting the trial");  D.D.C. Local Civ. Rule 7.1(m) 
(requiring parties to consult in advance of filing non-
dispositive motion "in a good-faith effort ... to narrow the 
areas of disagreement").

     The question that remains is whether the district court 
erred in ruling that GSK failed to satisfy the second prerequi-
site for attorney-client privilege--that the documents have 
been kept confidential.  GSK contends that this issue, too, 
was raised in a manner that deprived the Company of an 
opportunity to respond.  We think not.  The Commission 
took the position in its negotiations with GSK that the 
Company had lost its claim of privilege by disseminating the 
documents widely.  This argument put the Company on 
notice that it needed to establish it had kept the documents 
confidential.  The Commission renewed the point in its open-
ing brief to the district court thus:  "In view of the breadth of 
distribution and GSK's failure to carry its burden of establish-
ing that each and every recipient had a demonstrable 'need to 
know,' ... GSK's assertions of attorney-client privilege must 
fail...."  And the Company joined this argument on the 
merits before the district court.  Having defended as suffi-
cient the evidence it submitted to the district court on this 
point, GSK may not now claim it was unfairly surprised by 
the argument.

     Although the district court was correct to entertain the 
Commission's second argument, it erred in resolving the legal 
issue.  The applicable standard is, as the district court recog-
nized, whether the "the documents were distributed on a 
'need to know' basis or to employees that were 'authorized to 
speak or act' for the company."  203 F.R.D. at 19 (quoting 
Coastal States Gas Corp. v. DOE, 617 F.2d 854, 863 (D.C. Cir. 
1980)).  The Company's privilege log and the affidavit of 
Charles Kinzig establish that GSK circulated the documents 
in question only to specifically named employees and contrac-
tors, most of whom were attorneys or managers and all of 
whom "needed to provide input to the legal department 
and/or receive the legal advice and strategies formulated by 

counsel."  The affidavit also states that each intended recipi-
ent was bound by corporate policy or, in the case of the 
contractors, by a separate understanding, to keep confidential 
the contents of the documents.  The Company's submission 
thus leads ineluctably to the conclusion that no document was 
"disseminated beyond those persons who, because of the 
corporate structure, need[ed] to know its contents."  Diversi-
fied Indus., Inc. v. Meredith, 572 F.2d 596, 609 (8th Cir. 1978) 
(en banc).

     The district court faulted GSK for not having explained 
"why any, let alone all, of the employees received copies of 
certain documents," 203 F.R.D. at 19, and the Commission 
likewise claims on brief that GSK should have shown why 
each individual in possession of a confidential document 
"needed the information [therein] to carry out his/her work."  
These demands are overreaching.  The Company's burden is 
to show that it limited its dissemination of the documents in 
keeping with their asserted confidentiality, not to justify each 
determination that a particular employee should have access 
to the information therein.  Not only would that task be 
Herculean -- especially when the sender and the recipient 
are no longer with the Company -- but it is wholly unneces-
sary.  After all, when a corporation provides a confidential 
document to certain specified employees or contractors with 
the admonition not to disseminate further its contents and the 
contents of the documents are related generally to the em-
ployees' corporate duties, absent evidence to the contrary we 
may reasonably infer that the information was deemed neces-
sary for the employees' or contractors' work.  Compare 
Coastal States, 617 F.2d at 863 (confidentiality lost when 
organization "admitted that it does not know who has had 
access to the documents, and there is undisputed testimony 
that ... copies of the memoranda were circulated to all area 
offices").  We do not presume, therefore, that any business 
would include in a restricted circulation list a person with no 
reason to have access to the confidential document--that is, 
one who has no "need to know."  Id.

     Moreover, we can imagine no useful purpose in having a 
court review the business judgment of each corporate official 

who deemed it necessary or desirable for a particular employ-
ee or contractor to have access to a corporate secret.  It 
suffices instead that the corporation limited dissemination to 
specific individuals whose corporate duties relate generally to 
the contents of the documents.  As we have seen in this case, 
the privilege log and the Kinzig Declaration together estab-
lish that GSK did just that, and the Company thereby demon-
strated its entitlement to the attorney-client privilege.  The 
FTC has proffered nothing to the contrary.

     Our conclusion that the documents are protected by the 
attorney-client privilege extends also to those communications 
that GSK shared with its public relations and government 
affairs consultants.  The Kinzig affidavit notes that GSK's 
corporate counsel "worked with these consultants in the same 
manner as they d[id] with full-time employees;  indeed, the 
consultants acted as part of a team with full-time employees 
regarding their particular assignments" and, as a result, the 
consultants "became integral members of the team assigned 
to deal with issues [that] ... were completely intertwined 
with [GSK's] litigation and legal strategies."  In these cir-
cumstances, "there is no reason to distinguish between a 
person on the corporation's payroll and a consultant hired by 
the corporation if each acts for the corporation and possesses 
the information needed by attorneys in rendering legal ad-
vice."  See In re Copper Market Antitrust Litig., 200 F.R.D. 
213, 219 (S.D.N.Y. 2001).

                         III. Conclusion

     Because we hold the 91 documents are protected by the 
attorney-client privilege, we have no occasion to address 
GSK's other arguments, including its claim that a subset of 
those 91 documents are attorney work product.  For the 
foregoing reasons, the order of the district court enforcing 
the subpoena is

                                        Reversed.

                                                         