                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 23, 2001     Decided June 8, 2001 

                           No. 99-1268

               Appalachian Power Company, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                            Respondent

                  Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 
         Department of Environmental Protection, et al. 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
          99-1270, 99-1274, 99-1276, 99-1277, 99-1279, 
          99-1280, 99-1281, 99-1286, 99-1287, 00-1169, 
          00-1187, 00-1189, 00-1190, 00-1191, 00-1192, 
                             00-1194

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

                            ---------

     Norman W. Fichthorn argued the cause for the Industry 
Petitioners on the Electric Generating Facility Issues.  With 
him on the briefs were Andrea Bear Field, James D. Elliott, 
Mel S. Schulze, David M. Flannery, Kathy G. Beckett, Gale 
R. Lea, Scott D. Goldman, and Jeff F. Cherry.  Kyle W. 
Danish entered an appearance.

     Marc D. Bernstein, Assistant Attorney General, State of 
North Carolina, argued the cause for the Petitioning States.  
With him on the briefs were Michael F. Easley, Attorney 
General, James C. Gulick and J. Allen Jernigan, Special 
Deputy Attorneys General, James P. Longest, Jr. and Amy 
R. Gillespie, Assistant Attorneys General, Betty D. Montgom-
ery, Attorney General, State of Ohio, Bryan F. Zima, Assis-
tant Attorney General, Bill Pryor, Attorney General, State of 
Alabama, Tommy E. Bryan and Prudence A. Cash-Brown, 
Assistant Attorneys General, Jennifer Granholm, Attorney 
General, State of Michigan, Alan F. Hoffman, Assistant 
Attorney General, Charles M. Condon, Attorney General, 
State of South Carolina, Samuel L. Finklea and Thomas G. 
Eppink, Attorneys, Mark L. Earley, Attorney General, Com-
monwealth of Virginia, Roger L. Chaffe, Senior Assistant 
Attorney General, Stewart T. Leeth, Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral, and Thomas H. Zerbe, Senior Counsel, State of West 
Virginia.

     Theodore L. Garrett argued the cause for the Split State 
Petitioners Kansas City Power & Light Company, et al.  
With him on the briefs were Michael D. Hockley and Terry 
W. Schackman.

     Scott H. Segal argued the cause for the Non-Electric 
Generating/Industrial Petitioners.  With him on the briefs 
were Lisa M. Jaeger, Charles S. Carter, Deborah Ann Hotel, 
Kathy G. Beckett and Scott Goldman.

     Andrew J. Doyle, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief were 

Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, and Sara 
Schneeberg, Attorney, U.S. Environmental Protection Agen-
cy.

     Robert A. Reiley and M. Dukes Pepper, Jr. were on the 
brief of Intervenor Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  Thomas 
Y. Au entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  This case involves multiple chal-
lenges to "Technical Amendments" to the "NOx SIP Call" 
rulemaking at issue in Michigan v. EPA, 213 F.3d 663 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 121 S.Ct. 1225 (2001).  At issue here 
are revisions to the database used to establish state "budgets" 
for emissions of nitrogen oxide ("NOx") which are regulated 
by the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") under the 
Clean Air Act ("CAA").  Petitioners include upwind states 
subject to the NOx SIP Call and industries located therein.  
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania intervenes in support of 
the EPA.

     We hold that petitioners' challenges to the EPA's growth 
factors are neither time-barred nor estopped by principles of 
res judicata.  On the merits, we remand the EPA's growth 
factors for electric generating units for the same reasons as 
in Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, Nos. 99-1200, et al. (May 
15, 2001).  The remaining claims in the various petitions for 
review are denied with two exceptions.  We remand the 
EPA's source definitions pending completion of further rule-
makings in accordance with Michigan, and remand and va-
cate the NOx emission budget for the state of Missouri as the 
EPA continues to include portions of the state for which no 
significant contribution findings have been made.

                          I. Background

A.   Relevant Facts

     In October 1998, the EPA issued the "NOx SIP Call"--a 
final rule under CAA section 110(k)(5), 42 U.S.C. s 7410(k)(5), 

requiring 22 states and the District of Columbia ("upwind 
states") to revise their State Implementation Plans ("SIPs") 
to impose additional controls on NOx emissions.  See Finding 
of Significant Contribution and Rulemaking for Certain 
States in the Ozone Transport Assessment Group Region for 
Purposes of Reducing Regional Transport of Ozone, 63 Fed. 
Reg. 57,356 (Oct. 27, 1998) ("NOx SIP Call").  The EPA 
concluded that emissions from the upwind states "contribute 
significantly" to ozone nonattainment in downwind states, in 
violation of CAA section 110(a)(2)(D)(i).  42 U.S.C. 
s 7410(a)(2)(D)(i).  Under the SIP Call, upwind states are 
required to reduce NOx emissions by the amount accomplish-
able by "highly cost-effective controls," defined as those 
controls capable of removing NOx at a cost of $2,000 or less 
per ton.

     Under the NOx SIP Call, each upwind state must limit its 
summertime NOx emissions to a statewide emission "budget" 
for the year 2007.  "The budgets represent the amount of 
allowable NOx emissions remaining after a covered state 
prohibits the NOx amount contributing significantly to down-
wind nonattainment."  Michigan, 213 F.3d at 686.  Specifical-
ly, the NOx state budgets represent the EPA's projection for 
what NOx emissions in 2007 would be for each state were 
"highly cost-effective controls" implemented.  Under the NOx 
SIP Call, states have substantial flexibility in selecting combi-
nations of emission control measures to meet their respective 
budgets, so long as they do so by the regulatory deadline.

     In setting the NOx budgets, the EPA relied upon emission 
inventory data collected by the Ozone Transport Assessment 
Group, a working group comprised of federal, state, industry, 
and environmental group representatives.  See Findings of 
Significant Contribution and Rulemaking on Section 126 Peti-
tions for Purposes of Reducing Interstate Ozone Transport, 
64 Fed. Reg. 28,250, 28,253 (May 25, 1999);  Michigan, 213 
F.3d at 672.  The EPA divided each state's NOx emissions 
according to five source types or "sectors":  electric generat-
ing units ("EGUs"), non-EGU stationary sources (such as 
industrial boilers), area sources (smaller stationary sources), 
highway mobile sources, and nonroad mobile sources.  The 

EPA calculated 2007 budget allocations for each sector.  Un-
der the NOx SIP Call, the EPA assumed that emission 
reductions would occur primarily in the EGU and non-EGU 
sectors, representatives of which are petitioners here.  In 
developing their SIPs, however, states are free to achieve 
emission reductions from other sources, so long as the SIP 
provides for attainment of the requisite emission reduction 
level.

     To calculate the EGU emission budgets, the EPA obtained 
source-specific "utilization" (heat-input) data for either 1995 
or 1996.  To this baseline, the EPA applied "growth factors" 
derived from growth projections for the years 2001 through 
2010 generated by the "Integrated Planning Model" ("IPM"), 
a widely used utility planning model.  Even though the EPA 
had 2007 utilization projections from the IPM, the EPA 
instead opted to apply the 2001-2010 growth factors to pro-
ject growth over the 1996-2007 period in each state.  The 
resulting 2007 emission projections were then reduced based 
on the EPA's estimate of the amount of emission reductions 
that could be achieved through "highly cost-effective" means.  
The resulting 2007 budgets are at issue in this case.

     On March 3, 2000 this Court upheld the bulk of the EPA's 
NOx SIP Call.  See Michigan, 213 F.3d 663.  Relevant to 
this case, we specifically upheld the EPA's ability to set state-
specific NOx budgets.  At the same time, this Court remand-
ed the regulatory definition of EGU because the EPA failed 
to provide an adequate explanation.  This Court also partially 
vacated and remanded the SIP call as it applied to Missouri 
because the EPA included portions of Missouri in the SIP call 
with no evidence that these areas contributed to downwind 
nonattainment.

     At the same time that it promulgated the NOx SIP Call, 
the EPA also proposed a Federal Implementation Plan 
("FIP") that would impose direct emission controls on EGUs 
and non-EGUs in any state that failed to implement an 
adequate SIP by the regulatory deadline--May 31, 2004.  In 
January 2000, the EPA also mandated specific NOx emission 
controls on EGUs and non-EGUs in upwind states in re-

sponse to petitions filed by eight Northeastern states under 
section 126 of the CAA.  42 U.S.C. s 7426.  Both the FIP 
and the section 126 rule seek NOx reductions in accordance 
with the NOx budgets established for the NOx SIP Call, as 
amended by the rules challenged in this case.  Earlier this 
year, this Court upheld the EPA's section 126 rule in most 
respects, though some portions of that rule relevant to this 
case were remanded to the EPA for additional consideration.  
See Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, Nos. 99-1200, et al. (May 
15, 2001).

B.   The Technical Amendments

     In the final SIP Call rule promulgated on October 27, 1998, 
the EPA reopened public comment on the accuracy of data 
upon which the emission inventories and budgets were based.  
See NOx SIP Call, 63 Fed. Reg. at 57,427.  On December 24, 
the EPA extended the comment period "for emission invento-
ry revisions to 2007 baseline sub-inventory information used 
to establish each State's budget in the NOx SIP Call," and 
further explained that it was seeking comment on the rele-
vant data and assumptions so the agency could correct errors 
and update information used to compute the 2007 budgets. 
See Correction and Clarification to the Finding of Significant 
Contribution and Rulemaking for Purposes of Reducing Re-
gional Transport of Ozone, 63 Fed. Reg. 71,220 (Dec. 24, 
1998) ("SIP Call Correction").  The EPA also announced that 
it would reopen the comment period on equivalent inventory 
data for the FIP and section 126 rulemakings as well because 
all three rules relied upon the same inventories.  Id.

     Following this rulemaking, the EPA published two "Techni-
cal Amendments" ("TAs") revising the SIP Call NOx emission 
budgets.  In the first TA published May 14, 1999 ("May 1999 
TA"), the EPA made some modifications to source-specific 
emissions data, as well as to the 2007 baseline inventories.  
Technical Amendment to the Finding of Significant Contribu-
tion and Rulemaking for Certain States for Purposes of 
Reducing Regional Transport of Ozone, 64 Fed. Reg. 26,298 
(May 14, 1999).  In the second Technical Amendment publish-
ed March 2, 2000 ("March 2000 TA"), the EPA made addi-

tional "corrections" based upon additional public comments it 
received and the EPA's own internal review of the accuracy 
of its data and calculations.  Technical Amendment to the 
Finding of Significant Contribution and Rulemaking for Cer-
tain States for Purposes of Reducing Regional Transport of 
Ozone, 65 Fed. Reg. 11,222 (Mar. 2, 2000).  The EPA also 
explained that the March 2000 TA was "necessary to make 
the NOx SIP Call inventory consistent with the inventory 
adopted" by the EPA in the final section 126 rule, as the two 
rules were to be based upon the same inventory.  Id.  The 
EPA also made "corrections to the growth rates of many non-
EGU sources" because it had "misapplied" these growth rates 
in the May 1999 TA "version of the budget."  Id. at 11,223.  
These changes altered the 2007 baselines for some source 
categories and some states.

       II. Industry Petitioners--Electric Generating Issues

A.   EGU Growth Factors

     Industry Petitioners challenge the lawfulness of the NOx 
emission budgets as set forth in the TAs, specifically, the 
particular "growth factors" the EPA used to project future 
utilization rates for EGUs in 2007.  Petitioners allege that the 
EPA's reliance upon these growth factors was arbitrary and 
capricious because the growth factors were unsupported and 
in conflict with state-based growth estimates.  Petitioners 
further contend that the EPA arbitrarily failed to determine 
whether the resulting emission budgets could be achieved in a 
cost-effective manner.  Other petitioners raise similar chal-
lenges to the TAs.  Before turning to the merits of these 
arguments, we must first address several jurisdictional issues 
raised by the EPA.  Specifically, the EPA claims that peti-
tioners' claims are time barred and precluded by our Michi-
gan decision under principles of res judicata and collateral 
estoppel.1

__________
     1 The EPA's alternative claim that this Court should stay consid-
eration of these issues pending resolution of Appalachian Power 
Co. v. EPA, Nos. 99-1200, et al. (May 15, 2001), is obviously moot.

     1.   Statute of Limitations
          
     The EPA contends that petitioners' objections to the EGU 
growth factor determinations are not properly before this 
Court because they were resolved in the underlying NOx SIP 
Call rulemaking, not in the TA proceeding.  Therefore, the 
growth factors were subject to challenge in Michigan, and 
not here.  The EPA outlined and finalized its method for 
determining state emission budgets, including the use of 
growth factors, in the NOx SIP Call rulemaking.  See NOx 
SIP Call, 63 Fed. Reg. at 57,405-39.  The EPA argues that 
under CAA section 307(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. s 7607(b)(1), petition-
ers had sixty days from the publication of the SIP Call in the 
Federal Register to challenge the EPA's final growth factor 
determinations.  By these lights, petitioners may not chal-
lenge the growth factors because they did not raise their 
challenges within sixty days of publication of the SIP Call.

     In October 1998, the EPA reopened comment on "the 
source-specific data used to establish each State's budget."  
NOx SIP Call, 63 Fed. Reg. at 57,427.  However, the EPA 
maintains petitioners' claims are precluded because it did not 
explicitly invite comments on growth rate methodology.  In 
other words, the EPA argues that it undertook the TA 
rulemakings for the purpose of ensuring the accuracy of the 
EPA's data inputs, and not to reconsider prior methodological 
determinations, such as how to construct growth factors and 
how to use those growth factors in determining 2007 emission 
budgets.  According to the EPA, "[c]omments related to the 
use of growth factors in determination of State budgets" were 
addressed "in the context of the final NOx SIP call."  May 
1999 Response to Comments at 47.  Therefore, the agency 
pleads, petitioners' growth factor arguments are time-barred 
under National Ass'n of Reversionary Property Owners v. 
Surface Transportation Board, 158 F.3d 135, 141 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) ("NARPO") ("If NARPO's reopening theory does not 
apply, we are without jurisdiction to consider NARPO's due 
process claim.").

     The TA proceedings are not as clear cut as the EPA 
maintains, nor are our precedents so restrictive.  The initial 

TA rulemaking invited comment on both the source-specific 
emission data used to calculate state budgets and the "2007 
baseline sub-inventory information."  NOx SIP Call, 63 Fed. 
Reg. at 57,493.  As the EPA recognizes, the 2007 baseline 
sub-inventory information is nothing more than the product of 
growth factors and the source-specific emission data used to 
calculate state budgets.  See SIP Call Correction, 63 Fed. 
Reg. at 71,223 (noting that 2007 baseline inventory "is based 
on the universe of sources in the 1995 inventory and a growth 
factor ..." (emphasis added)).  Therefore, insofar as the 
EPA reopened comment on the 2007 baselines, it would seem 
that the EPA reopened comment on the growth factors in 
addition to the source-specific emission data used to calculate 
state budgets.  While the EPA did not reopen comment on 
the broader issues of its authority to impose NOx emission 
budgets on states, it did open comment on the budgets 
themselves.  Insofar as the agency was ambiguous on this 
point, that only further supports petitioners' argument that 
the growth factor issue was reopened.  See NARPO, 158 F.3d 
at 142 ("Ambiguity in an NPRM may also tilt toward a 
finding that the issue has been reopened.").

     Even accepting that the EPA did not explicitly reopen 
growth factors for public comment, this does not preclude 
petitioners' claim.  Under Public Citizen v. NRC, "whether 
an agency has in fact reopened an issue" is dependent upon 
"the entire context of the rulemaking including all relevant 
proposals and reactions of the agency," and not just on the 
agency's stated intent.  901 F.2d 147, 150 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  
Thus, "if an agency's response to comments 'explicitly or 
implicitly shows that the agency actually reconsidered the 
rule, the matter has been reopened.' "  Panamsat Corp. v. 
FCC, 198 F.3d 890, 897 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (citation omitted).

     The EPA claims that the growth factors were completely 
settled for the purposes of the NOx SIP Call by the time the 
TA rulemaking began in October 1998.  Yet this claim is 
difficult to square with the EPA's purported justification for 
the TA rulemakings--specifically to conform the emission 
inventories of the NOx SIP Call and section 126 rules.  The 
TA rulemaking began in October 1998, but the first section 

126 rule was not final until May 1999.  Thus, if the EPA was 
sincere in seeking to use the TA rulemaking to conform the 
emission inventories of the two rules, then the EPA's various 
growth factor methodologies must have been open for com-
ment for the purposes of the NOx SIP Call as they were 
subject to revision in the section 126 rulemaking at least up 
until the close of that proceeding.

     Where a rulemaking notice is ambiguous "and could fairly 
be read to 'suggest [ ] that the search for harmony might lead 
to the rethinking of old positions' " this Court has "found that 
the earlier decision was reopened."  NARPO, 158 F.3d at 142 
(citation omitted).  This is an apt description of what hap-
pened here.  Therefore, insofar as there are problems with 
section 126 inventories and budgets, the EPA implicitly gave 
petitioners an opportunity to identify the equivalent problems 
with the NOx SIP Call inventories and budgets when the 
EPA opened the TA rulemaking for the purpose of conform-
ing the inventories for the two rules.

     2.   Res Judicata and Collateral Estoppel
          
     Res judicata "bars relitigation not only of matters deter-
mined in a previous litigation but also ones that a party could 
have raised."  NRDC v. Thomas, 838 F.2d 1224, 1252 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988) (emphasis in EPA brief).  Collateral estoppel fur-
ther bars parties from relitigating issues of law or fact 
resolved in prior cases between those parties.  Securities 
Indus. Ass'n v. Bd. of Governors, 900 F.2d 360, 363 (D.C. Cir. 
1990) ("When a court determines an issue of fact or law that 
is actually litigated and necessary to its judgment, that 
conclusion binds the same parties in a subsequent action.").  
As the growth factor determinations were made as part of the 
NOx SIP Call, the EPA maintains that petitioners should 
have presented any challenge to the growth factors in Michi-
gan, where "there were actual legal and factual challenges on 
budget and growth-related topics" and where "nearly all" of 
the petitioners here were represented. Brief for Respondent 
EPA at 24-25.

     Petitioners' challenges are based upon the emission inven-
tories and budgets laid out in the TAs.  As such, they present 

issues not litigated in Michigan.  Though it is true that 
petitioners could have challenged the EPA's growth factor 
methodologies in that litigation, we hold here that the EPA 
reopened comment on that issue.  Just as it would be absurd 
for the EPA to argue that res judicata and collateral estoppel 
would preclude review had the EPA decided to change its 
growth factor methodologies in response to invited comments, 
so too is it absurd for the EPA to argue here that res 
judicata and collateral estoppel preclude review of its deci-
sion not to change in response to those same invited com-
ments.

     3.   Merits
          
     On the merits, Industry Petitioners allege that the EPA's 
emission budget determinations for EGUs are arbitrary and 
unsupported on several grounds.  First, they maintain that 
the 2007 emission baselines reflect the unrealistic assump-
tions that utilization growth will be linear.  Second, they 
question the EPA's use of IPM-generated 2001-2010 growth 
rates to estimate growth over the 1996-2007 period.  Third, 
they claim the EPA's reliance upon the growth factors result-
ed in unrealistic utilization estimates.  For example, 1998 
utilization rates in some states, such as Michigan and West 
Virginia, are greater than the 2007 baselines estimated by the 
EPA.

     Petitioners contend that the arbitrariness of the growth 
factors is compounded by the fact that more representative 
growth estimates were available.  In conducting its cost-
effectiveness analysis, the EPA used the IPM to generate 
growth assumptions for 1996-2001, as well as to generate 
state-by-state EGU utilization estimates for 2007.  Yet the 
EPA did not use this data for the purpose of developing its 
growth factors for the 2007 baseline, and it offered no reason-
able explanation for its choice.  Even if the EPA finds on 
remand that its choice was the better one, failure to "examine 
the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for 
its action" either is arbitrary decisionmaking or at least 
prevents a court from finding it non-arbitrary.  Motor Vehicle 
Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 
43 (1983).

     We confronted nearly identical challenges to the EPA's use 
of growth factors to estimate baseline NOx emissions for 2007 
in the section 126 litigation.  See Appalachian Power Co. v. 
EPA, Nos. 99-1200, et al. (May 15, 2001).  Although the NOx 
SIP Call covers more states than the section 126 rule, the 
EPA's methodological choices and explanations (or lack there-
of) were the same.  Therefore, we see no reason to depart 
from our conclusions in that litigation.

     There is no question that "[a]gency determinations based 
upon highly complex and technical matters are 'entitled to 
great deference.' "  Id., slip op. at 32 (quoting Public Citizen 
Health Research Group v. Brock, 823 F.2d 626, 628 (D.C. Cir. 
1987)).  The EPA has "undoubted power to use predictive 
models," such as the IPM, but it must "explain the assump-
tions and methodology used in preparing the model" and 
"provide a complete analytic defense" should the model be 
challenged.  Small Refiner Lead Phase-Down Task Force v. 
EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 535 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (citations and inter-
nal quotation marks omitted).  "Given the highly deferential 
standard of review applied to such questions, and the EPA's 
clear authority to rely upon computer models in place of 
inconsistent, incomplete, or unreliable empirical data, the 
Agency's decision to rely upon the IPM, rather than the 
projections offered by individual states, was not arbitrary and 
capricious."  Appalachian Power Co., slip op. at 34.  Howev-
er, this Court cannot excuse the EPA's reliance upon a 
methodology that generates apparently arbitrary results par-
ticularly where, as here, the agency has failed to justify its 
choice.

     In the case at hand, the EPA adopted a particular method-
ology to estimate EGU utilization rates in 2007 that generat-
ed seemingly implausible results, such as a negative growth 
forecast for some states in the coming decade.  The EPA 
adopted this methodology without offering any reasoned ex-
planation for its choice.  The EPA's decision not to use the 
IPM projections for 2007 that were used to estimate the cost-
effectiveness of emissions controls may well have been rea-
sonable.  So too may have been the EPA's choice to rely upon 
IPM projections for the 2001-2010 period in order to gener-

ate a growth factor for the 1996-2007 period.  However, 
there is no way for us to tell because the EPA never offered 
an explanation.  Merely asserting that the choice was "rea-
sonable" is not enough.

     As we held in the section 126 litigation, so too here:

     the EPA has not fully explained the bases upon which it 
     chose to use one set of growth-rate projections for costs 
     and another for budgets, nor has it addressed what 
     appear to be stark disparities between its projections and 
     real world observations.  "With its delicate balance of 
     thorough record scrutiny and deference to agency exper-
     tise, judicial review can occur only when agencies explain 
     their decisions with precision, for 'it will not do for a 
     court to be compelled to guess at the theory underlying 
     the agency's action ...' "  American Lung Ass'n v. 
     EPA, 134 F.3d 388, 392 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (quoting SEC v. 
     Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196-97 (1947)).  As a result, 
     we have no choice but to remand the EPA's EGU growth 
     factor determinations so that the agency may fulfill its 
     obligation to engage in reasoned decisionmaking on how 
     to set EGU growth factors and explain why results that 
     appear arbitrary on their face are, in fact, reasonable 
     determinations.
     
Id. at 37-38.

     4.   Cost-Effectiveness
          
     Industry Petitioners make the additional argument that the 
EPA failed to find the 2007 budgets achievable at the $2,000/
ton significant-contribution cut-off established in the NOx 
SIP Call rule.  Essentially, petitioners contend that the bud-
gets the EPA analyzed for cost-effectiveness purposes were 
different from the emission budgets imposed on the states.  
This argument is without merit.  The emission budget levels 
themselves are based upon reductions deemed by the EPA to 
be cost-effective.  In the case of EGUs, the EPA concluded 
that an average emissions rate of 0.15 lb/mmBtu could be 
achieved at a cost of less than $2000/ton.  NOx SIP Call, 63 
Fed. Reg. at 57,399-403.  Thus, insofar as the EPA properly 

generates, and adequately explains, estimated 2007 utilization 
rates, it need not repeat its cost-effectiveness analysis.

B.   Significant Contribution

     Industry petitioners also allege that the TAs are arbitrary 
because they rely upon emission inventories that are substan-
tially different from those that were used to make the initial 
"contribution" findings for the NOx SIP Call.  Essentially, 
petitioners argue that because the TAs changed the underly-
ing state emission inventories and budgets, thereby altering 
the relative contributions of upwind states to downwind non-
attainment, the EPA was obligated to reevaluate its "signifi-
cant contribution" findings for each of the affected states.  
For example, the TAs decreased the 2007 baseline emissions 
for West Virginia, an upwind state, and increased baseline 
emissions for New York, a downwind state.  Due to this 
change, petitioners contend, the EPA could not continue to 
assume that West Virginia contributes to New York nonat-
tainment without additional analysis.

     It is black-letter administrative law that "[a]bsent special 
circumstances, a party must initially present its comments to 
the agency during the rulemaking in order for the court to 
consider the issue."  Tex Tin Corp. v. EPA, 935 F.2d 1321, 
1323 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (citing Eagle-Picher Indus. v. EPA, 822 
F.2d 132, 146 (D.C. Cir. 1987)).  Generalized objections to 
agency action or objections raised at the wrong time or in the 
wrong docket will not do.  "An objection must be made with 
sufficient specificity reasonably to alert the agency."  Id.  An 
agency cannot be faulted for failing to address such issues 
that were not raised by petitioners.  Petitioners waived their 
argument, and can cite no "special circumstances" to justify 
their waiver.

     Petitioners are able to cite no comments that were in the 
relevant docket that raise the significant contribution issue.  
For example, petitioners note that the West Virginia Manu-
facturers Association argued that "[i]f EPA has in fact made 
adjustments to the inventories, we believe that this would 
dramatically affect the modeled impact of the contribution of 
upwind states and sources to downwind ozone nonattain-

ment."  The problem is that this document was submitted to 
the dockets for the section 126 and FIP rulemakings, and was 
not part of the TA rulemaking.  Petitioners do cite other 
documents which were part of the relevant rulemaking, but 
these documents do not address the significant contribution 
argument.  This is insufficient;  notice does not operate by 
osmosis.  Having failed to raise their concern in the relevant 
agency docket, petitioners could perhaps have cured their 
waiver by seeking reconsideration before the EPA, but they 
did not.  Thus, petitioners waived their argument that the 
EPA was required to revisit its significant contribution find-
ings.

                      III. State Petitioners

     State Petitioners echo many of the arguments addressed 
above.  Their claims are unique insofar as they object to the 
EPA's imposition of "erroneous projections of their economic 
growth" on states through the NOx SIP Call.  Joint Brief of 
Petitioning States at 4.  The State Petitioners' primary com-
plaint is with the EPA's reliance upon the IPM to generate 
state-by-state growth rates without promulgating a mecha-
nism to review these projections based upon actual growth 
rates.  Petitioning states contend that the EPA's projections 
underestimate actual growth in some affected states, but the 
EPA refused to address this concern in the TA rulemaking.  
While the EPA acknowledged some inconsistency between 
IPM growth projections and those provided by individual 
states, the EPA rejected the claim that the states' projections 
are inherently more reliable.  State Petitioners claim that it 
was unreasonable for the EPA to reach this conclusion with-
out conducting any analysis of the state projections.

     State Petitioners aver that deference to the EPA's findings 
in this area is unwarranted because deference is only due 
within an agency's area of expertise.  See NRDC v. EPA, 194 
F.3d 130, 136 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Were the EPA making 
environmental projections, they concede, deference would be 
warranted.  Since, however, the growth projections are es-
sentially economic projections, this Court should give the 

EPA no more deference "than it would to the agency's 
predictions of 2007 interest rates or the level of the Dow 
Jones Index."  Joint Brief of Petitioning States at 10 (citing 
Montana v. EPA, 137 F.3d 1135, 1141 (9th Cir. 1998)).  While 
the EPA has authority to impose emission limits on states, 
they argue, it does not have the authority to regulate a state's 
economic growth.  Insofar as the EPA has done this through 
its growth projections, it has adopted an "overly broad" 
reading of the CAA that "usurps States' sovereign power to 
manage their own economic growth."  Id. at 12.

     The EPA raises the same untimeliness arguments dis-
cussed above.  See infra Part II.A.1-2.  We reject them for 
the same reasons.  However, insofar as the State Petitioners 
seek relief beyond that which is provided above, their com-
plaints are not well taken.  The EPA has sufficient discretion 
to use the IPM model in the first instance even if states 
believe that some other state-specific modeling is more accu-
rate.  When it comes to these sorts of technical matters, the 
EPA is entitled to great deference.  See Environmental 
Action, Inc. v. FERC, 939 F.2d 1057, 1064 (D.C. Cir. 1991) 
("[I]t is within the scope of the agency's expertise to make 
such a prediction about the market it regulates, and a reason-
able prediction deserves our deference notwithstanding that 
there might also be another reasonable view.").  "[I]t is only 
when the model bears no rational relationship to the charac-
teristics of the data to which it is applied that we will hold 
that the use of the model was arbitrary and capricious."  
Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 135 F.3d 791, 802 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

     "That the EPA's projections depend, in large part, on 
economic projections, rather than environmental factors, 
makes little difference."  Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 
Nos. 99-1200, et al. (May 15, 2001), slip op. at 34.  Congress 
has delegated to the EPA the power to set emissions limits 
under the Clean Air Act.  Merely because this requires the 
selection and utilization of complex computer models to fore-
cast future emissions does not change the standard with 
which we evaluate the agency's actions, so long as the agen-
cy's actions are, as here, confined to those technical issues 

that must be resolved for the agency intelligently to address 
the matters over which Congress has given it authority.  See 
generally id.;  Small Refiner Lead Phase-Down Task Force 
v. EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 535 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  State Petitioners' 
hyperbolic suggestion that the EPA's choice of industry fore-
casting models is tantamount to stock market forecasting is 
simply absurd.

     Similarly, that the EPA's selection of a computer model 
and forecasting methodology results in the imposition of 
emission controls on states that crimp economic growth does 
not change the underlying analysis.  In Michigan, this Court 
squarely upheld the EPA's authority to establish state-
specific NOx budgets against a claim that such authority 
impermissibly intrudes on the statutory rights of states to 
select their own emission control policies in the first instance.  
Michigan v. EPA, 213 F.3d 663, 686-87 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  
Acknowledging this point, State Petitioners seek to argue 
that the Michigan holding somehow left open the claim that 
the EPA's authority to set state emission budgets did not 
entail authority to make the state-specific growth projections 
upon which such emission budgets are inevitably based.  This 
is a distinction without a meaningful difference.  Given the 
regulatory structure created by the Clean Air Act, the former 
authority clearly encompasses the latter, notwithstanding 
State Petitioners' veiled appeals to federalism principles.

     For these reasons, we hold that State Petitioners are not 
entitled to any relief beyond that which is entailed by re-
manding the growth factor determinations for further pro-
ceedings in response to Industry Petitioners' claims.

           IV. Non-Electric Generating Facility Issues

     Non-Electric Generating Petitioners ("Non-EGU Petition-
ers") make two additional arguments against the EPA's TAs 
to the NOx SIP Call.  First, petitioners allege that the EPA 
modified its methodology for calculating budgets for non-
EGUs in its final rule without providing non-EGUs with 
adequate notice of the change.  Second, Non-EGU Petition-
ers claim that insofar as the EPA's emission budgets for 

Non-EGUs rely upon the source definitions remanded in 
Michigan v. EPA, they are contrary to law and must be 
remanded here as well, if not vacated in their entirety.  We 
conclude that the EPA's misapplication of non-EGU growth 
factors constituted little more than clerical error, which the 
EPA corrected without additional notice and comment.  
While petitioners erroneously challenge the characterization 
of the error as clerical, they do not challenge the power of the 
EPA to correct clerical errors, compare Utility Solid Waste 
Activities Group v. EPA, 236 F.3d 749 (D.C. Cir. 2001), and 
we do not address that issue.  The petitioners are therefore 
not entitled to vacatur.  However, petitioners are correct that 
the EPA continues to rely upon source definitions that were 
issued without adequate notice and comment and remanded 
in Michigan.  Therefore, we remand the source definitions 
here as well.

A.   Notice

     The EPA began the budget-setting process with incomplete 
data on emission sources upon which to base its 2007 projec-
tions.  The EPA also began the process relying on one set of 
growth factors, Non-EGU Petitioners charge, but then sub-
stituted other factors.  The constant changes to the EPA's 
methodology, "combined with the virtual inaccessibility of the 
files containing the growth factors," made it impossible for 
affected parties to determine whether the EPA's calculations 
were reasonably accurate.  Joint Brief of Non-Electric Gen-
erating/Industrial Petitioners at 6.  As the aggregate non-
EGU budget changed over time, petitioners allege the EPA 
did not maintain a consistent explanation for these revisions.  
In the May 1999 TA, the EPA said that a fourteen percent 
increase in the aggregate non-EGU budget was due to source 
reclassifications.  May 1999 TA, 64 Fed. Reg. at 26,299.  In 
the March 2000 TA, however, it claimed that the budget 
change was due to the EPA's prior misapplication of the 
proper growth factors.  Rather than consistently modify its 
estimates, Petitioners attest that the EPA should have ex-
plained how the growth factors were misapplied and specifi-
cally sought comment from affected parties.  In failing to do 
so, it disregarded regulated entities' rights to notice and 

comment.  Even if providing such opportunity to comment 
would have delayed SIP implementation, Non-EGU Petition-
ers argue that this would not authorize the EPA to deprive 
regulated entities of their rights to notice and comment.

     The EPA responds that Non-EGU Petitioners allege no 
more than a harmless procedural error.  See 5 U.S.C. s 706 
(instructing courts to take "due account ... of the rule of 
prejudicial error.").  The EPA merely adjusted inventory 
data to fix clerical errors to ensure conformity between the 
various rules.  Petitioners had ample opportunity to comment 
and yet have failed to identify "a single source that has not 
been able to determine the growth factor assigned to it."  
Brief for Respondent EPA at 42.  The EPA readily admits 
that it did not announce the correction of its previous misap-
plication of non-EGU growth factors until the March 2000 
TA.  Insofar as Non-EGU Petitioners challenge specific 
changes in the Non-EGU portion of emission budgets, we 
agree with the EPA.  The record suggests that the changes 
complained of here were little more than fixes to technical 
errors, and not the sort of modifications that evince a change 
in policy or methodology.  Therefore, this portion of the 
petition for review is denied.  Petitioners' entreaty at oral 
argument that their notice challenge was tantamount to an 
unintelligible rulemaking challenge is likewise denied, as it 
came too late.

B.   Source Definitions

     Non-EGU Petitioners further challenge the EPA's reliance 
upon regulatory definitions of EGUs and non-EGUs that 
were remanded by this Court in Michigan.  There, we found 
that the EPA changed the definition of "EGU" in the final 
NOx SIP Call rule without providing sufficient notice and 
opportunity to comment.  Michigan, 213 F.3d at 692.  The 
altered definition reclassified some non-EGUs as EGUs.  
This is significant because the EPA assumed that EGUs can 
reduce more NOx emissions cost effectively, on a percentage 
basis, than can non-EGUs.  The EPA maintains that a new 
source definition rulemaking is imminent, see Brief for Re-
spondent EPA at 51 ("EPA is, in fact, presently reconsidering 

its EGU definition and intends to issue a proposed rule in the 
near future, perhaps as early as December 2000.").  However, 
as of oral argument, a year had passed since the Michigan 
remand and the EPA had yet to initiate new administrative 
proceedings on source definitions.

     Non-EGU Petitioners maintain that the EPA's continued 
reliance on the remanded source definitions requires remand-
ing and vacating the TAs in their entirety because the EPA 
cannot accurately apply growth factors and calculate state 
budgets until source categories are final.  The EPA contends 
that Non-EGU Petitioners seek more relief here than they 
were afforded in Michigan.  As the EPA notes, we did not 
vacate the budgets or any other portion of the NOx SIP Call 
in Michigan.  Instead, we left the budgets in place while 
EPA reconsidered a handful of narrow issues, including the 
proper delineation of what constitutes an EGU.  It seems 
that Non-EGU Petitioners are entitled to the same relief 
here-no more and no less.  Therefore, because the "EPA did 
not provide sufficient notice and opportunity to comment for 
its redefinition of EGUs," 213 F.3d at 693, we remand this 
portion of the rulemaking to the EPA for further consider-
ation in light of this opinion and that in Michigan.

             V. Missouri ("Split-State Petitioners")

     A group of Missouri utilities and the City of Independence, 
Missouri ("Split-State Petitioners") argue that the Technical 
Amendments are unlawful insofar as they establish a budget 
for the state of Missouri.  In Michigan, this Court vacated 
and remanded the NOx SIP Call insofar as it applied to 
Missouri because the EPA's Missouri NOx budget was "calcu-
lated on the basis of hypothesized cutbacks from areas that 
have not been shown to have made significant contributions."  
213 F.3d at 684.  Specifically, the EPA set a NOx emission 
budget for the entire state of Missouri, even though the 
computer models upon which the EPA relied only included 
the eastern portion of the state.  Before requiring a state or 
portion thereof to control emissions that make a "significant" 
contribution to downwind nonattainment, we held the EPA 

"must first establish that there is a measurable contribu-
tion."  Id. at 683-84 (emphasis in original).  Where the 
agency's own data "inculpate part of a state and not another, 
EPA should honor the resulting findings."  Id. at 684.

     Even though the NOx emission budget for Missouri was 
vacated and remanded in Michigan, the EPA included Mis-
souri's budget in the TAs.  It is undisputed that insofar as 
the TAs include a statewide Missouri emission budget they 
are unlawful under Michigan.  The only real dispute between 
Split-State Petitioners and the EPA is on the proper remedy 
for EPA's failure to address the Michigan holding.

     Split-State Petitioners contend that this court must vacate 
the entire Missouri budget, covering the budget for the "1-
hour" ozone standard as well as the "8-hour" ozone standard 
at issue in American Trucking Ass'ns v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027, 
reh'g granted in part and denied in part, 195 F.3d 4 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999), rev'd in part sub nom. Whitman v. American 
Trucking Ass'ns, 121 S. Ct. 903 (2001).  The EPA prefers a 
more limited remand.  In Michigan, this Court vacated the 
budget for the 1-hour standard, but stayed addressing the 
applicability of the 8-hour standard to the NOx SIP Call, at 
the EPA's request, due to the pendency of the American 
Trucking litigation.  Michigan, 213 F.3d at 671.  On this 
basis, we only resolved issues involving the EPA's 1-hour 
ozone standard, leaving issues related to the 8-hour standard 
until another day.

     Because we did not consider 8-hour issues in Michigan, the 
EPA suggests, we should only vacate and remand Missouri's 
budget under the 1-hour standard and stay consideration of a 
statewide Missouri budget under the 8-hour standard pend-
ing completion of litigation.  In other circumstances, we 
might be inclined to offer the more modest remedy the EPA 
suggests.  After all, the EPA is simply asking that the 
judgment in this case mirror that in Michigan, and that this 
Court stay consideration of the 8-hour basis for Missouri's 
budget until such time as the stay on the 8-hour standard is 
lifted.  Were there reason, any reason, to believe that the 
EPA could justify a statewide Missouri budget based upon 

existing record evidence, this would be a prudent step.  As it 
happens, the record and briefing in Michigan addressed both 
standards, and the EPA offered no evidence that would 
suggest western Missouri contributes significantly to down-
wind nonattainment of any ozone standard.  The EPA as-
serts that "it is entirely possible that the EPA's record could 
support including Missouri in the SIP Call under the 8-hour 
standard and assigning it a budget."  Brief for Respondent 
EPA at 49.  However, the EPA does not dispute that it has 
never modeled western Missouri sources under any standard.  
In other words, it is undisputed that the EPA has no more 
analytical basis for setting a statewide Missouri NOx budget 
under the 8-hour standard than it did for the 1-hour stan-
dard, for which it had no analytical basis at all.  While there 
may be areas for which the EPA could, with existing data and 
analysis, justify setting an emission budget for purposes of 
the 8-hour standard, but not for purposes of the 1-hour 
standard, western Missouri is not among them.

     So long as any statewide NOx budget remains in place, 
Split-State Petitioners and other entities potentially subject 
to emission controls in western Missouri must operate under 
the cloud of potential future controls.  Therefore, we find it 
prudent to vacate and remand the TAs insofar as they include 
a budget for Missouri under any ozone standard.  While we 
vacate and remand the statewide Missouri budget, it should 
be clear that we take this step only upon the record proffered 
to date.  As noted above, the EPA concedes that it has never 
conducted the analyses that would be required to impose a 
statewide budget for Missouri.  Should the agency ever con-
duct such analyses and, for instance, model the contribution 
of facilities located in western Missouri to downwind nonat-
tainment of the 8-hour standard, it is quite possible that such 
a budget could be justified.  This decision should be read 
neither to endorse nor to preclude such action.  If the EPA 
some day decides to impose a statewide NOx budget for 
Missouri, that decision will be evaluated on its own merits at 
that time.

                          VI. Conclusion

     In accordance with the above, we remand the EPA's EGU 
growth factors as well as the source definitions challenged by 
Non-EGU Petitioners.  We further remand and vacate the 
NOx emission budget for Missouri.  With respect to all other 
issues, including those not discussed expressly herein, the 
petitions are denied.

                              