                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 5, 2002   Decided October 25, 2002 

                           No. 00-1498

          Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

                 Northwest Pipeline Corporation, 
                            Intervenor

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     James H. Holt argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Judith A. Albert, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 

the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Steven W. Snarr, Alex A. Goldberg, and Timothy W. Mul-
ler were on the brief for intervenor Northwest Pipeline 
Corporation.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Sentelle and 
Randolph, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  The Canadian Association of Petro-
leum Producers petitions for review of two orders of the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission approving an in-
crease in the rates charged by Northwest Pipeline Corpora-
tion for transporting natural gas.  The CAPP contends that 
the Commission allowed Northwest an excessive rate of re-
turn on equity (ROE), resulting in unduly high rates.  Be-
cause the CAPP failed in its request for rehearing before the 
Commission to raise its current challenge to the proxy group 
range of ROEs upon which the Commission based North-
west's ROE, we lack jurisdiction to consider, and therefore 
dismiss, that aspect of its petition.  Because the Commis-
sion's decision to place Northwest at the median of the proxy 
group range was reasonable and supported by substantial 
evidence, we deny the remainder of the petition.

                          I. Background

     In 1995 Northwest applied for a general rate increase that 
would raise its revenues by $19.2 million per year.  The 
Commission, pursuant to its authority under s 4 of the Natu-
ral Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. s 717c, to regulate rates for interstate 
gas transmission, scheduled an evidentiary hearing before an 
Administrative Law Judge to consider, among other things, 
the appropriate rate of return on the equity invested in the 
pipeline.

     The Commission uses a discounted cash flow (DCF) analy-
sis to determine the appropriate ROE for a regulated pipeline 
company.  See Canadian Association of Petroleum Produc-
ers v. F.E.R.C., 254 F.3d 289, 293 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 

("CAPP I").  For a publicly-traded company, DCF analysis 
provides an estimate of ROE based upon the price of the 
company's stock, the dividend it pays, and projected growth 
in its earnings.  Id.  For a company that is not publicly 
traded, such as Northwest,

     the Commission has recourse to calculating the implicit 
     rate of return on companies that are comparable (or at 
     least companies whose business is predominantly the 
     operation of natural gas pipelines) and publicly traded.  
     These companies are called the "proxy group."  The 
     Commission then makes adjustments for specific charac-
     teristics of the company whose rates are in question.
     
Id. at 294.

     Northwest proposed to calculate its ROE using a DCF 
analysis of a "proxy group" composed of six companies.  The 
CAPP, through its expert witness Malcolm Ketchum, chal-
lenged the representativeness of that group based upon a 
"fundamental and continuing evolution taking place in the 
portfolio of business ventures" in which the proxy companies 
were engaged.  According to Mr. Ketchum, deregulation had 
enabled pipeline companies to diversify by segregating "pure 
pipeline" gas transmission operations into affiliated entities 
and then pursuing related--or, indeed, unrelated--lines of 
business that posed higher risks but offered greater potential 
for earnings growth.  A higher estimate of growth, when 
factored into the Commission's DCF analysis, results in a 
higher ROE than would be required to attract investment in 
a less risky, pure pipeline company.  Therefore, Mr. Ketchum 
argued, the Commission should supplement its DCF analysis 
with "a critical assessment of the relative business risks faced 
by a pure regulated pipeline, such as Northwest."

     The ALJ did not adjust the proxy group range of ROEs 
upon the basis of Mr. Ketchum's analysis.  Neither, however, 
did the ALJ accept Northwest's ROE figure, which was based 
upon a DCF analysis using only short-term growth projec-
tions.  Instead, using the Commission's then-prevailing DCF 
methodology, the ALJ calculated the proxy group range by 
giving equal weight to short- and long-term growth projec-

tions.  See Northwest Pipeline Corp., 87 F.E.R.C. p 61,266 at 
62,058, 1999 WL 357897 (June 1, 1999) ("Order").  Based 
upon Northwest's risk profile, the ALJ then placed North-
west at the midpoint of the proxy group range.  Id.

     The Commission modified the ALJ's calculation of the 
proxy group range in keeping with an intervening decision, 
Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp., 84 F.E.R.C. p 61,084, 
1998 WL 608596 (July 29, 1998) ("Transco"), in which the 
Commission had decided to give short-term growth projec-
tions more weight than long-term growth projections in its 
DCF calculations.  Order at 62,061.  As for placement of 
Northwest within the range, the Commission analyzed the 
company's competitive circumstances and the status of its 
contracts for the delivery of gas to users, and affirmed the 
ALJ's finding that Northwest faced an average level of risk.  
In another modification stemming from Transco, however, 
the Commission placed Northwest, as a company of average 
risk, at the median rather than the midpoint of the proxy 
group range of ROEs.  Id. at 62,068.  The Commission noted 
but, curiously, did not address the CAPP's argument that the 
ALJ had erred by failing to take into account, when placing 
Northwest within the range, the difference in risk between 
Northwest and the companies in the proxy group.  Order at 
62,065.

     The CAPP sought rehearing of the Order in two respects 
relevant here.  First, the CAPP argued that the Commission 
had erred in placing Northwest at the median of the proxy 
group range.  Specifically, the CAPP challenged the Commis-
sion's finding that Northwest faced significant competition 
and argued that the Commission's analysis of Northwest's 
contracts was flawed.  Again curiously, however, the CAPP 
did not protest the Commission's failure to address the 
CAPP's argument for adjusting Northwest's position within 
the range to account for differences between Northwest and 
the proxy companies.

     Rather, the CAPP relied upon those differences to support 
its second ground for rehearing, namely, that the Commis-
sion, in determining the proxy group range, should not have 

applied the recently-revised weighting formula adopted in 
Transco. The CAPP argued that short-term growth projec-
tions were influenced by the non-pipeline businesses of the 
proxy group companies and thus skewed upward the range of 
ROEs for the proxy group.

     The Commission rejected both the CAPP's arguments.  
Northwest Pipeline Corp., 92 F.E.R.C. p 61,287, 2000 WL 
1457024 (Sept. 29, 2000) ("Rehearing Order").  First, the 
Commission adhered to its position in Transco that short-
term growth projections are inherently more reliable than 
long-term growth projections, and therefore should be 
weighted more heavily.  Id. at 62,003-04.  Acknowledging 
that "there may be some differences between the proxy 
companies and Northwest," the Commission was satisfied 
nevertheless that the proxy group comprised "the six publicly 
traded companies whose operations most closely mirror the 
operations of a pure pipeline company."  Id. at 62,005.  Sec-
ond, the Commission reiterated its conclusion that Northwest 
faced average business risks stemming from actual and po-
tential competition and from a short average contract life 
relative to the depreciable life of its facilities.  Id. at 62,006-
08.

                         II. Jurisdiction

     Before addressing the merits of the CAPP's petition for 
review, we consider, at the Commission's urging, a jurisdic-
tional question arising from the difference between the 
CAPP's position here and what it urged before the Commis-
sion in its request for rehearing.  Upon the CAPP's motion, 
we held the briefing in this case in abeyance pending our 
disposition of CAPP I, a related petition in which we upheld 
the Commission's relative weighting of short- and long-term 
growth projections in calculating the proxy group range of 
ROEs.  254 F.3d at 297.  In the wake of that decision the 
CAPP abandoned the similar challenge it had raised in its 
rehearing request before the Commission in this case.  In-
stead, the CAPP now argues--as it had in earlier stages of 
the proceedings before the Commission--that the Commis-

sion should have adjusted Northwest's placement within the 
range to account for the differences between Northwest and 
the proxy group companies.

     Section 19(b) of the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. s 717r(b), 
provides that "[n]o objection to the order of the Commission 
shall be considered by the court unless such objection shall 
have been urged before the Commission in the application for 
rehearing unless there is reasonable ground for failure to do 
so."  The Commission contends that because the CAPP's 
rehearing argument was limited to challenging the Commis-
sion's decision to afford greater weight to short-term growth 
projections, the CAPP is barred from arguing on review for 
an adjustment to Northwest's placement within the range 
based upon a challenge to the representativeness of the proxy 
group.  The CAPP responds that it has consistently objected 
that "the use of growth estimates representative of growth in 
diversified, unregulated businesses produces an unreasonable 
ROE for FERC-regulated pipelines," and that the Commis-
sion is merely quibbling about a difference in the particular 
manner in which that objection was raised in different con-
texts.

     To evaluate the CAPP's point, one must bear in mind that 
the Commission's process for setting the ROE for a non-
publicly traded pipeline company consists of two discrete 
phases:  (1) determination of the range of reasonableness and 
of its median;*  and (2) assessment of the individual pipeline 
company's circumstances and "other factors" to determine 
whether to make a "pragmatic adjustment" away from the 
median.  Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. F.E.R.C., 926 F.2d 
1206, 1209 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  In its request for rehearing, the 
CAPP challenged the Commission's weighting policy, which is 
part of the first phase.  Accordingly, the Commission ad-
dressed the CAPP's argument in its discussion of the DCF 

__________
     * In CAPP I, we remanded to the Commission for further 
consideration its use of the median of the proxy group range.  254 
F.3d at 297-99.  In this case, the CAPP does not challenge the 
Commission's use of the median, and we express no opinion upon 
that issue.

methodology, a significant portion of which was devoted to 
defending its weighting policy.  Rehearing Order at 62,001-
05.

     The CAPP did not urge, as it now does, that the difference 
in riskiness between the proxy group and a pure pipeline 
company should be accounted for in the second phase--the 
company's placement within the range.  Had the CAPP done 
so, then the Commission might have come out differently in 
its rehearing order.  Or it might not have.  That the matter 
is open to such speculation, however, concludes the point;  the 
"obvious purpose" of the rehearing requirement "is to afford 
the Commission the first opportunity to consider, and per-
haps dissipate, issues which are headed for the courts."  
Moreau v. F.E.R.C., 982 F.2d 556, 564 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 
(emphasis omitted).  The CAPP's decision upon rehearing to 
focus its argument about the differences between Northwest 
and the proxy companies solely upon the initial calculation of 
the range of ROEs denied the Commission the opportunity to 
consider the precise challenge the CAPP now raises for 
judicial review.  This we cannot countenance.  See New Jer-
sey Zinc Co. v. F.E.R.C., 843 F.2d 1497, 1502-03 (D.C. Cir. 
1988) (finding no jurisdiction where specific objection was not 
made in rehearing application, despite claim it was encom-
passed by "overarching objection").  Simply put, the court 
cannot review what the Commission has not viewed in the 
first instance.

     Nor do we see any "reasonable ground" for the CAPP's 
failure to renew in its rehearing request its argument that the 
Commission must take Mr. Ketchum's analysis into account 
when locating Northwest within the proxy range of ROEs.  
The CAPP protests that in seeking rehearing it "placed its 
objection in the context of the weighting not because that was 
the only means, or even CAPP's preferred means, of address-
ing [it] ... but because the revised weighting was the only 
portion of the Commission's order in which the FERC made 
any mention of the growth estimates."  The CAPP's tactical 
decision to "frame its objection to conform to the way the 
Commission was interpreting the issue" cannot be accepted, 
however, in mitigation of the CAPP's failure also to present 

its argument for a downward adjustment.  We therefore 
conclude that we are without jurisdiction to consider, and 
must dismiss, the portion of the CAPP's petition challenging 
the representativeness of the proxy group.

                         III. The Merits

     The CAPP also challenges the Commission's determination 
that, in light of Northwest's competitive circumstances and 
the duration of its long-term transmission contracts, the 
pipeline company faced average levels of business risk and 
therefore should earn a ROE at the median of the proxy 
range.  We review the Commission's factual findings for 
substantial evidence, 15 U.S.C. s 717r(b), and conclude that 
the CAPP's objections are without merit.

     The record demonstrates that Northwest does not have a 
monopoly in the geographic market it serves;  customers do 
have alternatives and have made use of them.  For example, 
Tuscarora Gas Transmission Company beat out Northwest 
for a major contract in Nevada, while Pacific Gas Transmis-
sion Company competes with Northwest in Washington, Ore-
gon, and Northern California.  In addition, the Commission 
identified competitive threats, such as the application of BC 
Gas to enter Northwest's region and the potential for indus-
trial customers to bypass Northwest's system by connecting 
directly with a gas producer.  Although the CAPP faults the 
Commission for relying in part upon evidence portending 
future competition, in neither Williams Natural Gas Co., 77 
F.E.R.C. p 61,277, 1996 WL 862628 (Dec. 19, 1996), nor Ozark 
Gas Transmission Sys., 68 F.E.R.C. p 61,032, 1994 WL 
363498 (July 7, 1994), upon which the CAPP relies, did the 
Commission announce a blanket rule against considering po-
tential competitive threats.  Indeed, because the ROE neces-
sary to attract investment depends upon market perception of 
future risks, such a rule would make little sense.  The 
Commission therefore reasonably factored evidence of poten-
tial competition into its ROE calculus.

     The Commission also addressed adequately the CAPP's 
contention that Northwest's exposure to risk is reduced by 

the buoyant demand for gas in the area it serves.  That other 
states outside the region experienced similar and even great-
er increases in consumption led the Commission reasonably to 
conclude that growth in demand was not "abnormally" high in 
Northwest's territory.  Rehearing Order at 62,007.  The 
Commission was likewise reasonable in declining to attach 
conclusive weight to Northwest's favorable ranking in Stan-
dard and Poor's credit reports, preferring instead to make its 
own assessment of the degree of risk facing the company.  
Id.

     Finally, we hold that the Commission reasonably consid-
ered it a risk factor that, although Northwest's facilities were 
being depreciated over a 50-year period, its long-term con-
tracts had on average only 14 years to run.  Id. at 62,007-08.  
In some cases the Commission has examined a pipeline's 
remaining contract life in isolation, and the CAPP points out 
that by this measure Northwest compares favorably to other 
pipelines.  The comparison of contract life to depreciable life, 
however, wants neither logic nor Commission precedent to 
support it.  See id. at 62,008 (quoting Pine Needle LNG Co., 
75 F.E.R.C. p 61,121 at 61,410, 1996 WL 208856 (Apr. 30, 
1996)).  Here, the Commission has identified record evidence 
for its conclusion that the greater than 3:1 ratio of North-
west's remaining period of depreciation to the average life of 
its contracts was equivalent to or higher than that of other 
pipeline companies.  That evidence is not particularly 
strong--Northwest's expert conceded upon cross-examination 
that he did not conduct a comparative "study"--but the 
Commission was entitled to credit it.

                          IV. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is

                    Dismissed in part and denied in part.

     