                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 11, 2000      Decided June 30, 2000 

                           No. 99-5320

          American Federation of Government Employees, 
                        AFL-CIO, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

              Daniel R. Glickman, Secretary of the 
             U.S. Department of Agriculture, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (98cv00893)

     Anne M. Wagner argued the cause for appellants.  With 
her on the briefs was Mark Roth.

     Alfred Mollin, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause for appellees.  With him on the brief were 

David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney General, William 
B. Schultz, Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Barbara C. 
Biddle, Attorney, and Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney.

     Before:   Edwards, Chief Judge, Randolph and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

             Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  The Federal Meat Inspection 
Act ("FMIA"), 21 U.S.C. s 604, and the Poultry Products 
Inspection Act ("PPIA"), 21 U.S.C. s 455, require inspectors 
appointed by the Department of Agriculture ("USDA") to 
perform a "post-mortem inspection" of the carcasses and 
parts of all livestock and birds processed for human consump-
tion.  The question in this appeal from the judgment of the 
district court is whether the statutes permit federal inspec-
tors to step back from the processing lines and perform their 
inspection duties by overseeing inspections conducted by 
plant employees.

                                I

     Inspectors from the USDA's Food Safety and Inspection 
Service ("FSIS") generally conduct post-mortem inspections 
while stationed at fixed points along the slaughter processing 
line.  Using organoleptic methods, that is, relying on sight, 
touch and smell, the inspectors examine the head, viscera, and 
exterior of each carcass for signs of adulteration, such as 
tumors, inflammation, parasites, and other diseases.  See 9 
C.F.R. pts. 310-11, ss 381.76-94.  If the inspector detects no 
signs of adulteration, the carcass is passed and marked with 
the USDA legend.  See 9 C.F.R. ss 310.8, 381.79.  Under the 
FMIA, if the inspector finds any lesion or other condition 
"that might render the meat or any part unfit for food 
purposes, or otherwise adulterated," the carcass (and its 
parts) must be retained for veterinary disposition.  9 C.F.R. 
s 310.3.  A carcass or part found to "be unsound, unhealthful, 
unwholesome, or otherwise adulterated" is condemned and 
marked as such.  Id. s 310.5.  Similar procedures apply to 
inspections under the PPIA.  See id. ss 381.81-89.

     The method of inspection just described had remained 
unchanged for decades.  Then, in the mid-1990s, FSIS em-
barked on a comprehensive food safety initiative targeting the 
agency's resources at what it perceived as a serious health 
risk--foodborne pathogens, such as salmonella and E. coli, 
which cannot be detected by organoleptic inspection.  At the 
same time it determined to make changes in the current 
inspection process to combat these microbial causes of food-
borne illness, FSIS addressed what it considered to be anoth-
er failure of the present regulatory system--that it provides 
processing plants with little incentive to detect and eliminate 
unacceptable carcasses before presenting them for inspection.  
For these reasons, FSIS decided to require "industry to 
assume responsibility for producing safe products, reducing 
foodborne pathogens, and ... to shift Agency inspection 
resources to those areas which present the greatest public 
health risk."  John W. McCutcheon Decl. at p 10.

     In July 1996, FSIS took the first step in implementing its 
new initiative by promulgating the Pathogen Reduction/ 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points ("HACCP") final 
rule.  See 61 Fed. Reg. 38,806 (1996).  The rule "requires 
plants to implement science-based process control systems as 
a means of preventing food safety hazards, sets certain food 
safety performance standards, and establishes testing pro-
grams to ensure those standards are met." Food Safety and 
Inspection Service, HACCP-Based Inspection Models 1 
(1998).  It provides the industry with complete control over 
production decisions and execution, subject only to the perfor-
mance standards set by FSIS.  FSIS believes that heighten-
ing the industry's responsibility for safe meat and poultry 
products will increase "the incentives and flexibility establish-
ments need to innovate and improve food safety."  HACCP 
Final Rule, 61 Fed. Reg. 38,808.

     Such advances, according to FSIS, cannot be achieved 
without substantial changes to its approach to inspection.  As 
the agency put it, the roles of establishments and federal 
inspectors need to be "realigned to accord with the HACCP 
philosophy."  Id.  To design and test new inspection models, 
FSIS initiated the Inspection Models Development Project 

(the "Models Project").  Under the regulatory framework 
proposed in the Models Project, the task of separating normal 
from abnormal carcasses and parts will be carried out solely 
by industry personnel.  Federal inspectors will be responsible 
for monitoring the plant's performance in sorting and for 
verifying its compliance with performance standards and 
regulatory requirements.  Under the new model, a finding 
that a product is not adulterated will be based on FSIS's 
determination that the establishment's food safety and sanita-
tion control systems are preventing adulteration.1

     Under the new inspection models, FSIS has said that 
"slaughter process control will be an industry responsibility 
subject to FSIS oversight and verification."  HACCP-Based 
Meat and Poultry Inspection Concepts:  In-Plant Slaughter 
Inspection Models Study Plan, 63 Fed. Reg. 40,381, 40,381 
(1998).  It explained, "[e]stablishment employees will conduct 
anatomical and pathological examinations of carcasses, and 
FSIS inspectors will oversee, evaluate, and verify the effec-
tiveness and reliability of the establishments' slaughter pro-
cess controls."  Id. FSIS plans the transition to industry-
based inspection to occur in stages.  At the outset, establish-
ment employees will only be responsible for identifying and 
removing trimmable defects.  They will later assume respon-
sibility for generalized condemnable conditions.  And at the 
final stage, employees will perform "all tasks related to 
slaughter control," with the inspectors' role limited to over-
sight and verification.  Food Safety and Inspection Service, 
HACCP-Based Inspection Models Project In-Plant Slaugh-
ter 10 (1998).

     Draft guidance put out by FSIS gives some indication of 
what oversight and verification entails.  Though the descrip-

__________
     1 The Models Project encompasses several phases.  The first 
phase involves collecting baseline data of current performance 
under federal inspection in order to ensure that the new system 
achieves similar standards.  This is followed by a period of testing 
the new inspection models at certain volunteer plants.  Testing 
began in three such plants in September 1999, and FSIS has set 
tentative start-up dates for eighteen others.

tions vary slightly depending on the class of animals, over-
sight amounts to inspectors observing establishment person-
nel as they process carcasses and remove unacceptable 
products from the food supply.  By verification, FSIS means 
that inspectors will randomly sample and examine carcasses 
that have been passed to determine if the establishment is 
complying with the relevant performance standards.

     The appellants are a group of federal meat and poultry 
inspectors, their union, and the Community Nutrition Insti-
tute.  They brought this suit to enjoin the Secretary from 
"authorizing anything other than the carcass-by-carcass post-
mortem inspection by a federal government inspector."  Brief 
for Appellants at 5.  Following cross-motions for summary 
judgment, the district court ruled in the government's favor 
on the basis that the word "inspection" did not clearly require 
an organoleptic inspection.  See American Fed'n of Gov't 
Employees, AFL-CIO v. Glickman, No. 98-0893, Memoran-
dum and Order (D.D.C. Sept. 23, 1999).

                                II

     The statutory language with which we are concerned, the 
language supposedly allowing FSIS's oversight and verifica-
tion regime, is as follows.  For meat, s 604 of the FMIA 
provides:  "the Secretary shall cause to be made by inspectors 
appointed for that purpose a post-mortem examination and 
inspection of the carcasses and parts thereof of all [livestock] 
to be prepared at any slaughtering, ... or similar establish-
ment...."  21 U.S.C. s 604 (emphasis added).  For poultry, 
s 455(b) of the PPIA states:  "[t]he Secretary, whenever 
processing operations are being conducted, shall cause to be 
made by inspectors post mortem inspection of the carcass of 
each bird processed...."  21 U.S.C. s 455(b) (emphasis add-
ed).

     The government does not deny that in the ninety or so 
years since passage of the FMIA in 1907, "inspection" has 
been taken to mean an organoleptic examination of the car-
cass, an inspection, that is, using the senses.  Now the 
government has discovered another meaning.  A "federal 

employee has performed an inspection of a carcass," the 
government tells us, "when he has watched a plant employee 
conduct the kind of examination, organoleptic or otherwise, 
that is necessary to determine whether the carcass is fit for 
human consumption.  And in making these observations, the 
oversight inspector will observe all of the carcasses that pass 
along the slaughter line."  Brief for the Appellees at 29.

     In other words, the government believes that federal em-
ployees fulfill their statutory duty to inspect by watching 
others perform the task.  One might as well say that umpires 
are pitchers because they carefully watch others throw base-
balls.  The government thinks it can arrive at its position on 
the basis that the word "inspection" is undefined in the 
statutes.  But the lack of a statutory definition does not 
render a term ambiguous.  See Bass v. Stolper, Koritzinsky, 
Brewster & Neider, S.C., 111 F.3d 1322, 1325 (7th Cir. 1997).  
It simply leads us to give the term its ordinary, common 
meaning.  See Perrin v. United States, 444 U.S. 37, 42 (1979);  
Johnson v. SEC, 87 F.3d 484, 487 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  And when 
we treat the word "inspection" in that manner, it is easy to 
see why there is nothing to the government's point that "an 
oversight inspector will necessarily observe all carcasses and 
parts that pass along the slaughter line."  See John W. 
McCutcheon Decl. at p 21.  Every inspection entails an obser-
vation, but not every observation amounts to an inspection.  
One may observe something without paying close attention to 
it, and without giving it a critical appraisal, although that is 
what these statutes demand.  The military commander may 
observe his troops without inspecting them.  The foreman of 
an assembly line may do the same with widgets.

     Both statutes clearly contemplate that when inspections are 
done, it will be federal inspectors--rather than private em-
ployees--who will make the critical determination whether a 
product is adulterated or unadulterated.2  To the extent 
federal employees are doing any systematic inspecting under 

__________
     2 "The term 'inspector' means:  (1) an employee or official of the 
United States Government ..., or (2) any employee or official of the 
government of any State...."  21 U.S.C. s 453(k).

the Models Project, they are inspecting people not carcasses.  
Delegating the task of inspecting carcasses to plant employ-
ees violates the clear mandates of the FMIA and PPIA.  See 
Chevron USA, Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 
Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984).  For that reason, we 
reverse the grant of summary judgment and remand to the 
district court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.

                                                                 So ordered.

 