                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 18, 2002   Decided December 27, 2002 

                           No. 01-3137

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Ronald T. Clipper, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 00cr00380-01)

     David W. Bos, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant. With him on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.  Robert L. Tucker, Assis-
tant Federal Public Defender, entered an appearance.

     Mary B. McCord, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief was Roscoe C. 

Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Elizabeth Tros-
man, and Wan J. Kim, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson, Circuit Judge, 
and Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  Ronald Clipper pleaded 
guilty in May 2001 to unlawful possession of a firearm and 
ammunition by a convicted felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
s 922(g)(1).  The Sentencing Guidelines calculation yielded a 
range of 57-71 months, and the district court sentenced him 
at the very top of the range, noting Clipper's "dangerousness, 
his recklessness, his irresponsibility."  The Guidelines range 
was significantly affected by several prior felony convictions, 
but one of them--his 1991 conviction for possession of crack 
cocaine with intent to distribute--was very likely in violation 
of the Fourth Amendment as interpreted by the Supreme 
Court years after that conviction became final.  Clipper asked 
the district court to exclude that conviction from his present 
sentence calculations, but that option is plainly foreclosed by 
the Guidelines, and Clipper does not pursue it on appeal.  
Rather, he presses two fallback arguments:  first, that the 
district court should have given him a downward departure to 
mitigate the effect of the 1991 conviction;  and second, that 
the changed outlook on that conviction called for a downward 
departure for time "erroneously" served.

     The district court rejected both arguments, and we agree.  
The Sentencing Guidelines clearly set forth the conditions 
under which a prior conviction may be discounted in sentenc-
ing calculations--conditions that Clipper's 1991 conviction 
indisputably does not meet.  Clipper reasons that the Guide-
lines' foreclosure of any direct exclusion of the 1991 conviction 
naturally opens the door to a departure;  this is unsound.  If 
correct, it would tend to make every explicit Guidelines 
provision an invitation for courts to do the opposite.  Similar-
ly, because the 1991 conviction has not been vacated, over-
turned, or set aside, Clipper has not served time in jail 

erroneously and is not entitled to a downward departure on 
that score.  We affirm the district court in all respects.

                             *  *  *

     We review the district court's departure decision for abuse 
of discretion.  Koon v. United States, 518 U.S. 81, 99-100 
(1996).  But the decision "whether a factor is a permissible 
basis for departure under any circumstances is a question of 
law."  Id. at 100.  On that point, therefore, there is no 
deference to the district court.  Id.

     Clipper's 1991 conviction arose from an anonymous call to 
the police that a person meeting a particular description and 
walking in the area of a specified intersection was armed with 
a gun.  United States v. Clipper, 973 F.2d 944, 946 (D.C. Cir. 
1992).  Officers responded to the tip and saw Clipper, who 
matched the description given by the caller.  After a brief 
chase, they stopped and frisked him, finding a thick wad of 
currency and a bag of crack cocaine.

     Clipper moved to suppress the money and drugs, arguing 
that the officers didn't have the reasonable suspicion required 
for a stop under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968).  The 
district court denied the motion and the jury convicted.  
Clipper appealed and we upheld the stop.  Applying the 
"totality of the circumstances" test set forth in Alabama v. 
White, 496 U.S. 325 (1990), and stressing the tipster's claim 
that the person possessed a gun, we held that the circum-
stances under which White permitted a stop included instanc-
es where an anonymous tip did not state predictive facts but 
did provide "the police with verifiable facts while alerting 
them to an imminent danger that the police cannot ignore 
except at risk to their personal or the public's safety."  Clip-
per, 973 F.2d at 949-50.  The Supreme Court denied certiora-
ri.  Clipper v. United States, 506 U.S. 1070 (1993).

     In Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. 266 (2000), however, the Court 
resolved a judicial split on the issue, identifying Clipper as 
one of the dividing cases.  Id. at 269.  The Court held that an 
anonymous tip that a person is carrying a gun is not, without 
more, sufficient to justify a police officer's stop and frisk of 

that person.  Although Florida v. J.L. did not reverse, va-
cate, or set aside Clipper's conviction, or even explicitly 
disapprove Clipper, both parties agreed at argument that for 
purposes of this case the officers' stop of Clipper should be 
assumed to be unconstitutional under Florida v. J.L.

     In his 2001 sentencing Clipper's 1991 conviction affected 
the Guidelines calculation both of his "base offense" level (see 
U.S.S.G. s 2K2.1(a)) and his criminal history category (see 
U.S.S.G. s 4A1.2).  The upshot was to increase his sentencing 
range from 30-37 months to 57-71 months.

                              * * *

     Clipper's request for a downward departure depends on 
whether he cites factors that were "not adequately taken into 
consideration" by the Sentencing Commission.  U.S.S.G. 
s 5K2.0.  Thus, although Clipper has decided not to appeal 
the district court's rejection of his claim that the Guidelines 
authorized exclusion of his 1991 conviction, our analysis must 
begin with this issue.  In the criminal history context, the 
commentary to U.S.S.G. s 4A1.2 says:

          6. Reversed, Vacated, or Invalidated Convictions.  Sen-
          tences resulting from convictions that (A) have been 
          reversed or vacated because of errors of law or 
          because of subsequently discovered evidence exoner-
          ating the defendant, or (B) have been ruled constitu-
          tionally invalid in a prior case are not to be counted.  
          With respect to the current sentencing proceeding, 
          this guideline and commentary do not confer upon 
          the defendant any right to attack collaterally a prior 
          conviction or sentence beyond any such rights other-
          wise recognized in law (e.g., 21 U.S.C. s 851 express-
          ly provides that a defendant may collaterally attack 
          certain prior convictions).
          
U.S.S.G. s 4A1.2 (Application Note 6).  For purposes of 
counting convictions for the base offense level, U.S.S.G. 
s 2K2.1 incorporates the standards of s 4A1.2.  See U.S.S.G. 
s 2K2.1 (Application Note 15).  Thus Application Note 6 to 
s 4A1.2 controls the inquiry for both of the ways in which the 
1991 conviction raised Clipper's sentencing range.

     As Clipper's 1991 conviction has not been reversed, vacat-
ed, or ruled constitutionally invalid, it plainly doesn't fall 
within the class of convictions whose sentences are "not to be 
counted."  The Guidelines' effort to limit the issues available 
in a recidivist sentencing is in accord with the Supreme 
Court's approach.  In Custis v. United States, 511 U.S. 485 
(1994), it held that in a sentencing under the Armed Career 
Criminal Act of 1984, 18 U.S.C. s 924(e), a defendant had no 
right to collaterally attack a prior state conviction used for 
sentencing enhancement--with a narrow exception for convic-
tions obtained in a proceeding in which the accused was not 
represented by counsel and had not competently and intelli-
gently waived the right to counsel.  See id. at 487, 493-96.  
In Daniels v. United States, 532 U.S. 374, 382 (2001), the 
Court extended the rule to a challenge under 18 U.S.C. 
s 2255 to a sentence enhanced under s 924(e) by a prior state 
conviction.  The Court was explicit that this raised no consti-
tutional problems.  Custis, 511 U.S. at 493-97;  Daniels, 532 
U.S. at 383.  Of course a prisoner adversely affected by a 
prior sentence may pursue whatever avenues of collateral 
relief remain open to him, and then ask the later sentencing 
court to reopen the sentence.  Id. at 382.  But the later 
sentencing does not open any doors that are otherwise closed:  
"If ... a prior conviction used to enhance a federal sentence 
is no longer open to direct or collateral attack in its own right 
because the defendant failed to pursue those remedies while 
they were available (or because defendant did so unsuccess-
fully), then that defendant is without recourse."  Id.

     The second sentence of Application Note 6 says that the 
Guidelines "do not confer upon the defendant any right to 
attack collaterally a prior conviction or sentence beyond any 
such rights otherwise recognized in law (e.g., 21 U.S.C. s 851 
expressly provides that a defendant may collaterally attack 
certain prior convictions)."  There is an ambiguity here that 
we need not resolve.  The decision in Custis makes clear that 
a defendant being sentenced under s 924(e) may not use the 
occasion to bring even a collateral attack that is still open to 
him;  he must bring that separately and if successful return to 

the court that sentenced him as a recidivist.  The parties 
have not briefed and we need not decide whether Application 
Note 6 or 18 U.S.C. s 922(g)(1) embodies any restriction like 
that found in s 924(e).  Here, Clipper could not obtain collat-
eral relief for his claim in any forum because it rests solely on 
the Fourth Amendment and he was afforded a full and fair 
opportunity to litigate the claim in federal court.  See Stone 
v. Powell, 428 U.S. 465, 481-82 (1976).

     Clipper accordingly recognizes that the Guidelines them-
selves leave no direct basis for excluding the 1991 conviction 
from his sentencing calculation. Instead he seeks a downward 
departure under U.S.S.G. s 5K2.0, which reads in relevant 
part:

     Under 18 U.S.C. s 3553(b), the sentencing court may 
     impose a sentence outside the range established by the 
     applicable guidelines, if the court finds "that there exists 
     an aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind, or 
     to a degree, not adequately taken into consideration by 
     the Sentencing Commission in formulating the guidelines 
     that should result in a sentence different from that 
     described."
     
U.S.S.G. s 5K2.0.  Clipper argues that the Sentencing Com-
mission did not take into consideration the situation of a 
defendant facing the Guidelines repercussions of a conviction 
that would be unconstitutional if it occurred at the time of 
sentencing but that is not subject to collateral attack outside 
the recidivist sentencing.

     But Application Note 6 represents the Sentencing Commis-
sion's express "consideration" of the types of convictions that 
are to be disregarded in calculations of criminal history--ones 
that have been "reversed," "vacated," or "ruled constitutional-
ly invalid in a prior proceeding."  Id.  That Clipper cannot 
satisfy this test does not make his circumstance one that the 
Commission failed to consider.  A clearly drawn line is not a 
failure to consider cases that fall on the wrong side of the 
line.  Doubtless the Commission understood that some invalid 
convictions were beyond collateral attack.  Stone v. Powell 
itself, for example, was decided in 1976.

     Clipper suggests, however, that in 1993 when the Sentenc-
ing Commission last amended Application Note 6 it could not 
have been aware of two later legal developments which he 
sees as restricting his ability to challenge the 1991 conviction:  
the Supreme Court's decision in Custis, and Congress's pas-
sage of the Anti-terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 
1996, amending 28 U.S.C. s 2255 to impose a one-year statute 
of limitations on federal habeas corpus relief.  As a general 
matter it seems to us improbable that the Commission could 
have been blind to the fact that the Supreme Court decides 
cases and that Congress occasionally legislates in relation to 
collateral attack, thereby making authoritative resolutions of 
the competing interests that are implicated by such attacks.  
Application Note 6 appears simply to accept that process, 
refraining from "confer[ing] ... any right to attack collateral-
ly a prior conviction or sentence beyond any such rights 
otherwise recognized by law."  But in any event, as we've 
explained, Stone v. Powell already foreclosed Clipper from 
challenging his 1991 conviction, and the changes to which he 
points had no bearing on his case.  It would mischievously 
upset the Commission's rules to suppose that their application 
to persons so situated had not been "taken into consider-
ation."

     Clipper's argument that he is entitled to the possibility of a 
departure for time served "erroneously" under his 1991 con-
viction is no stronger.  The two cases he relies upon, United 
States v. Romualdi, 101 F.3d 971 (3d Cir. 1996), and United 
States v. Miller, 991 F.2d 552 (9th Cir. 1993), each involved 
time served under a sentence for the same conviction that 
had been vacated by the court of appeals.  See Romualdi, 
101 F.3d at 977;  Miller, 991 F.2d at 554.  Given the statute 
providing a credit for time served, see 18 U.S.C. s 3585, it is 
not altogether clear why a departure was necessary in these 
cases, but in any event they plainly do not advance his claim.

     Finally, we reject Clipper's argument that his first two 
arguments together constitute a combination of factors that 

warrants departure.  As stated above, neither of these argu-
ments has merit on its own;  zero plus zero equals zero.

     The judgment of the district court is

                                                            Affirmed.

                                                 