                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 15, 2002      Decided April 23, 2002 

                           No. 01-5107

     Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc., et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                        John D. Ashcroft, 
            Attorney General of the United States and 
            Ruth A. Harvey, Attorney, Civil Division, 
                      Department of State, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv01962)

     Philip P. Kalodner argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellant.

     Bruce G. Forrest, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellees.  With him on the brief were 

Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and William Kanter, 
Deputy Director, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Following decades of oil overcharge 
litigation under the Economic Stabilization Act of 1970, the 
United States Attorney General recovered a multi-million 
dollar judgment on behalf of thirty-seven utilities, including 
the three appellants.  Awarded by the United States District 
Court for the Southern District of Alabama, that judgment 
included an $800,000 surcharge payable to the Attorney Gen-
eral pursuant to the Federal Debt Collection Procedures Act.  
Appellants then filed suit in the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia seeking a writ of mandamus that 
would direct the Attorney General to pay the $800,000 to 
them.  Concluding that Appellants failed to show that the 
Attorney General's retention of the surcharge amounted to a 
violation of a clear ministerial duty that would warrant man-
damus, the district court denied the writ.  We agree.

                                I.

     The now-defunct Economic Stabilization Act of 1970 (ESA), 
as amended, 12 U.S.C. s 1904 note, gave the President broad 
authority to "issue such orders and regulations as he may 
deem appropriate to stabilize prices."  Pub. L. 91-379, s 202, 
84 Stat. 799, 799 (1970) (expired 1974).  Acting pursuant to 
delegated ESA authority, see id. s 203, 84 Stat. at 800, the 
Secretary of Energy created price controls for crude oil.  
Under the ESA, the Attorney General (as well as private 
parties) has authority to seek restitution for any "sale of 
goods or services exceed[ing] the applicable ceiling under 
regulations or orders issued under this title."  Economic 
Stabilization Act Amendments of 1971, Pub. L. 91-379, 
ss 209-10, 85 Stat. 743, 748 (1971).

     In 1977, the Attorney General intervened in litigation pend-
ing in the United States District Court for the Southern 
District of Alabama to obtain ESA restitution on behalf of 

thirty-seven utilities that had purchased crude oil at prices 
exceeding Department of Energy limits.  Among the thirty-
seven utilities were the three appellants:  Consolidated Edi-
son, Long Island Lighting Company, and Niagara Mohawk 
Power Corporation, to whom we will refer collectively 
throughout this opinion as "Edison."  Eleven years of litiga-
tion later, the Alabama district court awarded a judgment of 
approximately $30 million in the Attorney General's favor.  
Following another decade of litigation caused by the sellers' 
efforts to escape payment, the court entered a final judgment 
of $15.75 million.  Pursuant to court order, the funds were 
deposited into a Department of Energy escrow account for 
distribution to the thirty-seven judgment beneficiaries on a 
pro rata basis.

     Central to this case, the Alabama judgment included an 
$800,000 surcharge payable to the Attorney General pursuant 
to the Federal Debt Collection Procedures Act.  That Act 
provides that the U.S. government "is entitled to recover a 
10% surcharge of the amount of the recovered debt in connec-
tion with recovery of the debt."  28 U.S.C. s 3011(a).

     After the Alabama district court denied Edison's motion to 
intervene to challenge the surcharge, Edison filed suit in the 
United States District Court for the District of Columbia 
seeking a writ of mandamus that would direct the Attorney 
General to remit the $800,000 surcharge to the Department of 
Energy for transmission to the judgment beneficiaries.  Ac-
cording to Edison, nothing in the Debt Collection Act autho-
rized the surcharge.  Finding that "the decision of the Justice 
Department to pursue recovery of a surcharge ... is not a 
ministerial act[,] ... and it clearly is not so free from doubt 
that the Government didn't have the authority and the discre-
tion to seek to invoke [the Debt Collection Act],"  Tr. Mots. 
Hr'g of 1/30/01 at 6, the district court dismissed the com-
plaint.  Edison filed simultaneous appeals in this court and 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, 

and successfully moved to stay the latter appeal pending the 
resolution of this one.

                               II.

     Before addressing the mandamus issue, we must consider 
the Attorney General's arguments that jurisdiction lies exclu-
sively in the Federal Circuit and that, in any event, Edison 
lacks Article III standing.  We consider each argument in 
turn.

     The Attorney General's first argument rests on ESA sec-
tion 211, which placed exclusive jurisdiction over "cases or 
controversies arising under" that statute in a specialized 
federal court, the Temporary Emergency Court of Appeals.  
Economic Stabilization Act Amendments of 1971, Pub. L. 
92-210, s 211(a), 85 Stat. 743, 748 (1971).  That court has 
since been dissolved and its jurisdiction transferred to the 
Federal Circuit.  See Federal Courts Administration Act of 
1992, Pub. L. 102-572, s 102(a), 106 Stat. 4506, 4506 (1992) 
(abolishing the Temporary Emergency Court of Appeals);  id. 
at s 102(b), 106 Stat. at 4506 (codified as amended at 28 
U.S.C. s 1295(a)(11)) (establishing exclusive Federal Circuit 
jurisdiction over ESA issues).  The Federal Circuit construes 
its ESA jurisdiction narrowly.  In Texas American Oil Co. v. 
United States Department of Energy, the Federal Circuit 
held that it possesses only " 'issue' jurisdiction, not 'case' or 
'arising under' jurisdiction" over ESA issues, emphasizing 
that such a holding "steadfastly implement[s] the jurisdiction-
al policy and practice of deciding only the ESA issues in a 
case, leaving to the regional circuit courts all other issues 
arising in the same transaction or joined to [the] ESA issues."  
44 F.3d 1557, 1563 (Fed. Cir. 1995).  In other words, the 
Federal Circuit will only "decide certain questions that do not 
aris[e] independently of the substantive [ESA] claim or cause 
of action and have no life apart from that substantive claim."  
Stertz v. Gulf Oil Corp., 783 F.2d 1064, 1069 (Temp. Emer. 
Ct. App. 1986) (alterations in original) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted).  The Federal Circuit uses a 
two-part test for determining whether an issue falls within its 
exclusive ESA jurisdiction.  First, resolution of the litigation 
must require application or interpretation of the ESA or 
regulations issued thereunder;  and second, the ESA issue 

must have been adjudicated in the district court.  Tex. Am., 
44 F.3d at 1563.

     The issue raised here fails the first element of the Texas 
American test.  Although the litigation leading to this appeal 
has its origins in the ESA, the substantive question under 
that statute--whether Edison was entitled to restitution for 
alleged oil overcharges--was long ago resolved by the Ala-
bama district court.  Moreover, the issue Edison now rais-
es--whether the Debt Collection Act authorizes the Attorney 
General's $800,000 surcharge--requires neither interpretation 
nor application of the ESA.  Asked at oral argument to 
identify any ESA issues we must decide to resolve this 
appeal, the Attorney General's counsel candidly conceded 
there are none.  Because the Debt Collection Act question 
has "life apart" from the substantive ESA cause of action that 
gave rise to this litigation decades ago, we have jurisdiction to 
consider it.

     This result comports with decisions of both the Supreme 
Court and one of our sister circuits holding that issues 
relating to enforcement of an ESA judgment fall outside the 
Federal Circuit's exclusive jurisdiction if they require neither 
interpretation nor application of the ESA.  In Bray v. United 
States, the Supreme Court held that the Temporary Emer-
gency Court of Appeals' exclusive jurisdiction did not encom-
pass an appeal of a contempt proceeding growing out of a 
party's refusal to produce documents subpoenaed in connec-
tion with a possible ESA violation.  423 U.S. 73, 73-74 (1975).  
"Although the contempt charge related to an order entered in 
connection with an investigation of [ESA] violations," the 
Court explained, "it was not dependent on the existence of 
such violations," and thus sufficiently separate from the sub-
stantive ESA issues that the Tenth Circuit should have 
exercised jurisdiction.  Id. at 75-76.  Similarly, in Citronelle-
Mobile Gathering Inc. v. Watkins, the Eleventh Circuit re-
viewed a challenge to a district court's appointment of a 
receiver whose sole purpose was to enforce an ESA judg-
ment.  934 F.2d 1180, 1184-85 (1991).  The court pointed out 
that because "appellants' liability for ESA ... violations has 
already been fully litigated, ... [t]here remains no question 

of liability based on those ... violations."  Id. at 1185.  It 
went on to hold that because "the issues on this appeal 
concern the post-judgment enforcement of the ... decision," 
the challenge to the appointment was not integrally related to 
the ESA, thus not within the Federal Circuit's exclusive 
jurisdiction.  Id.  Here too, determining whether the Attor-
ney General may retain the Debt Collection Act surcharge 
does not require that we review--or even question--the 
Alabama district court's conclusion that the ESA entitles 
Edison to restitution for the oil overcharges.

     Insisting that this case nevertheless belongs in the Federal 
Circuit, the Attorney General claims that the district court 
here considered "an important issue requiring the interpreta-
tion of the ... ESA," namely, whether "plaintiffs failed to 
state a claim under the Economic Stabilization Act."  Appel-
lee's Br. at 17, 18.  It is true that the district court ruled that 
because "there is no private right of action under the Eco-
nomic Stabilization Act Amendments of 1971[,] ... there is no 
standing," and therefore extensively considered the ESA's 
provisions for public and private rights of action as well as 
related Federal Circuit decisions.  Tr. Mots. Hr'g of 1/30/01 
at 6, 6-11.  The district court's ESA discussion, however, has 
no effect on our jurisdiction.  As the Federal Circuit has 
repeatedly emphasized, its ESA jurisdiction is issue-specific, 
and the issue we must resolve in this appeal does not require 
in that Edison state a cause of action under the ESA.  
Instead, because Edison sought a writ of mandamus, whether 
it stated a cause of action depends on the All Writs Act, which 
authorizes federal courts to "issue all writs necessary or 
appropriate in aid of their respective jurisdictions and agree-
able to the usages and principles of law."  28 U.S.C. s 1651.

     Next, the Attorney General contends that Edison seeks to 
"split" its appeal, and that the company intends to follow up 
any adverse result on the merits by briefing the same issues 
again in its pending appeal in the Federal Circuit.  Appellee's 
Br. at 18-19.  A bifurcated appeals process, however, seems 
precisely what the Federal Circuit's issue-based approach 
contemplates:  "[A]ny issue requiring interpretation or appli-

cations of the ... ESA[ ] or related regulations has been held 
to be within the exclusive purview of the [Federal Circuit], 
and separated from the appeal of any other substantive 
issue."  Tex. Am., 44 F.3d at 1563.  In any event, no duplica-
tive merits determinations could occur, for if we have jurisdic-
tion over the Debt Collection Act issue, that issue would 
necessarily fall outside the Federal Circuit's exclusive ESA 
jurisdiction.

     Finally, the Attorney General cites Texas American for the 
proposition that "[w]hen the [Federal Circuit] has taken 
jurisdiction [of ESA issues], the court has occasionally been 
required to consider and apply laws in interaction with the 
ESA."  Id. at 1564.  But that proposition--where an issue 
requires interpretation of both the ESA and another statute, 
the Federal Circuit can exercise jurisdiction over the non-
ESA issue--sheds no light on which questions this circuit 
may entertain.  Besides, because the Debt Collection Act 
issue does not require interpretation of the ESA, see supra at 
5, no such "interaction" could take place.

     As to Edison's standing, the Attorney General does not 
articulate his claim in terms of the familiar constitutional 
standard:  a "concrete and particularized" "injury-in-fact" that 
is "fairly ... trace[able]" to the conduct of the defendant and 
may be "redressed by a favorable decision."  Lujan v. De-
fenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992) (alterations in 
original).  Instead, he argues, the relief Edison seeks re-
quires "this court [to] attribute a desire on the part of the 
Department of Energy to obtain, via judicial fiat, an order 
running against federal officials from one Executive Branch 
agency to another."  Appellee's Br. at 20.  We assume that 
the Attorney General means that Edison's claim is not re-
dressable--that is, requiring him to remit the surcharge to 
the Energy Department would fail to redress Edison's 
claimed injury because it would fail to place the $800,000 in 
the judgment beneficiaries' corporate hands.  This claim, 
however, ignores the Alabama district court's express re-
quirement that "[w]henever ... the amount held by DOE in 
escrow for this case ... exceeds $1,000,000, but in any event 
no less often than once every two years, DOE shall make 

further pro rata payments to the claimants."  Order of the 
United States District Court of the Southern District for 
Alabama at 2, Citronelle-Mobile Gathering, Inc. v. Watkins 
(May 14, 1992) (No. Civ. 77-101-A).  Thus, had the district 
court here issued the writ and directed the Attorney General 
to deposit $800,000 in the Department of Energy escrow 
account, the Alabama district court's order would have re-
quired Energy to disburse those funds directly to Edison.  
Accordingly, the presence of the Department of Energy as an 
intermediary between Edison and the Attorney General does 
not deprive Edison of standing.

                               III.

     "[A] 'drastic' remedy, 'to be invoked only in extraordinary 
situations,' " In re Papandreou, 139 F.3d 247, 249 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (quoting Kerr v. U.S. Dist. Court, 426 U.S. 394, 402 
(1976)), mandamus is inappropriate except where a public 
official has violated a "ministerial" duty.  Such a duty must 
be "so plainly prescribed as to be free from doubt and 
equivalent to a positive command....  [W]here the duty is 
not thus plainly prescribed, but depends on a statute or 
statutes the construction or application of which is not free 
from doubt, it is regarded as involving the character of 
judgment or discretion which cannot be controlled by manda-
mus."  Wilbur v. United States, 281 U.S. 206, 218-19 (1929).

     We agree with the district court that Edison's showing falls 
far short of this high standard.  To begin with, the Attorney 
General obtained the surcharge and now retains it pursuant 
to a federal court order.  He is thus complying with--not 
violating--his legal obligations.  Resisting this obvious propo-
sition, Edison argues that the Attorney General's possession 
of the surcharge is so plainly wrong that it amounts to a 
violation of a ministerial duty.  In our view, however, this 
argument amounts to a completely inappropriate collateral 
attack on the Alabama court's judgment.  See Roche v. 
Evaporated Milk Ass'n, 319 U.S. 21, 26 (1946) (holding that 
mandamus is only available to "confine an inferior court to a 
lawful exercise of its prescribed jurisdiction or to compel it to 

exercise its authority when it is its duty to do so").  Although 
Edison never formally asked the district court here to manda-
mus the Alabama district court, the relief it seeks amounts to 
exactly the same thing, for however phrased, Edison's com-
plaint challenges the Alabama district court's interpretation 
of the Debt Collection Act.

     Even if we were free to consider Edison's arguments, they 
would provide no basis for mandamus.  Edison first claims 
that "this is simply a case in which a lawyer is withholding 
funds improperly from his client," Appellants' Opening Br. at 
32, thus violating a duty that is "ministerial, plainly defined, 
peremptory, and owed to the plaintiff," id. (quoting Public 
Citizen v. Kantor, 864 F. Supp. 208, 212 (D.D.C. 1994)).  The 
cases Edison cites, though, all involve attorneys refusing to 
pay funds courts had awarded to clients.  Here, by contrast, 
the Alabama district court ordered the $800,000 paid to the 
Attorney General.  See Order of the United States District 
Court for the Southern District of Alabama at 2, Citronelle-
Mobile Gathering, Inc. v. PeNa (Sept. 23, 1997) (No. Civ. 
77-101-A).

     Equally without merit is Edison's argument that the Debt 
Collection Act so plainly does not authorize the surcharge 
that the Attorney General wrongly possesses the $800,000 
and should therefore be required to remit it to the judgment 
beneficiaries.  According to Edison, the "essence of the au-
thorized 'surcharge' is that it be imposed on the debtor as an 
addition to the judgment debt," and "the withholding by the 
Attorney General of funds due clients from the partially 
collected judgment is a 'surcharge' not upon the debtor, but 
upon the Judgment Beneficiaries."  Appellants' Opening Br. 
at 24.  We agree with the district court that this argument is 
"somewhat of a stretch."  Tr. Mots. Hr'g of 1/30/01 at 14.  
While the term "surcharge" might refer to an amount added 
on to--not subtracted from--the judgment, the Debt Collec-
tion Act's language by no means unambiguously requires this 
conclusion, and Edison cites no authority, other than Web-
ster's Dictionary, to support its interpretation.  The dictio-
nary, however, provides no basis for concluding that the 
Attorney General of the United States violated a duty "so 

plainly prescribed as to be free from doubt and equivalent to 
a positive command."

     The district court's dismissal of the complaint is affirmed.

                                                            So ordered.

                             