                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 25, 1999    Decided April 21, 2000 

                           No. 98-1368

         Association of Battery Recyclers, Inc., et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

            U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and 
                Carol M. Browner, Administrator, 
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
                           Respondents

                        Consolidated with 
                 Nos. 98-1381, 98-1392 & 98-1394

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     Donald J. Patterson, Jr. argued the cause for petitioners 
on the RCRA classification issues. With him on the joint 

briefs were Harold P. Quinn, Jr., Roderick T. Dwyer, Karl S. 
Bourdeau, Michael W. Steinberg, Joshua D. Sarnoff, David 
F. Zoll, Ronald A. Shipley, William R. Weissman and Steven 
J. Groseclose.  Michael B. Wigmore and Robert N. Stein-
wurtzel entered appearances.

     William R. Weissman argued the cause for petitioners on 
the LDR treatment standards issues. With him on the briefs 
was Steven J. Groseclose.

     Michele L. Walter, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
and Steven Silverman, Attorney, Office of General Counsel, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, argued the causes for 
respondents. With them on the brief was Cecilia Kim, Attor-
ney, U.S. Department of Justice.

     David R. Case argued the cause for intervenors Environ-
mental Defense Fund, Environmental Technology Council 
and National Mining Association.  With him on the brief were 
Karen Florini, Donald J. Patterson, Jr., Harold P. Quinn, 
Jr., and Roderick T. Dwyer.

     Before:  Silberman, Ginsburg, and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Opinion for the Court by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Opinion dissenting in part by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  These are consolidated petitions 
for judicial review of Environmental Protection Agency regu-
lations promulgated on May 26, 1998, under the Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 ("RCRA"), Pub. L. 
No. 94-580, 90 Stat. 2795.  The regulations--known collec-
tively as the "Land Disposal Restrictions Phase IV" Rule--
deal with residual or secondary materials generated in mining 
and mineral processing operations and EPA's classification of 
these materials as "solid waste";  with the treatment stan-
dards for a specific category of hazardous waste;  and with 
EPA's test for determining whether certain wastes are haz-
ardous.  Our opinion is in three parts.  The first part decides 
whether EPA properly defined "solid waste."  We are unani-
mous that it did not.  The second part decides, again unani-

mously, that EPA's treatment standards for a particular 
category of hazardous waste are lawful. The third part, 
written by Judge Ginsburg and joined by Judge Silberman, 
decides that EPA's test for determining toxicity is valid for 
certain wastes but not for others.  I disagree with their 
conclusion for the reasons stated in my dissenting opinion.

                   I. Definition of Solid Waste

     Two petitioners--the National Mining Association and the 
American Iron and Steel Institute--and an intervenor-the 
Chemical Manufacturers Association--challenge the portion 
of EPA's Phase IV Rule defining a "solid waste" in terms of 
how materials "generated and reclaimed within the primary 
mineral processing industry" are stored.  40 C.F.R. 
s 261.2(e)(iii).  The question is of substantial importance to 
these petitioners because, together, they represent most of 
the nation's producers of coal, metals, and industrial and 
agricultural minerals;  two thirds of the nation's steel produc-
tion;  and more than ninety percent of the nation's productive 
capacity of basic industrial chemicals.

     RCRA defines "solid waste" as "any garbage, refuse, 
sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment 
plant, or air pollution control facility and other discarded 
material...."  42 U.S.C. s 6903(27).  Solid wastes are "con-
sidered hazardous if they possess one of four characteristics 
(ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity) or if EPA 
lists them as hazardous following a rulemaking."  Columbia 
Falls Aluminum Co. v. EPA, 139 F.3d 914, 915 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (citing 42 U.S.C. s 6921(a), 40 C.F.R. pt. 261).  Disposal 
of hazardous waste is forbidden unless the waste is treated to 
reduce its hazardous constituents or stored in a manner 
ensuring that the hazardous constituents will not migrate 
from the disposal unit.  See id. (citing 42 U.S.C. s 6924(g)(5), 
(m)).

     To understand the contentions of the parties, it will be 
helpful to outline the current solid waste classification system 
(most of which predates the Phase IV Rule and is not being 
challenged).  EPA's general regulation defining "solid waste" 
begins by repeating a portion of the statutory definition:  "a 

solid waste is any discarded material."  40 C.F.R. 
s 261.2(a)(1).  It then defines "discarded material" to mean 
"any material which is Abandoned ... or Recycled, as ex-
plained in paragraph (c) of this section...."  Id. 
s 261.2(a)(2).  Paragraph (c) identifies four situations in 
which "recycled" materials will be considered "solid waste":  
when the materials are "used in a manner constituting dispos-
al";  when the materials are "burn[ed] for energy recovery";  
when the materials are "reclaimed";  and when the materials 
are "accumulated speculatively."  40 C.F.R. s 261.2(c)(1)-(4).

     The Phase IV Rule revised only the reclamation provision.  
Before the revision, EPA classified reclaimed spent materials 
and scrap metal as solid waste.  See 40 C.F.R. s 261.2(c)(3) & 
tbl.1 (1996).  Reclaimed sludges and by-products were classi-
fied as solid waste only if they had been specifically listed in 
40 C.F.R. pt. 261 as a hazardous waste following an EPA 
rulemaking.  See 40 C.F.R. s 261.2(c)(3) & tbl.1 (1996).  Re-
claimed sludges and by-products exhibiting a characteristic of 
hazardous waste, but not specifically listed as hazardous 
wastes, were not classified as solid waste.  See id.  This 
classification system applied without regard to the industry 
that produced the materials.

     The Phase IV Rule purported to take materials reclaimed 
by the mineral processing industry outside this framework 
and to subject these secondary materials to a new test for 
determining whether they constituted "solid waste."  See 40 
C.F.R. s 261.2(c)(3) & tbl.1.  We say "purported" because it 
is not clear to us that EPA accomplished its objective.  The 
relevant part of the new recycling-reclamation provision 
reads:

     Materials [listed in a table] are not solid wastes when 
     reclaimed (except as provided under 40 CFR 
     261.4(a)(17)).[1]
     
__________
     1 The final rule published in the Federal Register incorrectly 
cited s 261.4(a)(15).  See 63 Fed. Reg. 28,556, 28,636 (1998).  EPA 
later corrected its mistake.  See 64 Fed. Reg. 25,408, 25,408 (1999).

Id.  The new s 261.4(a)(17) gave a so-called "conditional 
exclusion":  if the provision's criteria were met, reclaimed 
mineral processing secondary materials would not be classi-
fied as solid waste.  We have trouble making sense of these 
two provisions.  The first provision (s 261.2(c)(3)) broadly 
describes what is not a solid waste, unless it complies with the 
other provision.  But the other provision--s 261.4(a)(17)--is 
an exclusion, and the consequence of not complying with the 
provision is, of course, loss of exclusion.  In other words, read 
together, the provisions seem to say that something is not a 
solid waste unless it is not excluded from being a solid waste.  
Lewis Carroll would be proud.  But petitioners make nothing 
of the point and we shall therefore assume that if secondary 
material of this sort--derived from mineral processing--does 
not meet the conditions specified in s 261.4(a)(17), EPA will 
consider the material "solid waste" potentially subject to full 
RCRA Subtitle C regulation.

     As to the conditions set forth in s 261.4(a)(17), EPA's 
dividing line between "waste" and nonwaste is the manner of 
storage.  If the mineral processor stores secondary material 
destined for recycling in tanks, containers, buildings, or on 
properly maintained pads, the materials are not considered 
"solid waste."  See id. s 261.4(a)(17)(iii), (iv).  Given our 
assumption (and that of the parties), if by-products and 
sludges exhibiting a characteristic of hazardous waste are not 
stored in such a manner prior to being recycled, they may be 
regulated as hazardous "waste."

     How long the materials are stored is of no consequence 
according to the regulation.  See Fed. Reg. 28,556, 28,582-83 
(1998).  They could be placed on the ground for only a few 
minutes before being put back into the production process, 
yet they would still be subject to RCRA if not stored in 
accord with s 261.4(a)(17).  Petitioners say this rule extends 
EPA's authority far beyond the statute.  They ask how 
secondary material held for recycling in production could 
possibly qualify as "waste" when the statute defines "waste" 
as "discarded materials"?  42 U.S.C. s 6903(27).

     The question is not a new one.  It was asked and answered 
in American Mining Congress v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1177 (D.C. 
Cir. 1987) ("AMC I").  The court began by referring to the 
"ordinary, plain-English meaning" of "discarded"--" 'disposed 
of,' 'thrown away,' or 'abandoned.' "  Id. at 1184.  Secondary 
materials destined for recycling are obviously not of that sort.  
Rather than throwing these materials away, the producer 
saves them;  rather than abandoning them, the producer 
reuses them.  After examining the structure and history of 
RCRA, see id. at 1184-92, the AMC I court concluded:  
"Congress clearly and unambiguously expressed its intent 
that 'solid waste' (and therefore EPA's regulatory authority) 
be limited to materials that are 'discarded' by virtue of being 
disposed of, abandoned, or thrown away."  Id. at 1190.  The 
court therefore set aside an EPA rule regulating secondary 
"materials reused within an ongoing industrial process," id. at 
1182, because the materials were "neither disposed of nor 
abandoned," id. at 1193.

     The holding in AMC I thus appears to answer the question 
we have before us.  See Chevron U.S.A. Inc. vs. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  The 
Supreme Court has a rule:  "Once we have determined a 
statute's clear meaning, we adhere to that determination 
under the doctrine of stare decisis, and we judge an agency's 
later interpretation of the statute against our prior determi-
nation of the statute's meaning."  Maislin Indus., U.S., Inc. 
v. Primary Steel, Inc., 497 U.S. 116, 131 (1990);  see also 
Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 527, 536-37 (1992).  We 
too follow stare decisis.  The complication, for an administra-
tive agency, of conflicting interpretations of the same statute 
from different circuits is not present.  The D.C. Circuit is the 
exclusive venue for pre-enforcement judicial review of RCRA 
regulations.  See 42 U.S.C. s 6976(a)(1).  And so, our inter-
pretation of RCRA binds not only this court but also EPA.

     EPA nevertheless insists that RCRA may be applied to 
materials that are not disposed of, abandoned, or thrown 
away, but are destined for reuse in an on-going industrial 
process.  The argument is that AMC I was a narrow decision, 
and that "subsequent judicial opinions have sharply limited 

the scope of AMC I."  63 Fed. Reg. at 28,580.  These later 
decisions, according to EPA, absolutely bar the agency from 
treating secondary materials as "discarded" (42 U.S.C. 
s 6903(27)) if and only if "reclamation is continuous in the 
sense that there is no interdiction in time--i.e. materials 
moving from one step of a recovery process to another 
without a break in the process, as for storage."  63 Fed. Reg. 
at 28,581.  We believe EPA misapprehends the law of the 
circuit.

     As to AMC I, EPA supports its interpretation of the 
decision on the basis that the court twice used the phrase 
"immediate reuse":

     Here, Congress defined "solid waste" as "discarded ma-
     terial."  The ordinary, plain-English meaning of the word 
     "discarded" is "disposed of," "thrown away" or "aban-
     doned."  Encompassing materials retained for immediate 
     reuse within the scope of "discarded" strains, to say the 
     least, the everyday usage of that term.
     
                              *  *  *

     The question we face, then, is whether ... Congress was 
     using the term "discarded" in its ordinary sense--"dis-
     posed of" or "abandoned"--or whether Congress was 
     using it in a much more open-ended way, so as to 
     encompass materials no longer useful in their original 
     capacity though destined for immediate reuse in another 
     phase of the industry's ongoing production process.
     
824 F.2d at 1183-84, 1185.  EPA reads, or rather misreads, 
these passages to mean that it may treat secondary materials 
as "discarded" whenever they leave the production process 
and are stored for any length of time.

     For one thing, "the language of an opinion is not always to 
be parsed as though we were dealing with language of a 
statute," Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442 U.S. 330, 341 (1979)--
an admonition the AMC I court itself repeated.  See 824 F.2d 
at 1183 n.6 (quoting Reiter, 442 U.S. at 341);  see also St. 
Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 515 (1993) ("[W]e 

think it generally undesirable, where holdings of the Court 
are not at issue, to dissect the sentences of the United States 
Reports as though they were the United States Code.").  Yet 
EPA treats "immediate reuse" as if these were statutory 
terms in need of a regulatory definition.  See, e.g., 63 Fed. 
Reg. at 28,582-83.  EPA supplies the definition:  immediate 
reuse is "continuous recirculation of secondary materials back 
into recovery processes without prior storage" unless the 
storage for later recycling complies with the conditions EPA 
sets forth in the new s 261.4(a)(17) of its regulations.  63 
Fed. Reg. at 28,580-83.  Of course, this thoroughly ignores 
the AMC I court's holding that, under RCRA, material must 
be thrown away or abandoned before EPA may consider it to 
be "waste."  As we have said, material stored for recycling is 
plainly not in that category.

     For another thing, in the two passages quoted above, the 
word "immediate" cannot mean what EPA thinks.  The court 
wrote of secondary material "retained"--held for a time--and 
"destined"--denoting the future--for "immediate reuse."  
This more than suggests that the court had in mind materials 
that were being held or stored for later recycling or reuse.  
EPA assumes, without saying why, that when the AMC I 
court wrote "immediate" in these sentences it meant "at 
once."  But the word "immediate" has another common 
meaning--"direct," as in "my immediate superior" or "the 
immediate cause of the accident."  It is clear to us that this is 
what the AMC I court intended.  It is clear because retaining 
signifies holding onto, keeping, storing.  And so retaining, on 
the one hand, and reusing at once, on the other hand, sounds 
like a physical impossibility.  It is clear because the AMC I 
court stressed, again and again, that it was interpreting 
"discarded" to mean what it ordinarily means.  To say that 
when something is saved it is thrown away is an extraordi-
nary distortion of the English language.  Yet that is where 
EPA's definition leads. It is also clear that the AMC I court 
intended "direct" when it wrote "immediate" because EPA 
never even argued that materials sent back into the produc-
tion process, with no intermediate storage, were "waste."  
EPA never made the argument because its rule at the time 

did not consider such secondary materials to be discarded 
(and thus "solid waste" under RCRA).  EPA's AMC I brief 
stated:  "when secondary materials are recycled by being 
returned directly (without undergoing significant reprocess-
ing) for use as feedstock to the process which generated 
them, the activity often is like an on-going production process.  
Secondary materials being recycled in this way--referred to 
as a 'closed-loop' process--therefore are not defined as solid 
wastes."  Brief for Respondent at 11 (citing 40 C.F.R. 
s 261.2(e)(iii)(1986)), AMC I.

     That the "immediate reuse" phrase was not mentioned in 
the critical portions of the AMC I opinion containing the 
court's holding is still another reason for rejecting EPA's 
position.  The court stated:  "In sum, our analysis of the 
statute reveals clear Congressional intent to extend EPA's 
authority only to materials that are truly discarded, disposed 
of, thrown away, or abandoned," 824 F.2d at 1190;  and 
"[t]hese materials have not yet become part of the waste 
disposal problem;  rather, they are destined for beneficial 
reuse or recycling in a continuous process by the generating 
industry itself," id. at 1186 (italics in original);  and "we are 
persuaded that by regulating in-process secondary materials, 
EPA has acted in contravention of Congress' intent," id. at 
1193.  Nothing here about saved materials being transformed 
into discarded materials unless they are placed back into the 
production process forthwith.

     Still further, the AMC I court thought that EPA's final rule 
illegally regulated the following:  "valuable metal-bearing and 
mineral-bearing dusts are often released in processing a 
particular metal.  The mining facility typically recaptures, 
recycles, and reuses these dusts, frequently in production 
processes different from the one from which the dusts were 
originally emitted."  Id. at 1181.  The court must have been 
referring to the following illustration provided in the mining 
industry's brief:

     If, for example, "an emission control dust from a primary 
     zinc smelting furnace" is not returned to the zinc produc-
     
     tion process but instead to on-site "cadmium recovery 
     operations," it is classified as solid waste.
     
Brief for Petitioner American Mining Congress at 20 (citing 
50 Fed. Reg. 614, 640 (1985)), AMC I.  In this example, the 
dust is not placed back into the production process at once, 
and yet the AMC I court held that EPA had no authority to 
regulate the dust as solid waste because it had not been 
thrown away or otherwise discarded.  To state the matter 
more generally, the court in AMC I set aside EPA's rule 
because secondary materials which are treated prior to recy-
cling cannot be considered discarded if they are "reused 
within an ongoing industrial process."  824 F. 2d at 1182.2

     We have written enough to explain why we disagree with 
EPA's reading of AMC I and why the Phase IV Rule 
contradicts that decision.  Later cases in this court do not 
limit AMC I, as EPA supposes.  American Petroleum Insti-
tute v. EPA, 906 F.2d 729 (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("API"), was, as 

__________
     2 An example from the rulemaking record in this case illustrates 
how temporary storage can be a necessary phase of reclaiming 
mineral processing secondary material.  The Cyprus Amax Miner-
als Company commented on EPA's proposed 48 hour rule, which 
would have defined any such secondary material stored for more 
than 48 hours as solid waste, see 62 Fed. Reg. 26,041, 26,051 
(1997)--a more limited assertion of authority than the current rule, 
which requires no minimum time period of storage.  See Comments 
of Cyprus Amax Minerals Company:  Land Disposal Restrictions 
Phase IV, at J.A. 839.  At its Miami smelter, Cyprus recycles 
reverts, a mixture of "converter slag and matte which has frozen to 
the wall and bottom of a transfer ladle."  Id. at 864.  To accomplish 
this, the reverts must be removed from the production process. 
"This frozen layer of material (reverts) is physically knocked loose 
from the ladle once it reaches a thickness that significantly reduces 
the ladle transfer capacity.  The freshly removed revert's tempera-
ture may still be as much as 1800-1900øF, and the large mass of 
material will require many hours to cool sufficiently to allow equip-
ment to move it to the crushing and sizing operations.  The reverts 
inventory is constantly in process of being reused."  Id.  The 
inventory is not always equal to demand, so some reverts, after the 
crushing and sizing, remain in that area before reentering the 
furnaces.  See id.

EPA acknowledged in the Phase IV rulemaking, at "the end 
of the [jurisdictional] continuum ...  where EPA's authority 
is most certain."  63 Fed. Reg. at 28,580.  In that case, the 
Natural Resources Defense Council challenged EPA's deci-
sion not to regulate K061 slag.  It was "undisputed" that 
K061, an individually listed, zinc-bearing hazardous waste 
generated from air pollution control equipment in steel indus-
try electric furnaces, see 906 F.2d at 734, was "a 'solid waste' 
when it le[ft] the electric furnace in which it [was] produced."  
Id. at 740.  But EPA, citing AMC I, disavowed authority over 
K061 after it had been transported to a metals reclamation 
facility.  Hence, slag produced when K061 went through a 
smelting furnace at the reclamation facility was not automati-
cally classified as a solid waste.3  See id. at 738-39;  53 Fed. 
Reg. 11,742, 11,753 (1988).

     The court rejected EPA's view that AMC I precluded 
classifying K061 slag as solid waste.  The material was sent 
to reclamation facilities not as part of an " 'ongoing manufac-
turing or industrial process' within 'the generating industry,' 
but as part of a mandatory waste treatment plan prescribed 
by EPA."  906 F.2d at 741.  API thus involved the taking of 
solid waste from the steel industry and reclaiming it within 
another industry, typically primary zinc smelting or some 
other type of secondary metal recovery.  See 53 Fed. Reg. at 
11,752.  The API decision is entirely consistent with AMC I. 
In fact the AMC I court recognized EPA's authority over 
comparable secondary materials:  "Oil recyclers typically col-
lect discarded used oils, distill them, and sell the resulting 
material for use as fuel in boilers. Regulation of those activi-
ties is likewise consistent with an everyday reading of the 
term 'discarded.'  It is only when EPA attempts to extend 
the scope of that provision to include the recycling of undis-
carded oils at petroleum refineries that conflict occurs."  824 
F.2d at 1187 n.14, cited in API, 906 F.2d at 741 n.16.

__________
     3 Under the "derived from" rule, "once EPA determines that a 
particular substance is a hazardous waste, the agency continues to 
treat as a hazardous waste any product 'derived from' that sub-
stance in the course of waste treatment."  906 F.2d at 738 (citing 40 
C.F.R. s 261.3(c)(2)).

     American Mining Congress v. EPA, 907 F.2d 1179 (D.C. 
Cir. 1990) ("AMC II"), the other case featured in EPA's 
argument, did not disturb AMC I's interpretation of "discard-
ed."  Industry groups contested EPA's authority to regulate 
three specifically listed hazardous wastes--K064 (acid plant 
blowdown sludge from primary copper production);  K065 
(surface impoundment solids from primary lead smelting);  
and K066 (wastewater treatment sludge from primary zinc 
production).  See 907 F.2d at 1183, 1185.  The court ex-
plained that copper, lead and zinc smelting operations "pro-
duce large volumes of wastewater that the smelting company 
must treat before discharging it.  Many smelting operations 
use surface impoundments to collect, treat, and dispose of the 
wastewater."  Id. at 1185-86.  Solids in the wastewater set-
tle.  Petitioners claimed that the resulting sludge "may at 
some time in the future be reclaimed" and therefore could not 
be considered solid waste because they had not discarded it.  
Id. at 1186.  The key word in the passage just quoted is 
"may."  Could EPA consider this secondary material--mate-
rial that may in the future be reclaimed--to be discarded?  
The AMC II court thought the answer to this "precise 
question" was not clear from RCRA and so it deferred to 
EPA's interpretation.  Id.

     EPA regulates the speculative accumulation of secondary 
materials through 40 C.F.R. s 261.2(c)(4), a provision not 
challenged in this case, and not challenged in AMC II.  This 
regulation, in itself, supported EPA's viewing the three types 
of sludge in AMC II as waste.  EPA, however, dismissed the 
language in the AMC II opinion indicating that the court had 
before it speculative accumulation.  According to EPA, AMC 
II did not involve speculative accumulation because each 
sludge "was actually recycled 100 percent, not stored with the 
expectation of recycling.  50 FR at 40292, 40296;  Brief of 
Petitioner American Mining Congress in AMC II (filed March 
30, 1990) pp. 18, 29."  63 Fed. Reg. at 28,581.  EPA is flatly 
wrong about this.  As to K064 (acid plant blowdown sludge 
from primary copper production), only 31 percent was eventu-
ally recycled throughout the industry, as the AMC II peti-
tioners conceded.  See 50 Fed. Reg. at 40,296;  Final Brief of 

Consolidated Petitioners at 26, AMC II.  As to K066 (waste-
water treatment sludge from primary zinc production), recy-
cling totaled 69 percent nationwide.  See 50 Fed. Reg. at 
40,296;  Final Brief of Consolidated Petitioners at 13 n.15, 
AMC II.  As to K066 (surface impoundment solids from 
primary lead smelting), EPA reported 100 percent recycling 
in the past but--and the "but" is critical--lead smelting 
plants were now storing this material for years and "due to 
declining lead demands, there is a strong potential that these 
sludges may not be recycled."  50 Fed. Reg. at 40,297.

     Even if we credited EPA's mistaken notion about AMC II, 
the court's decision there was not at odds with AMC I.  The 
best authority for this is EPA itself.  In defense of its listing 
of the materials in AMC II, the agency argued that it had 
acted consistently with AMC I's holding that "discarded," as 
used in RCRA, carries its ordinary, everyday meaning.4  
Here is the heart of EPA's argument in AMC II:

          The record demonstrates that the sludges in question 
     are managed in wastewater treatment surface impound-
     ments, which are within the definition of solid waste.  
     Moreover, the sludges exhibit sufficient elements of dis-
     card to be solid wastes, even if they may be, in part, later 
     reclaimed.
     
                              *  *  *

          EPA acted consistently with AMC in assessing wheth-
     er each specific sludge at issue here was, considering all 
     facts and indicia, discarded....
     
          Wastewater treatment surface impoundments are not 
     part of an ongoing, continuous primary smelting produc-
     tion process.  The impoundments receive process waste-
     water, from which sludges settle or precipitate out.
     
__________
     4 RCRA jurisdiction over these types of sludge may have existed 
even without resort to the "discarded material" term in the solid 
waste definition.  Congress defined solid waste to include "any ... 
sludge from a waste treatment plant," 42 U.S.C. s 6903(27), a point 
EPA made in its AMC II brief.  See Brief for Respondent at 15, 
AMC II.

Brief for Respondent at 12, 19-20 (footnotes omitted), AMC 
II.  The AMC II court agreed with this argument:  "Nothing 
in AMC prevents the agency from treating as 'discarded' the 
wastes at issue in this case, which are managed in land 
disposal units that are part of waste treatment systems."  907 
F.2d at 1186 (italics in original).  The point of AMC II, and 
for that matter API, is that once material qualifies as "solid 
waste,"5 something derived from it retains that designation 
even if it might be reclaimed and reused at some future time.  
In contrast, the Phase IV Rule seeks to regulate materials 
that are not a by-product of solid waste, but a direct by-
product of industrial processes.

     EPA thinks that in light of API and AMC II, "discarded" is 
now ambiguous and thus we should defer to its interpretation.  
To accept EPA's contention would be to conclude that two 
later panels of this court overruled the decision in AMC I that 
"discarded" was not ambiguous.  See AMC I, 824 F.2d at 
1193.  We think nothing of the sort occurred.  A term may be 
ambiguous as applied to some situations, but not as applied to 
others.  The AMC II court said as much:  nothing in RCRA 
"shows the term 'discarded' to be any less ambiguous regard-
ing sludges stored in surface impoundments than it was 
regarding the materials at issue in API."  907 F.2d at 1186.6

__________
     5 The "solid waste" to which we refer is the wastewater.  Under 
RCRA a "solid" waste may be liquid.  See 42 U.S.C. s 6903(27).

     6 It is true that the AMC II court quoted the "immediate reuse" 
language from AMC I we mentioned earlier.  It is also true that the 
AMC II court quoted a good deal more of AMC I, for instance:  
"We held [in AMC I] that the agency could not treat such materials 
as solid wastes, because they 'have not yet become part of the waste 
disposal problem;  rather, they are destined for beneficial reuse or 
recycling in a continuous process by the generating industry itself.'  
[824 F.2d at 1186]."  907 F.2d at 1186 (italics in original).  While 
the AMC II court said that AMC I "concerned only materials that 
are 'destined for immediate reuse in another phase of the industry's 
ongoing production process,' " id. (quoting 824 F.2d at 1185, and 
adding italics), we have already explained why the italicized lan-
guage cannot carry the meaning EPA ascribes to it.  See pp. 6-10, 
supra.

     Some mineral processing secondary materials covered un-
der the Phase IV Rule may not proceed directly to an 
ongoing recycling process and may be analogous to the sludge 
in AMC II.  The parties have presented this aspect of the 
case in broad abstraction, providing little detail about the 
many processes throughout the industry that generate residu-
al material of the sort EPA is attempting to regulate under 
RCRA.7  At this stage, all we can say with certainty is that at 
least some of the secondary material EPA seeks to regulate 
as solid waste is destined for reuse as part of a continuous 
industrial process and thus is not abandoned or thrown away.  
Once again, "by regulating in-process secondary materials, 
EPA has acted in contravention of Congress' intent," 824 
F.2d at 1193, because it has based its regulation on an 
improper interpretation of "discarded" and an incorrect read-
ing of our AMC I decision.

               II. Alternative Treatment Standards

                                A.

     Once it is determined that materials are hazardous waste 
and thus subject to RCRA, EPA is required to take several 
steps, one of which is to promulgate regulations prohibiting 
land disposal of certain hazardous wastes.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 6924(d), (e) & (g).  If a waste falls under this disposal 
restriction, it cannot be disposed of "unless the waste is 
treated so as to minimize the short-term and long-term 
threats to human health and the environment posed by toxic 
and hazardous constituents ... or unless the EPA finds that 
no migration of hazardous constituents from the facility will 
occur after disposal."  Chemical Waste Management, Inc. v. 
EPA, 976 F.2d 2, 8 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (citing 42 U.S.C. s 6924 
(g)(5), (m)).  We are concerned in this portion of the opinion 

__________
     7 The Phase IV Rule encompasses recycling activities in "all 
primary mineral processing sectors" of which EPA has identified at 
least 41.  63 Fed. Reg. at 28,580 (citing EPA, Identification and 
Description of Mineral Processing Sectors and Waste Streams 
(1996)).

with the first option--the land disposal restriction ("LDR") 
treatment standards.

     EPA originally promulgated technology-based LDR treat-
ment standards, see Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. 
EPA, 886 F.2d 355, 361-66 (D.C. Cir. 1989), usually examin-
ing the available treatment data and requiring use of the 
"best demonstrated available technology" ("BDAT"), see 61 
Fed. Reg. 18,780, 18,807 (1996).  Beginning in 1991, see 56 
Fed. Reg. 55,160, 55,172-77 (1991),8 EPA began to rethink 
whether BDAT standards should apply to all soils containing 
hazardous wastes.  While continuing to believe that BDAT 
standards are best for newly-generated wastes, the agency 
doubted that this was also true for wastes generated during 
remediation of contaminated soils.  See 61 Fed. Reg. 18,780, 
18,808 (1996).  BDAT standards "create an incentive to gen-
erate less of the affected waste in the first instance."  Id.  
This incentive is what EPA desires in the context of newly-
generated wastes, but in the remediation context it serves as 
a barrier to desirable cleanup efforts.  See id.

     EPA thus proposed, and promulgated in the rule before us, 
alternative treatment standards for soils.  Rather than re-
quiring BDAT, the alternative standards allow any treatment 
that results in a ninety percent reduction in the concentration 
of hazardous constituents, unless the ninety percent reduction 
would result in a concentration less than ten times the 
Universal Treatment Standard (based on BDAT) for that 
constituent.  See 40 C.F.R. s 268.49(c)(1).  In that case, the 
concentrations can be reduced only to ten times the Universal 
Treatment Standard.  See id. s 268.49(c)(1)(C).

__________
     8 This first mention of alternative standards was during part of 
the Phase II LDR rulemaking.  See 56 Fed. Reg. 55,160, 55,172-77 
(1991);  58 Fed. Reg. 48,092, 48,122-33 (1993).  The development of 
the alternative standards continued in the Hazardous Waste Identi-
fication Rule for Contaminated Media, see 61 Fed. Reg. 18,780, 
18,783-85, 18,803-13 (1996) and in the Phase IV rule currently 
before this court, see 63 Fed. Reg. 28,556, 28,571-52, 28,609-10 
(1998).

     The final rule applies solely to soils that are placed "into a 
land disposal unit."  See id. s 268.49(a).  Four industry 
groups representing electric and gas utilities challenge the 
regulation because it departed from the proposed rules, which 
petitioners contend applied to any "land disposal" of soils.  
The practical effect of this difference is that the alternative 
standards do not apply to soils that are recycled into products 
placed on land.  See 63 Fed. Reg. at 28,609.  These petition-
ers prefer the proposed rule because in their efforts to clean 
up manufactured gas plant sites, they often recycle contami-
nated soils into asphalt, brick, or cement--products that are 
placed on land.  Petitioners voice procedural objections to the 
final rule, claiming it violated the notice and comment provi-
sions of the APA, see 5 U.S.C. s 533, and the public partic-
ipation requirements of RCRA, see 42 U.S.C. s 6974(b)(1).  
They also argue that the final rule should be set aside as 
"arbitrary and capricious."  See 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).

                                B.

     There is a jurisdictional hurdle to get over.  Intervenors 
Environmental Defense Fund and Environmental Technology 
Council, but not EPA, question whether we may hear peti-
tioners' challenge to the Phase IV Rule for something it did 
not do--that is, its failure to apply the alternative treatment 
standards to soils that are recycled into products placed on 
land.  RCRA gives this court jurisdiction over "a petition for 
review of action of the Administrator in promulgating any 
regulation...."  42 U.S.C. s 6976(a)(1).  Our court lacks 
jurisdiction under this provision to hear petitions complaining 
that the "EPA should have promulgated a rule which, up until 
now, it has not promulgated."  United Technologies Corp. v. 
EPA, 821 F.2d 714, 720-21 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  see also Hazard-
ous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 287 
(D.C. Cir. 1988).  In United Technologies, a petitioner chal-
lenged an EPA regulation because it did not promulgate 
groundwater monitoring regulations for solid (but not hazard-
ous) waste management units.  See 821 F.2d at 721.  EPA 

had not yet acted either to adopt or to reject proposed 
regulations.  See id.

     In the Phase IV final rule, however, EPA acted.  It "stud-
ied carefully" whether to apply alternative LDR standards to 
soils that are recycled into products placed on land.  63 Fed. 
Reg. at 28,575.  While the new regulations do not apply to 
soils that are recycled into products placed on land, the 
jurisdictional provision does not limit review to the actual 
regulations.  It allows for review "of action of the Adminis-
trator in promulgating any regulation," 42 U.S.C. 
s 6976(a)(1) (italics added).  When EPA considers and rejects 
a proposed regulation it has acted.  Unlike the United Tech-
nologies situation, there are standards by which to judge 
EPA's action because the agency selected what, in its view, is 
the "appropriate method of ascertaining compliance with stat-
utory and regulatory norms."  821 F.2d at 721.

                                C.

     The Administrative Procedure Act requires that a "[g]ener-
al notice of proposed rule making shall be published in the 
Federal Register" and "[t]he notice shall include ... either 
the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description 
of the subjects and issues involved."  5 U.S.C. s 553(b).9  
This notice then allows interested persons to comment on the 
proposed rules.  See id. s 553(c).  EPA published notices of 
proposed rulemaking on alternative LDR standards for soil in 
1991, 1993, and 1996.  See 56 Fed. Reg. 55,160, 55,172-77 
(1991);  58 Fed. Reg. 48,092 (1993);  61 Fed. Reg. at 18,813.  
Affected industries thus had numerous opportunities to com-
ment about whether the alternative LDR standards should, or 

__________
     9 Petitioners also rely on the public participation provisions of 
RCRA.  See 42 U.S.C. s 6974(b)(1).  They note, however, that the 
APA provides "greater specificity" of notice requirements, see Brief 
of Petitioners Edison Electric Institute et al. on LDR Treatment 
Standard Issues at 14, and support their argument only with 
reference to APA case law.  They do not explain how the RCRA 
provision creates additional notice requirements relevant to this 
petition.

should not, apply to their processes.  Petitioners did just 
that.  But they now contend that they were not given proper 
notice of the final rule, which, as discussed above, applied 
only to soils placed in land disposal units.

     Petitioners are correct that the final Phase IV Rule is not 
exactly the same as the proposed rules.  But notice require-
ments do not require that the final rule be an exact replica-
tion of the proposed rule.  If that rigidity were required, the 
purpose of notice and comment--to allow an agency to recon-
sider, and sometimes change, its proposal based on the com-
ments of affected persons--would be undermined.  Agencies 
would either refuse to make changes in response to comments 
or be forced into perpetual cycles of new notice and comment 
periods.  Recognizing this, we hold that notice and comment 
requirements are met when an agency issues rules "that do 
not exactly coincide with the proposed rule so long as the 
final rule is the 'logical outgrowth' of the proposed rule."  
Fertilizer Inst. v. EPA, 935 F.2d 1303, 1311 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  
"[T]he key focus is on whether the purposes of notice and 
comment have been adequately served....  [A] final rule will 
be deemed to be the logical outgrowth of a proposed rule if a 
new round of notice and comment would not provide commen-
ters with 'their first occasion to offer new and different 
criticisms which the agency might find convincing.' "  Id. 
(quoting United Steelworkers of America v. Marshall, 647 
F.2d 1189, 1225 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (quoting BASF Wyandotte 
Corp. v. Costle, 598 F.2d 637, 642 (1st Cir. 1979))).

     The Phase IV final rule on alternative LDR treatment 
standards is a logical outgrowth of the proposed rules.  EPA 
proposed allowing alternative standards for remediated soils.  
The proposal was just that--a proposal.  One would logically 
conclude that EPA could have ended up allowing alternative 
standards for all soils as the proposal suggested, for no soils, 
or--as it turned out--for some soils.  Petitioners submitted 
comments on why remediation activities involving soils recy-
cled into products placed on land should be subject to the 
alternative standards.  EPA responded to those comments.  
Petitioners say that they "would have submitted comments 
demonstrating that utility companies have engaged in such 

recycling under regulatory oversight...."  Brief of Petition-
er Edison Electric et al. on LDR Treatment Standard Issues 
at 21.  They think this would have been convincing because 
"[w]hat ultimately seemed to be dispositive was EPA's belief 
that recycling is not subject to regulatory supervision."  Id. 
(citing 63 Fed. Reg. at 28,610).  Not so.  In 1996, EPA 
suggested that it might limit the alternative treatment stan-
dards to remediation activities subject to regulatory over-
sight:  "[S]hould the Agency adopt soil treatment standards 
that are adjusted to account for the lack of State or Agency 
oversight over how they are administered?"  See 61 Fed. 
Reg. at 18,813.  This notified affected persons that they 
should submit information discussing the regulatory oversight 
of any remediation activities at issue.

     The short of the matter is that petitioners have identified 
no relevant information they might have supplied had they 
anticipated EPA's final rule.  We therefore hold that EPA 
complied with the notice and comment requirements.

                                D.

     This brings us to the arbitrary and capricious challenge.  
EPA concluded that soils recycled into products placed on 
land should continue to be treated with the "best treatment 
available" because these products "can be placed virtually 
anywhere, compounding potential release mechanisms, expo-
sure pathways, and human and environmental receptors."  63 
Fed. Reg. at 28,610.  The agency stressed the "uncertainties 
posed by this method of land disposal" in refusing to apply 
the alternative LDR standards.  See id. at 28,609-10.

     Petitioners claim this "uncertainty" is not a rational basis 
for agency decisionmaking and that EPA did not adequately 
support its environmental concerns with recycled soils placed 
on land. There is nothing to this.  EPA decided not to apply 
alternative standards unless it was certain the new standards 
would result in safe disposal.  "[N]othing [in RCRA] requires 
the Administrator to determine that a method of land disposal 
is not safe before prohibiting it.  Rather, the statute com-
mands the Administrator to promulgate prohibitory regula-

tions unless he has made an affirmative determination of 
safety."  Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 
907 F.2d 1146, 1153 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  EPA applies a similar 
presumption in granting variances from treatment standards.  
See 40 C.F.R. s 268.44.  EPA also sufficiently supported its 
view that environmental risks exist when soils are recycled 
into products placed on land.  See 63 Fed. Reg. at 28,610 
(citing 53 Fed. Reg. at 31,197-98);  J.A. 2131-32.  It engaged 
in reasoned decisionmaking in finding that contaminated soils 
placed on the ground as asphalt or cement pose greater 
environmental risks than similar soils placed in land disposal 
units.

                             *  *  *

     EPA must define "solid waste" in accordance with this 
opinion.  The parenthetical--"(except as provided under 40 
CFR 261.4(a)(17))"--to the second sentence of 40 C.F.R. 
s 261.2(c)(3), through which EPA purportedly expanded its 
regulation of mineral processing secondary materials, is 
therefore set aside.

     The petitions challenging the alternative treatment stan-
dards for soils are denied.

                                                      So ordered.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  A solid waste not specifically 
listed as "hazardous" by the EPA is nonetheless deemed 
"hazardous" if it exhibits one or more of four characteristics:  
ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity.  40 C.F.R. 
ss 261.20, 261.21, 261.22, 261.23 & 261.24.  In order to deter-
mine whether a solid waste is toxic, the EPA has adopted a 
test called the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure 
(TCLP).  40 C.F.R. s 261.24.  The EPA created the TCLP, 
and its predecessor the Extraction Procedure (EP), as part of 
its response to the command of the Congress to "promulgate 
regulations identifying the characteristics of hazardous 
waste."  42 U.S.C. s 6921(b)(1);  see also 51 Fed. Reg. 21,653 
(describing evolution of EP and TCLP).  Because the Con-
gress had defined hazardous waste to include any solid waste 
that may "pose a substantial present or potential hazard to 
human health or the environment when improperly treated, 
stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed," 
42 U.S.C. s 6903(5)(B), the EPA set out to design a test that 
would determine whether a solid waste would pose a risk to 
human health or the environment if it was mismanaged.  See 
55 Fed. Reg. 11,806/1.  Rejecting as impractical an approach 
in which the test for toxicity would vary depending upon the 
manner in which a waste was actually disposed of, see 55 Fed. 
Reg. 11,807, the EPA instead decided to adopt a test designed 
to simulate the disposal practice that is the most dangerous to 
human health and the environment and yet still plausible.  
See id.  Although the EPA included in the TCLP several 
refinements the EP lacked, both tests model essentially the 
same worst-case mismanagement scenario.  See 51 Fed. Reg. 
21,653;  Edison Electric Institute v. EPA, 2 F.3d 438, 442 
(D.C. Cir. 1993).

     That scenario assumes the "co-disposal of toxic wastes in an 
actively decomposing municipal landfill which overlies a 
groundwater aquifer," 45 Fed. Reg. 33,110/3;  this hypotheti-
cal landfill is composed of "5 percent industrial solid waste 
and 95 percent municipal waste," 51 Fed. Reg. 21,653/3;  the 
toxic waste leaches unattenuated to the groundwater strata, 
see 45 Fed. Reg. 33,111/2;  and the closest well for drinking 
water is 500 feet down gradient from the landfill.  See id.

     In order to conduct the TCLP, the EPA first determines 
the composition of the waste sample.  If the sample contains 
less than 0.5% dry solid matter, called the "solid phase," then 
the waste is filtered;  the liquid passing through the filter is 
considered the TCLP extract and is analyzed to determine 
the concentrations of various chemicals.  See Office of Solid 
Waste, EPA, Method 1311, in Test Methods for Evaluat- 
ing Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods, ss 2.1, 7.3.15, 
7.3.16 (3d ed. 1998) (EPA Publication SW-846).  After apply-
ing a dilution and attenuation factor to simulate the diminu-
tion in concentration "expected to occur between the point of 
leachate generation and the point of human or environmental 
exposure," Edison Electric, 2 F.3d at 441, the EPA deter-
mines whether any of the resulting concentrations of certain 
chemicals are equal to or greater than the concentrations 
listed in 40 C.F.R. s 261.24, tbl. 1.  If they are, then the 
waste is considered toxic and, consequently, hazardous.  40 
C.F.R. s 261.24(a).

     If the waste contains more than 0.5% solid phase, then the 
solid phase is separated from the "liquid phase," see EPA 
Publication SW-846 at s 2.2, if any, and reduced to particle 
size in order to simulate the various processes that break 
down large solids in a landfill.  See id. at s 7.1.3;  Edison 
Electric, 2 F.3d at 444.  An "extraction fluid" is then mixed 
with the solid phase and the resulting leachate, called the 
"liquid extract," is filtered through a glass fiber filter.  EPA 
Publication SW-846 at ss 2.2, 7.1.4.  The liquid phase and 
the liquid extract, treated collectively as the TCLP extract, 
are then analyzed to determine the concentration of various 
chemicals, see id. at s 2.3;  again, the dilution and attenuation 
factor is applied and the resulting concentrations compared 
with those listed in the table at 40 C.F.R. s 261.24.

     In Edison Electric we held that the EPA's decision to use 
one test based upon a single, hypothetical mismanagement 
scenario was authorized under a permissible construction of 
the RCRA and entitled to our deference pursuant to Chevron 
U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  
See Edison Electric, 2 F.3d at 446.  Applying the Administra-
tive Procedure Act, however, we rejected as arbitrary and 

capricious the EPA's attempt to apply the TCLP to mineral 
processing wastes in general and in particular to those miner-
al processing wastes known as manufactured gas plant (MGP) 
waste.  See id. at 446-47.  Specifically, we held that although 
the "EPA need not demonstrate that mineral wastes [includ-
ing MGP waste] are typically or commonly deposited in 
[municipal solid waste] landfills ... the Agency must at least 
provide some factual support for its conclusion that such a 
mismanagement scenario is plausible."  Id. at 446.  The EPA 
could alternatively justify the application of the TCLP to 
mineral processing and MGP wastes if it could demonstrate 
"on the record that [these] wastes were exposed to conditions 
similar to those simulated by the TCLP."  Id. at 447.  Re-
cently, we reaffirmed our holding that the EPA must demon-
strate a rational relationship between the hypothetical mis-
management scenario underlying the TCLP and the actual 
way in which the wastes tested by the TCLP are discarded.  
See Columbia Falls Aluminum Co. v. EPA, 139 F.3d 914 
(1998).

     In the Phase IV Rule the EPA once again has used the 
TCLP as the test for determining the toxicity of mineral 
processing wastes, including MGP waste.  See 63 Fed. Reg. 
28,574, 28,599.  The National Mining Association, the Ameri-
can Iron and Steel Institute, the Edison Electric Institute, 
and the Chemical Manufacturers Association (collectively the 
Associations) argue that the EPA has failed to demonstrate 
that the mismanagement scenario underlying the TCLP bears 
a rational relationship to the way in which mineral processing 
and MGP wastes are disposed of in fact;  they therefore ask 
this court once again to strike down the EPA's application of 
the TCLP to these wastes as arbitrary and capricious.  Addi-
tionally, the Associations argue that the EPA failed to consid-
er or to respond to significant comments the Associations 
submitted suggesting the use of both the TCLP and another 
test, known as the Synthetic Precipitation Leaching Proce-
dure (SPLP).  Although we hold that the EPA has justified 
its use of the TCLP alone to determine the toxicity of mineral 
processing wastes generally, and that the EPA did respond to 
the Associations' comments, we nonetheless find that the 

EPA has failed to justify application of the TCLP to MGP 
waste.  Accordingly, we grant the petition for review in part 
and vacate the Phase IV Rule insofar as it provides for use of 
the TCLP to determine whether MGP waste exhibits the 
characteristic of toxicity.

A.   Mineral Processing Wastes (Other than MGP waste)

     Paralleling our holding in Edison Electric, the EPA at-
tempts to justify its application of the TCLP to mineral 
processing wastes on two grounds:  (1) It is likely that 
mineral processing wastes have been disposed of in municipal 
landfills;  and (2) mineral processing wastes have been "ex-
posed to conditions similar to those simulated by the TCLP."  
Because we find that evidence in the record supports the first 
proposition, we do not address the EPA's alternative justifica-
tion.

     In response to this court's remand in Edison Electric, the 
EPA prepared a document entitled Applicability of the 
[TCLP] to Mineral Processing Wastes. There the EPA col-
lected an impressive amount of evidence that mineral process-
ing wastes may have been disposed of as hypothesized in the 
mismanagement scenario modeled by the TCLP.  First, the 
EPA catalogued evidence that many facilities generating min-
eral processing wastes are located near population centers 
with municipal landfills and that a substantial portion of 
mineral processing facilities generate mineral processing 
wastes in quantities small enough to be deposited in a munici-
pal landfill.  Second, the EPA collected 14 cases of either 
"likely," "possible," or "potential" disposal of mineral process-
ing wastes in municipal landfills.  In one of the two "likely" 
cases an eyewitness saw waste taken from A&W Smelters 
and Refiners, a mineral processing facility, being dumped in a 
municipal landfill.  In the other "likely" case, a landfill locat-
ed on an abandoned "strip mine" was closed after having 
accepted industrial wastes without a permit;  an unidentified 
slag was among the laundry list of wastes found at the site.  
In the "possible" cases, "materials such as 'slag,' 'dusts,' and 
'ash' [were disposed of] in various landfills";  the materials 
involved are not precisely described and because "these 

wastes often become indistinguishable from the soil and de-
bris in municipal landfills," it is difficult to determine whether 
mineral processing wastes were actually involved.  The "po-
tential" cases typically "involve mineral processing and mu-
nicipal solid wastes being disposed of in close proximity to 
each other (e.g., in two separate on-site disposal areas)."  
Finally, the EPA collected ten instances in which mineral 
processing wastes had been stored at mineral processing 
facilities along with materials commonly found in municipal 
landfills.  For example, one facility had a landfill on site that 
contained 98% plant trash and two percent "spent catalyst," 
while another facility operated a landfill on site composed of 
90% plant trash and 10% "mercury contaminated soil."

     The Associations argue that this evidence is insufficient to 
meet the standard announced in Edison Electric, although 
they do not dispute the facts concerning the location of 
mineral processing facilities and the volume of waste they 
produce.  Rather, the Associations maintain that all the 
EPA's evidence does not establish that mineral processing 
wastes are plausibly disposed of in the manner modeled by 
the TCLP.  For example, they claim that there is no evidence 
that the material the eyewitness saw moved from A&W 
Smelters and Refiners originated at that facility or, alterna-
tively, that the material was subject to regulation under the 
RCRA as hazardous waste.  See 42 U.S.C. s 6921(b)(3)(A)(ii) 
(Bevill exclusion, as implemented by EPA, exempts from 
regulation under Subtitle C of RCRA solid wastes from 
extraction and beneficiation of ores and minerals and 20 
mineral processing wastes);  Solite Corp. v. EPA, 952 F.2d 
473, 479 n.4, 481-82 & n.6 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  Finally, the 
Associations contend that the EPA's examples of landfills 
located at mineral processing facilities are inadequate because 
most of those sites did not contain the mixture of 95% 
municipal waste and 5% industrial waste that the TCLP 
simulates and the two sites that did have a similar ratio did 
not contain mineral processing wastes.

     We hold that the evidence the EPA has marshaled in 
support of applying the TCLP to mineral processing wastes is 
sufficient to meet the standard announced in Edison Electric.  

In that case we did not demand that the EPA demonstrate 
that the TCLP exactly reflects actual disposal practices, but 
only that the mismanagement scenario underlying the TCLP 
bears some "rational relationship" to those practices.  See 
Edison Electric, 2 F.3d at 446.  Therefore, to the extent the 
Associations seek to exploit factual uncertainties in the EPA's 
account--such as whether the waste the eyewitness saw 
taken from A&W was actually a mineral processing waste 
subject to Subtitle C of the RCRA--we can agree that the 
evidence is not conclusive and nonetheless hold that it is 
sufficient to make application of the TCLP "rational" or 
"plausible."  Especially with respect to on-site landfills, the 
Associations' objections amount to nothing more than re-
peated observations that the EPA's evidence about actual 
disposal does not precisely match the conditions the agency 
models in the TCLP.  Such complaints are of little moment, 
for they merely point up an inherent feature of the TCLP, 
and indeed of any model.  As we have previously explained, 
because "a model is meant to simplify reality in order to 
make it tractable," it is no criticism of a model "[t]hat [it] 
does not fit every application perfectly."  Chemical Manufac-
turers Ass'n v. EPA, 28 F.3d 1259, 1264 (1994).

B.   MGP Waste

     The Associations also argue that the EPA has not justified 
applying the TCLP to MGP waste because the MGP industry 
stopped producing waste about 40 years ago and there is no 
evidence that MGP waste is currently being disposed of in 
municipal landfills.  In response, the EPA makes two points.  
First, the EPA notes that, prior to the demise of the MGP 
industry, MGP waste was deposited in landfills and at indus-
try facilities, many of which are currently being remediated.  
Second, the EPA argues that some of the MGP waste from 
the sites being remediated could be sent to municipal land-
fills, as evidenced by the following passage in a handbook 
issued by the Edison Electric Institute advising utilities on 
how to clean up contaminated sites:

     Landfilling is the most common and simplest of the 
     disposal methods.  If the wastes are hazardous then they 
     
     must be disposed of in a properly licensed secure landfill.  
     The nearest such landfill may be hundreds of miles from 
     the site, which results in high transportation costs.  If 
     the wastes are non-hazardous, disposal may be at a local 
     commercial municipal landfill.  It is therefore important 
     to determine if the wastes are hazardous or non-
     hazardous both for different transportation costs and for 
     the extreme difference in disposal costs, with secure 
     landfill costs being much higher.
     
On the basis of this publication, the EPA concludes that "the 
utilities' own characterization of its disposal practices demon-
strates that MGP wastes that do not display the toxicity 
characteristic are commonly disposed in municipal solid waste 
landfills, evidently because it is cheaper to do so."

     The Associations contend that because the EPA has not 
provided any evidence indicating that any remediation waste 
has ever found its way into any municipal landfill--or is for 
some particular reason likely to do so--the agency has failed 
to carry its burden, as set out in Edison Electric, of "pro-
vid[ing] some factual support for its conclusion that such a 
mismanagement scenario is plausible."  Although the Associ-
ations do not dispute that there are many sites, including 
municipal landfills, that contain MGP waste, they point out 
that the EPA has not provided any evidence linking the waste 
at those sites to waste generated during the remediation of 
sites contaminated with MGP.  Further, the Associations 
argue that the handbook issued by the Edison Electric Insti-
tute simply canvasses the available options for waste disposal 
without advocating any practice and without indicating that 
remediation wastes were or should be deposited in municipal 
landfills.  Indeed, the handbook specifically warns against 
disposing of hazardous MGP waste in a municipal landfill.  As 
the Associations see it, the EPA's evidence establishes, at 
most, that it is possible for MGP waste from a remediation 
site to be deposited in a municipal landfill.

     As we have said, the EPA must show that the mismanage-
ment scenario the TCLP simulates bears "some rational 
relationship" to how wastes subject to that test are actually 

managed.  See Edison Electric, 2 F.3d at 446.  Here, the 
EPA has demonstrated the possibility that MGP waste from 
remediation sites could be disposed of in a municipal landfill, 
but has not produced a shred of evidence indicating that has 
happened or is likely to happen.  Upon the current record, 
therefore, we must conclude that the EPA has not justified its 
application of the TCLP to MGP waste.

     Judge Randolph, post, expresses dismay that the Court 
rejects the EPA's application of the TCLP to MGP waste--
for which he would find there is at least some record sup-
port--while approving the agency's application of the TCLP 
to the other "350 or so wastes in this rulemaking for which 
the agency uses TCLP," Diss. op. at 1, and about which the 
record is silent.  Suffice to say, we do not require the EPA to 
present evidence justifying application of the TCLP to any 
other specific mineral processing waste because no party 
challenges the TCLP with respect to any other specific waste.

     The Associations have pointed out that MGP waste differs 
in one very real respect from other mineral processing 
wastes:  MGP waste is no longer produced and therefore will 
not be disposed of in municipal landfills unless that happens 
in the course of a remediation effort.  Evidence that mineral 
processing wastes that are still being produced have been 
disposed of in municipal landfills offers no support for the 
different proposition that MGP waste from a remediation 
effort has been or will be so disposed.

     Furthermore, the incomplete and vague evidence in the 
record relating to MGP waste is far less persuasive than the 
evidence the EPA produced for mineral processing wastes 
generally.  For instance, even in the two examples singled 
out by Judge Randolph--by far the strongest in the record--
there is no evidence that the "coal tar, kerosene, and other 
wastes typically produced at MGP sites," Diss. op. at 2, and 
found at the landfills actually originate from an MGP site at 
all, let alone evidence that they came to the landfill from a 
remediation effort.  Nor, contrary to Judge Randolph's sug-
gestion, see Diss. op. at 2, does evidence that the MGP 
industry disposed of its waste in municipal landfills--when 

that industry was actively producing waste--support the in-
ference that remediation waste containing MGP waste will 
now be deposited in landfills.  For these reasons, we do not 
think the EPA's evidence supporting application of the TCLP 
to mineral processing wastes justifies its application to MGP 
waste.

C.   Significant Comments

     The Associations also argue that the EPA failed to consider 
and respond to their comments suggesting the use of both the 
SPLP and the TCLP to determine toxicity.  This argument is 
without merit.  During the rulemaking, the EPA responded 
to the Associations' comments by highlighting evidence that 
the SPLP is no more accurate than the TCLP and by 
reiterating its decision to use a single test to determine 
toxicity instead of using different tests depending upon how 
the waste is actually managed.  The EPA therefore adequate-
ly considered and responded to the Associations's comments.

                             *  *  *

     For the foregoing reasons we grant the petition for review 
in part and vacate the Phase IV Rule insofar as it provides 
for the use of the TCLP to determine whether MGP waste 
exhibits the characteristic of toxicity.

                                                      So ordered.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, dissenting in part:  I respectfully 
dissent from Judge Ginsburg's conclusion, for himself and 
Judge Silberman, that EPA failed to justify "its application of 
TCLP to MGP wastes."  Maj. op. at 22.

     Edison Electric Institute v. EPA, 2 F.3d 438, 446 (D.C. Cir. 
1993), and Columbia Falls Aluminum Co. v. EPA, 139 F.3d 
914, 922-23 (D.C. Cir. 1998), require EPA to show a rational 
relationship between its chosen toxicity test--TCLP--and the 
wastes to which the test is applied.  (TCLP simulates what 
would occur if waste were dumped in a landfill.)  The case 
before us involves the application of TCLP to 358 different 
types of mineral processing wastes generated by 41 different 
sectors of the mineral processing industry.  Has EPA satis-
fied the "rational relationship" test with respect to all 358 
types of waste?  Yes, my colleagues decide, because there are 
2 cases of "likely" disposal of mineral processing wastes in 
municipal landfills and 12 such "possible" cases.  Quite obvi-
ously, this "proof" says nothing whatever about hundreds of 
types of waste thrown off by this industry.  The majority's 
inference must be that if some types of mineral processing 
waste may be dumped in a landfill, it is plausible to suppose 
that all types may wind up there.

     I have no quarrel with this reasoning, although I wish it 
had been made more explicit.  But I cannot comprehend why 
the reasoning does not apply equally to one other type of 
mineral processing waste--"manufactured gas plant" (MGP) 
waste.  See 63 Fed. Reg. at 28,574;  Edison Elec., 2 F.3d at 
443, 446-47 (treating MGP waste no differently than other 
mineral processing wastes).  Put another way, why is it that 
of the 350 or so wastes in this rulemaking for which the 
agency uses TCLP, my colleagues reach in and pluck out this 
one--MGP--to place under the judicial microscope?  Odder 
still, the record contains more support for using the test on 
MGP wastes than for using it on the hundreds of other 
unnamed mineral processing wastes, which the court sustains.

     My colleagues share EPA's conjecture that because mineral 
processing operations are often located near urban areas, 
their wastes are likely to be disposed in municipal landfills.  
See maj. op. at 25.  But MGP plants too were located in such 
spots, producing gas for municipalities.  While EPA identified 

only 14 examples of "likely" or "possible" landfill disposal for 
all 358 mineral processing wastes, the agency listed 14 exam-
ples of codisposal for MGP wastes alone.  See Office of Solid 
Waste, EPA, Applicability of the Toxicity Characteristic 
Leaching Procedure to Mineral Processing Wastes at 14 
(1998).  The record is a bit hazy regarding some of these 
instances.  For two of them, though, there is sufficient evi-
dence to make it likely that MGP waste was disposed in 
municipal landfills.  In both the New Lyme (Ohio) Landfill, 
see id. app. D, and the Schilling Landfill in Ironton, Ohio, see 
id., there were significant concentrations of coal tar, kero-
sene, and other wastes typically produced at MGP sites.

     The majority's concern seems to be that these two exam-
ples did not involve "remediation waste," that is, waste from 
clean up operations after the MGP plants ceased functioning.  
Maj. op. at 27-28.  How can my colleagues know that?  No 
findings to this effect appear in the record.  Besides, I believe 
they are mistaken.  The New Lyme landfill, for example, did 
not begin operation until 1969, see Applicability of the Toxici-
ty Characteristic Leaching Procedure to Mineral Processing 
Wastes app. D, yet MGPs "stopped producing waste about 40 
years ago," maj. op. at 27;  see also Petitioners' Reply Brief 
on RCRA Classification Issues at 17 (stating that MGP 
industry defunct for 40 years).  If not from remediation, how 
did this MPG waste wind up in the landfill?  At any rate, the 
same factors that led to disposing of MPG waste in landfills in 
the past--proximity to landfills, size of the waste, cost--are 
with us today and should have been enough to sustain EPA's 
rule.

     I again ask why the special judicial treatment of MGP 
waste?  Of the other 350 or so types of mineral processing 
wastes, how many of these are (1) from abandoned plants;  (2) 
near city dumps;  and (3) have in the past wound up in those 
dumps?  The majority does not say because it does not know.  
Yet it sustains application of TCLP to these wastes, for which 
there is no evidence, and strikes down TCLP for manufac-
tured gas plant wastes, despite abundant evidence showing a 
rational relationship.  I therefore dissent.

                                                                            