                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 4, 2001        Decided July 6, 2001 

                           No. 00-7238

                       Marshall Freedman, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               MCI Telecommunications Corporation, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (98cv02753)

     Bruce J. Terris argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Harvey D. Rumeld argued the cause for appellee.  With 
him on the brief was Thomas F. O'Neil, III.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964 forbids an employer from "discriminating against any 
individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, 
or privileges of employment because of such individual's race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin."  42 U.S.C. s 2000e-
2(a)(1).  Marshall Freedman contends that MCI Telecommu-
nications violated that prohibition by discriminating against 
him because of his religion during his brief but tumultuous 
employment there in 1997.

                                I.

     The story begins in Spring 1997 when Freedman, an Ortho-
dox Jewish man, interviewed for a position as a Network 
Services Engineer (NSE).  Freedman arrived at the inter-
view wearing his religious garments:  a yarmulka (also known 
as a kippah or skullcap) and fringes.  He was first inter-
viewed by Jeff Porter, who discussed Freedman's qualifica-
tions and showed him the facility.  At the end of this inter-
view, Freedman explained to Porter that, because of his 
religion, he must be permitted time off for various Jewish 
holidays and that his schedule needed to accommodate the 
Sabbath, which required him to be home before sundown on 
Fridays.  Freedman claims that Porter "stormed out" of the 
interview when he learned of his religious restrictions.

     Nonetheless, the second phase of the interview proceeded, 
and Freedman met with Leo Smith, who would actually make 
the hiring decision.  During his interview with Smith, Freed-
man reiterated his scheduling needs.  Shortly after this inter-
view, Smith contacted Freedman, extending a job offer in a 
phone call to Freedman's wife, and confirming the offer by 
written letter on May 1.  Freedman began work on May 12.

     By May 29, the company had its first inkling that some-
thing was wrong.  On that date, Smith, the manager of the 
MCI facility where Freedman was employed, received a five-
page, handwritten letter from Freedman detailing a number 
of complaints about his working conditions as well as listing 
several requests relating to his training and days that he 
needed off for jury duty and Jewish holidays.  Smith told 

Porter, Freedman's immediate supervisor, to discuss the is-
sues with Freedman and work out solutions.

     Among Freedman's early round of complaints was a lack of 
access to computers and tools.  Freedman was unhappy that 
he had not yet been assigned his own computer workstation.  
He was also concerned that he was required to share tools 
with co-workers.  During this early phase of his employment, 
Freedman was being trained to perform his new job by 
working with David Swithers and Peter Cartland.

     In the first two weeks of June, Freedman reminded Porter 
that he needed time off for the upcoming Shavous holiday.  
Freedman claims that, during his discussions with Porter 
regarding holiday leave, Porter expressed reluctance, even 
anger, at allowing the time off.  Shortly after these meetings, 
Porter informed Freedman that he was to be moved to the 
night shift.

     On June 9, 1997, Freedman began his tenure on the night 
shift and had the opportunity to work with a mentor, Scott 
Huff.  Freedman claims, though, that his experiences with 
Huff were cut short because Huff was very busy covering for 
other technicians who were on vacation.

     On August 12, 1997, Freedman suffered a severe headache 
and fainting spell that required him to go to the hospital.  
For the next several weeks, he was absent from work on 
disability leave.  Freedman returned to work on October 6.  
He claims that he did not have access to a computer worksta-
tion for the first three weeks of his return to the day shift.  
On October 28, 1997, Freedman met with Edward Lynch, a 
senior human resource generalist.  Apparently in response to 
this meeting, Freedman forwarded to Lynch an 18-page, 
handwritten letter detailing his claim of discrimination.  On 
November 21, 1997, Freedman filed a charge of discrimina-
tion with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

     Meanwhile, MCI was undergoing significant structural 
changes.  Sometime in late October or early November, 
William MacDonald, the Senior Manager of Operations for 
Washington, D.C. and Virginia, asked Smith for a list of 

employees in order of their usefulness.  Smith provided Mac-
Donald with a ranking that placed Freedman at or near the 
bottom of all the employees in his department.  MacDonald 
used this list as a basis for making recommendations to his 
supervisor that employees, including Freedman, be cut from 
several departments.  On January 16, 1998, Freedman was 
informed that he was to be terminated on March 28, 1998.  
Freedman filed another charge of discrimination with the 
EEOC on January 29, 1998.  The EEOC declined to pursue 
the charges on August 11, 1998, and Freedman brought suit 
in the district court on November 11, contending that MCI 
had violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act.

     On a motion by MCI, the district court granted summary 
judgment against Freedman on August 22, 2000.  Though 
sometimes for different reasons, we agree with the district 
court that MCI is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.

                               II.

     Rule 56 indicates that summary judgment is appropriate 
when there is "no genuine issue of material fact and ... the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."  
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c).  The substantive law is used to identify 
the "material" facts.  See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 477 
U.S. 242, 248 (1986).  And there must be a "genuine" dispute 
about those material facts;  that is, the evidence must be 
"such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the 
nonmoving party."  See id.

     For this case, Title VII provides the legal framework.  
Freedman is responsible for making out a prima facie case 
that (1) he is in a protected class, (2) that MCI took an 
adverse employment action against him and (3) that MCI 
took the adverse employment action because of his member-
ship in a protected class.  See Brown v. Brody, 199 F.3d 446, 
452 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  It is undoubted that Freedman is a 
member of a protected class.  The contest is in whether he 
can demonstrate adverse employment actions taken because 
of his protected status.

     Freedman sees discrimination in the following occurrences.  
First, he claims that his assignment to the night shift was an 
act of discrimination.  Second, he perceives discrimination 
against him in training opportunities.  In a third, and related, 
complaint, he claims that he was subject to disparate treat-
ment regarding MCI's mentorship program.  Fourth, he 
claims that he was denied the use of computers and tools 
during his tenure.  Fifth, he claims that he was given inap-
propriate assignments.  Sixth, he thinks he was denied one-
on-one feedback from supervisors given to other employees.  
Seventh, he claims that he was badly treated by Jeff Porter.  
Eighth, and finally, he contends that he was discharged 
because the joint operation of the other actions he describes 
made him underqualified and ripe for discharge.  We con-
clude that summary judgment was appropriate because each 
of the activities complained of, taken alone or collectively, 
fails to rise to the level of an adverse employment action, 
lacks evidence of disparate treatment, or both.

                                A.

     Consider first the problem of Freedman's assignment to 
the night shift.  Freedman contends that he was transferred 
to the night shift because of his religion.  Specifically, he 
contends that Porter moved him to the night shift in retalia-
tion for his request for time off for Jewish holidays.  The 
disparate treatment, according to Freedman, was that NSEs 
were not transferred to the night shift unless they agreed to 
go.  Since Freedman objected to being moved, he contends 
that he was treated both adversely and differently than his 
co-workers.

     The district court, relying on our decision in Brown, con-
cluded that Freedman had not suffered an adverse employ-
ment action because the transfer to the night shift was lateral 
and there was no corresponding decrease in salary or bene-
fits.  See Freedman v. MCI, No. 98-2753, slip op. at 15 
(D.D.C. Aug. 24, 2000).  We think that this may read our 
decision in Brown too broadly.  In Brown, we held that a 
purely lateral transfer was not, in itself, an adverse employ-

ment action unless "there are some other materially adverse 
consequences affecting the terms, conditions, or privileges of 
[the plaintiff's] employment ..."  Brown, 199 F.3d at 457.  
Thus, it is not enough to ask whether the transfer was purely 
lateral.  We must also ask if other changes in terms, condi-
tions, or privileges followed from the transfer.  It is hard to 
say that transfer to the night shift would not constitute such a 
change, at least in conditions or privileges.  Freedman testi-
fied that the change in hours interfered with his education.  
Further, the fact that Freedman received a pay differential 
for working on the night shift does not, as the district court 
held, necessarily demonstrate that he was not adversely 
affected by the change.  Rather, it could demonstrate that 
the night shift was an undesirable assignment.

     Freedman fails to make out a claim of discrimination 
because he has not established that he was treated differently 
than other employees because of his religion.  MCI contends 
that Freedman's transfer to the night shift can be explained 
by Porter's conclusion that Freedman would receive better 
training on the night shift.  In a case such as this, where the 
plaintiff claims discrimination and the defendant offers evi-
dence of a legitimate reason for an adverse action, the burden 
shifts to the plaintiff to produce evidence rebutting the em-
ployer's legitimate reason.  See Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs 
v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981);  Cones v. Shalala, 
199 F.3d 512, 516 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  Freedman offered no 
evidence that the proffered reason was a pretext.  Specifical-
ly, in his statement to the district court of disputed facts, 
Freedman suggested that the pace of the night shift was 
more hectic and that technicians on the night shift were 
expected to have more skills in different areas.  While there 
may be a genuine factual dispute about whether the work on 
the night shift was more or less hectic or demanding, it still 
does not answer the fundamental argument made by MCI:  
"Porter hoped that he would have a better opportunity to 
progress more quickly by working closely with some of the 
better technicians who were on the mid shift."  Porter testi-
fied that he transferred Freedman because he had more 
confidence in the night shift technicians' ability to train 

Freedman, who had not responded well to training on the day 
shift.  Freedman presented no evidence to rebut this.

     Freedman contends that, quite apart from the question 
whether he was assigned to the night shift for a legitimate 
reason, he was treated differently because he was forced to 
switch to the night shift without his acquiescence.  In order 
to survive a summary judgment motion, a plaintiff must have 
more than a scintilla of evidence to support his claims.  See 
Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252.  Freedman has failed to meet this 
burden for establishing his contention that workers were not 
assigned to the night shift without their permission.  Freed-
man marshals little evidence to show this fact.  He cites one 
employee's affidavit attesting to the fact that Porter once 
asked him if he would work the night shift and did not assign 
him to the night shift when he refused.  He also cites the 
deposition of Charles Moon.  Moon describes an incident in 
which Jeff Porter told him that he needed to work the night 
shift and Moon agreed.  However, Moon indicated that he 
interpreted Porter's statement to mean that he could have 
declined.  Finally, he cites to the deposition of Jeffrey 
Spriggs, who said that Porter "usually works out the shifts 
according to your preference.  And that at that time the 
needs of the business will warrant what we have to work."  If 
anything, this final piece of testimony suggests that Porter 
made efforts to assign people the times that they desired, but 
that business needs may have trumped those desires.  The 
other two pieces of evidence merely demonstrate that Porter 
offered workers a choice on distinct occasions.  As a whole, 
they hardly rise to the level of demonstrating the existence of 
a policy against assigning people to the night shift against 
their wishes.

                                B.

     Freedman's claim that he was denied intensive one-on-one 
training given to other technicians is similarly flawed.  MCI's 
training program relied heavily on hands-on training in which 
a newly hired NSE would learn by working with more 
experienced NSEs.  Freedman claims that he was denied the 
training opportunities offered to other technicians because he 

was assigned to train with relatively inexperienced NSEs, 
David Swithers and Peter Carlin.

     The district court found that the differences in training 
between Freedman and other technicians were " 'marginal 
distinctions with uncertain consequences' " that could not 
support a discrimination claim.  Freedman, slip op. at 14 
(quoting Millburn v. West, 854 F. Supp. 1, 14 (D.D.C. 1994)).  
While a denial of training may rise to the level of an adverse 
employment action, see Turlington v. Atlanta Gas Light Co., 
135 F.3d 1428, 1436 n.16 (11th Cir. 1998);  see also 42 U.S.C. 
s 2000e-2(d) (barring employers from discriminating in "ad-
mission to, or employment in, any program established to 
prove apprenticeship or other training"), we agree with the 
district court that there is insufficient evidence to demon-
strate that Freedman was treated differently than his peers.

     The essence of his claim is that he was assigned to less 
experienced NSEs for training.  Swithers indicated that he 
joined MCI in October 1996, so he had about six months' 
experience when he began training Freedman.  It is true that 
some other technicians were assigned to more experienced 
partners.  LaTaryn Dexter, for one, was assigned to Gary 
Hobson, who had been with MCI for about twelve years.  
However, the evidence also shows that many of Freedman's 
peers were trained by NSEs who had about as much or less 
training than Swithers.  Swithers himself was trained by 
Philip Cofer when he started in October 1996.  At that point, 
Cofer had been a NSE for a scant four months.  Kent Rice 
was also trained by Swithers, but in March 1997, when 
Swithers had been employed for only four months.  Sherry 
Porter, who joined MCI only a couple of weeks after Freed-
man was also trained by Swithers and reports that "[t]his 
training [was] extremely important to my being able to do my 
job."

     Nor does the evidence support a claim that Freedman was 
hobbled by a training period shorter than those afforded to 
other NSEs.  The other NSEs report training with another 
employee for times ranging from two weeks to four months.  
Sherry Porter, who was hired at about the same time as 

Freedman, reports that she trained for about a month, a span 
of time decidedly similar to the training period Freedman 
received from his hire date of May 12 to the date he started 
on the night shift, June 9.  This, of course, does not even 
include the additional training that Freedman was expected 
to receive on the night shift.

                                C.

     In a similar vein, Freedman claims that he was denied the 
benefits of a mentorship program enjoyed by other MCI 
employees.  The mentorship program was designed to pro-
vide additional training to new NSEs.  Under the program, 
experienced engineers from other MCI locations visited the 
Washington terminal and assisted newer workers while more 
experienced technicians were occupied with other tasks.

     Again, assuming that a training program is a condition or 
term of employment, Freedman has failed to demonstrate 
that he was treated differently with regard to this particular 
training program.  Freedman reports that he received 10 to 
15 hours of mentoring from Scott Huff during one week on 
the night shift.  (He was evidently well enough satisfied by 
this experience that he sent an e-mail to Leo Smith, thanking 
him for the opportunity.)  Both Sherry Porter and Kent Rice 
report that they were mentored for one week.  There is 
nothing in either the Kent Rice or Sherry Porter affidavit to 
indicate that they spent eight hours per day with the mentor.  
Indeed, that would be a rather strange outcome in light of the 
unrebutted testimony by MacDonald to the effect that men-
torships were not given to individuals, but that a mentor was 
essentially shared by whichever new NSEs were working on 
a particular shift.  Because Freedman has failed to raise the 
necessary evidence of discriminatory treatment, his claim 
here fails.

                                D.

     There is likewise no way to conclude on this record that 
Freedman was treated differently regarding access to tools 
and computers.  Freedman complained in the district court 

that MCI had violated Title VII "by (a) failing to provide 
plaintiff with a work station, [and] (b) failing to provide 
plaintiff with tools needed to perform his duties."  Compl. 
p 43.  It seems beyond dispute that, when Freedman began 
work at MCI, he was not assigned a computer for his 
personal use.  Freedman's claim of discrimination rests on 
his belief that everyone else was assigned a computer, and he 
was not.

     However, in the context of the other evidence in the case, 
Freedman's mere belief that others were given access to 
computers while he was denied is insufficient for his claim to 
survive summary judgment.  See Hall v. Giant Food, Inc., 
175 F.3d 1074, 1079-80 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  There is evidence of 
a shortage of computers on the day shift.  Freedman himself 
acknowledges that this shortage meant that some people were 
given access to computers and others were not. Cf. Hall, 175 
F.3d at 1080 (where plaintiff did not even dispute existence of 
neutral policy explaining his treatment, employers explana-
tion is "credible and unrefuted").  In essence, the MCI 
terminal appeared to operate as sort of a free market:  those 
who had tasks to perform on a computer would wait until one 
became available, perform their tasks and move on to other 
business.  The affidavits that Freedman submitted to support 
his complaint bear this out.  Dexter and Rice both report that 
they had to share computer access during their initial training 
periods and beyond.  Sherry Porter indicated that she shared 
her workstation until, like Freedman, she was transferred to 
the night shift.  While MCI's approach to managing its 
employees and resources may have been less than ideal, all of 
the employees, Freedman included, operated under the same 
system.  Since Title VII is designed to remedy discrimina-
tion, not poor management practices, Freedman has failed to 
provide evidence that would support a claim.

     Though the question may be closer, the issue is essentially 
the same with tools.  Freedman complains that other employ-
ees were assigned sets of tools and he was not.  This is true 
to a point.  Dexter, Rice and Swithers all report that they 
were assigned tools as soon as they were employed at MCI.  
However, it appears that this practice was haphazard:  Jeff 

Porter testified that he "gave out tools when [he] could get 
them," but that he "couldn't really tell you who had tools and 
who did not have tools."  Like Freedman, Sherry Porter 
indicated that she was initially not personally assigned a set 
of tools.

     Much as it did with access to computers, MCI expected 
employees to share resources to complete tasks.  Jeff Porter 
testified that "tools were available on the floor.  One need 
only to open a desk drawer and you can usually find all the 
tools you need."  Freedman's testimony on the matter is 
contradictory.  In his affidavit, he contends that "I had 
difficulty in obtaining use of a computer, workstation, and 
tools from other employees" and that "[t]his interfered with 
my work...."  However, in his deposition, he indicates that 
he was able to borrow the necessary tools from other employ-
ees (though sometimes with a wait).  We need not resolve the 
contradiction, though.  The evidence is clear that Sherry 
Porter, who was hired at roughly the same time as Freedman 
was not given her own set of tools until she had worked at 
MCI for three months.  That Freedman was not personally 
assigned a set of tools in his first few months could hardly 
indicate that he was treated differently than his peers.

     It is true that Freedman was not assigned a set of tools 
upon his return to MCI in October.  However, by this point 
in his tenure with MCI, his assignments had changed.  
Though there appears to be some confusion about his actual 
assignment, Freedman was assigned to work either in a 
group called "install" or a group that was in transition from 
"install" to "maintenance."  Though the record does not 
illuminate the differences between these groups of tasks, it is 
clear that while working on the daytime "install" task, Freed-
man would only occasionally need tools in order to perform 
wiring tasks.  Work requiring such tools was generally per-
formed at night. Thus, even assuming that Freedman was 
denied access to tools after he returned from his illness in 
October, the interference with his work was minimal, and 
could not rise to the level of an adverse employment action.

                                E.

     Freedman also complains that he was given inappropriate 
assignments--"junk jobs" in his terms.  Specifically, he 
claims that he was given special tasks--such as inventorying 
parts and teaching classes--not given to other workers.  As-
suming, as we must, the truth of this charge, we cannot say 
that he was unlawfully discriminated against.  Quite simply, a 
temporary assignment to a less desirable task does not create 
liability under Title VII unless it results in a diminution in 
pay or benefits or affects such things as future employment 
opportunities "such that a reasonable trier of fact could 
conclude that the plaintiff has suffered objectively tangible 
harm."  Brown, 199 F.3d at 457.  There is no evidence to 
suggest that Freedman was harmed by his temporary assign-
ment to tasks he found unpleasant or undesirable, and 
"[m]ere idiosyncracies of personal preference are not suffi-
cient to state an injury."  Id.

                                F.

     Freedman's complaint that he received inadequate feed-
back similarly fails to rise to the level of demonstrating an 
adverse employment action.  Freedman's complaint stems 
from the quarterly performance reviews that MCI employees 
received from supervisors.  Porter reviewed Freedman's per-
formance twice--once on July 15, 1997, and again on Novem-
ber 4, 1997.  Freedman contends that both of these sessions 
were inadequate because Porter did not provide Freedman 
with adequate guidance or feedback regarding his job perfor-
mance.

     We agree with the district court that, even if Freedman's 
evaluations were less complete than those given his co-
workers, those deficiencies could not constitute a sufficient 
change in the terms and conditions of his employment to 
support a claim.  See Freedman, slip op. at 13-14.  In Brown, 
we wrote that a negative performance evaluation did not rise 
to the level of an adverse employment action.  See Brown, 
199 F.3d at 458.  It is hard to fathom the logic that while a 
poor evaluation is not an adverse employment action, no 

evaluation is an adverse employment action.  By themselves, 
Freedman's allegedly limited feedback sessions cannot be 
considered discriminatory changes in the terms or conditions 
of his employment.

                                G.

     Freedman's final specific complaint is that Jeff Porter 
exhibited a generally nasty attitude toward him while he 
worked for MCI.  While Freedman does not say it in so many 
words, we take this as a traditional "hostile atmosphere" 
complaint.  Of course, an employee may experience a work 
environment so tainted with hostility that the terms and 
conditions of employment may be considered changed.  See 
Harris v. Forklift Sys., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).  Often, deter-
mining whether an environment is sufficiently hostile is a 
difficult task.  The appropriate standard "takes a middle path 
between making actionable any conduct that is merely offen-
sive and requiring the conduct to cause a tangible psychologi-
cal injury."  Id.

     In this case, Freedman's evidence of religious hostility is 
limited.  He cites a single explicit episode in which he alleges 
that Jeff Porter, after negotiating with a supervisor for a 
printer, said to Freedman that "Soon I'm going to be the only 
one at this terminal wearing a Yarmulka."  Freedman took 
this as a religious slander.  Even so, such a comment is 
insufficient to establish an atmosphere of hostility.  As the 
Supreme Court has recently reminded us, a singular stray 
comment does not a hostile environment make.  See Clark 
County Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 1510 (2001);  
see also Faragher v. Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 788 (1998);  
Park v. Howard Univ., 71 F.3d 904, 906-07 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     Freedman's only other pieces of evidence are three state-
ments of co-workers regarding Porter's behavior.  In his 
statement of disputed facts, Freedman characterizes these 
statements as demonstrating that "Mr. Porter's treatment of 
plaintiff has been described by other NSE's [sic] as 'with 
indifference,' 'badly and exhibited a nasty attitude towards 
him,' and 'differently than other NSE's [sic].' " Plaintiff's 

Local Rule 108(h) Statement of Facts as to Which There 
Exists a Genuine Dispute p 3.  However, Freedman over-
states the claims made by his fellow employees.

     LaTaryn Dexter's affidavit indicates that Porter treated 
Freedman with "indifference," but gives an acceptably non-
discriminatory explanation for his behavior:  "He seemed 
irritated with Mr. Freedman because he asked numerous 
questions."  Likewise, Sherry Porter indicated that Jeff Port-
er treated Freedman "differently."  However, Sherry Port-
er's statement deals not with the atmosphere of the terminal, 
but with the assignments that Freedman was given, an issue 
that we already discussed.  Philip Cofer stated that "Mr. 
Porter treated Marshall Freedman badly and exhibited a 
nasty attitude towards him."  A mere "nasty" attitude exhib-
ited by a supervisor is insufficient to establish a hostile 
atmosphere, especially where, as here, there is no evidence 
that the "nasty" attitude is pervasive and constant.  See 
Phillips v. Taco Bell Corp., 156 F.3d 884, 890 (8th Cir. 1998).

                                H.

     Freedman claims that his discharge was the result of 
discrimination.  He does not claim that the actual discharge 
was motivated by his religion.  Rather, he claims that the 
collective impact of the various religiously-motivated slights 
he allegedly suffered was to ensure that he was a poorly-
trained, under-performing worker ripe for discharge when 
MCI reorganized.  We might be persuaded by this rationale, 
if there were evidence to support it.  We have already 
established that there is insufficient evidence to establish that 
Freedman was subjected to different treatment regarding his 
transfer to the night shift, his training, his access to a mentor, 
his access to computers or his access to tools.  The only 
remaining complaints are that he was given inadequate feed-
back and that he was given inappropriate assignments.  Even 
if we accept Freedman's invitation to consider the "totality of 
the adverse actions" taken against him, we cannot see that 
the limited feedback and a few stray assignments would be 

sufficient to constitute adverse action which caused his dis-
missal.1

                                                                           Affirmed.

     1 We have considered and rejected Freedman's other arguments.  
They occasion no need for a written opinion.  See D.C. Cir. R. 36(b).

            