                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 17, 2001   Decided December 7, 2001 

                           No. 00-7239

        Teamsters Local Union No. 61, affiliated with the 
        International Brotherhood of Teamsters, AFL-CIO, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                  United Parcel Service, Inc., 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv00935)

     Jonathan G. Axelrod argued the cause for the appellant.

     Edward P. Lynch argued the cause for the appellee.  Wil-
liam J. Kilberg and Lauren S. Goodman were on brief.  
Eugene Scalia entered an appearance.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Teamsters 
Local Union No. 61 (Local 61) seeks reversal of the district 
court's grant of summary judgment to United Parcel Service, 
Inc. (UPS), affirming two rulings of the Atlantic Area Parcel 
Grievance Committee (Committee), a joint management-labor 
panel created to resolve UPS employee grievances.  In re-
solving a discharge grievance brought by employee Mark 
Thompson, the Committee decided on January 20, 1999 that 
the case could proceed to the merits;  on February 16, 1999 it 
upheld Thompson's discharge.  In district court, Local 61 
argued that the two decisions were invalid because each was 
made absent a quorum.  Finding that the Committee's impar-
tial arbitrator had the authority to decide to proceed to the 
merits and that the Committee could decide the merits in the 
absence of the union Committee members, the district court 
held that Local 61 did "not meet the substantial burden 
required to vacate the arbitration decision" and it granted 
UPS's motion for summary judgment.  Joint Appendix (JA) 
255.  We agree and therefore affirm the district court's grant 
of summary judgment.

                                I.

     Local 61, an unincorporated labor organization, challenged 
in district court the Committee's decision to affirm the dis-
charge of Mark Thompson, a UPS package pickup and deliv-
ery driver.  Local 61 and UPS are bound by collective 
bargaining agreements known as the National Master United 
Parcel Service Agreement (NMA) and the Atlantic Area 
Supplemental Agreement (Supplement).  The agreements 
mandate that if a grievance cannot be resolved on the job by 
management, it must be submitted to the Committee for 
arbitration.  See generally Supplement, Article 49, section 2.  
The Committee meets monthly for a three-day period.  See 
Supplement, Article 49, section 4(b).  Each monthly Commit-
tee is to consist of an equal number of representatives from 
management and the union--no fewer than two and no more 

than three members each.  See Supplement, Article 49, sec-
tion 2(e).  The Supplement requires in a discharge or suspen-
sion case that an "impartial arbitrator" serve as the fifth or 
seventh member and further provides that he "shall render a 
bench decision on [sic] all deadlocked cases."  Supplement, 
Article 49, section 4(c).

     The January 1999 Committee designated to consider the 
Thompson grievance consisted of seven members--three 
management members, three union members and the impar-
tial arbitrator, Joseph Sharnoff.  Shortly after the January 19 
hearing began, Local 61 questioned the Committee's authori-
ty to hear the case in view of an alleged agreement between 
the parties that discharge cases involving productivity were 
not to be resolved by arbitration.  Raising a point of order,1 
Local 61 argued that UPS was precluded from defending 
Thompson's discharge on the ground that he had failed to 
meet production standards.  The Committee then considered 
the issue in executive session.  During the session, one man-
agement member moved to deny Local 61's point of order.  
Before the motion was seconded, however, the three union 
members left the room.  They did not return that day.

     The Committee reconvened on January 20, recommenced 
its executive session and resumed discussions regarding the 
productivity issue.  Once again a management member 
moved to deny the point of order.  The motion was seconded 
but, once again, the three union members left the room 
before a vote could be taken.  When the arbitrator's efforts to 
get the three to return were unsuccessful, he ruled that their 
absence amounted to three votes to uphold Local 61's point of 
order and to dismiss the Thompson grievance on the basis 
that it involved productivity.  The three management mem-
bers then voted to deny the productivity point of order, 
creating a 3-3 deadlock.  The arbitrator broke the deadlock 

__________
     1 A point of order, in Committee parlance, appears to be the 
arbitration equivalent of an objection in a trial court proceeding.  
See, e.g., Br. of Appellant at 6 (describing Local 61's productivity 
point of order);  Br. of Appellee at 7 (same).

by voting to deny the point of order and to proceed to the 
merits.

     When the Committee reconvened on January 21 to hear the 
merits, two of the three union Committee members refused to 
participate in the hearing and remained instead in an adjoin-
ing room.  Local 61 then raised a point of order that there 
was no quorum.  The arbitrator again attempted to get the 
union members to participate and again he failed.  Upon 
returning to the hearing room, the arbitrator stated that "we 
do not have, to my view, a properly constituted panel ... 
[b]ecause there are two [u]nion members absent, for whatever 
reason."  JA 48.  He recommended that "we proceed to put 
the record on tape ... [a]nd at such point as everybody's 
finished stating what their positions are we'll proceed, I 
guess, with however [UPS] determines that we can proceed."  
JA 48.  UPS then raised a point of order asserting that the 
union Committee members' refusal to proceed violated Article 
7 of the NMA, which provides in part that "[t]he [u]nion 
agrees it will not unreasonably delay the processing of [dis-
charge or suspension] cases."  NMA Article 7.  UPS threat-
ened to remove Thompson from the payroll but the remaining 
union Committee member objected that doing so would vio-
late both the NMA and the Supplement.  The Committee did 
not rule on the Article 7 point of order before adjourning.

     A different five-member Committee convened on February 
16 with two management members, two union members and 
the same arbitrator in attendance.  When the Committee 
called the Thompson case, one union member refused to 
participate.  Local 61 again raised a point of order that there 
was no quorum, although four of the five Committee members 
(two management members, one union member and the arbi-
trator) remained present.  In executive session, the Commit-
tee denied Local 61's point of order.  Local 61 then stated 
that it would not participate any further or be bound by any 
Committee decision, again insisting--in spite of the Commit-
tee's ruling to the contrary--that there was no quorum.  
When UPS began presenting its case, the remaining union 
Committee member left the hearing, echoing Local 61's objec-
tion that there was no quorum.  After UPS's presentation, 

"the Panel ruled in favor of the Company," JA 54, and upheld 
Thompson's discharge, JA 120.

     Local 61 sought in district court to vacate the Committee's 
decisions, arguing that both the January 20 decision to pro-
ceed and the February 16 decision on the merits were invalid 
because they were made without a quorum.  On September 7, 
2000 the district court granted UPS's motion for summary 
judgment.

                               II.

     Our review of a district court's decision on a summary 
judgment motion is de novo.  See Shields v. Eli Lilly & Co., 
895 F.2d 1463, 1466 (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("Since pretrial summary 
judgment decisions are rendered exclusively on the basis of a 
'paper' record, an appellate court is equally well-positioned as 
a trial judge to assess the evidence at issue.").  We will affirm 
the district court's grant of summary judgment to UPS only if 
UPS has demonstrated in view of all the facts--and the 
reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in the light most 
favorable to Local 61, the non-moving party--that "there is 
no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."  Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 56(c);  see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 
323-24 (1986).  Local 61 appeals the grant of summary 
judgment to UPS on three grounds.

     First, Local 61 argues that the district court had the 
"broad authority" and even the duty to "scrutinize strictly" 
the Committee's January 20 decision to proceed because that 
decision was substantive, not procedural, and because it "seri-
ously undermined the integrity of the arbitral process."  Br. 
of Appellant at 17.  We reject this contention.

     It is well-settled that "the courts play only a limited role 
when asked to review the decision of an arbitrator."  United 
Paperworkers Int'l Union, AFL-CIO v. Misco, Inc., 484 U.S. 
29, 36 (1987).  Indeed, we "are not authorized to reconsider 
the merits of an award even though the parties may allege 
that the award rests on errors of fact or on misinterpretation 
of the contract."  Id.;  see also United Steelworkers of Am. v. 

Enter. Wheel & Car Corp., 363 U.S. 593, 596 (1960) ("The 
federal policy of settling labor disputes by arbitration would 
be undermined if courts had the final say on the merits of the 
awards.").  We have repeatedly recognized that "judicial re-
view of arbitral awards is extremely limited" and that we "do 
not sit to hear claims of factual or legal error by an arbitrator 
as [we would] in reviewing decisions of lower courts."  Ka-
nuth v. Prescott, Ball & Turben, Inc., 949 F.2d 1175, 1178 
(D.C. Cir. 1991) (quoting Misco, 484 U.S. at 38).  The United 
States Supreme Court recently reaffirmed these general prin-
ciples, holding that "if an arbitrator is even arguably constru-
ing or applying the contract and acting within the scope of his 
authority, the fact that a court is convinced he committed 
serious error does not suffice to overturn his decision."  Ma-
jor League Baseball Players Ass'n v. Garvey, 532 U.S. 504, 
__, 121 S. Ct. 1724, 1728, 149 L. Ed. 2d 740 (2001) (per 
curiam) (internal quotations omitted) (emphasis added).  Ju-
dicial deference to an arbitrator is broader still if the arbitra-
tor's decision is a procedural one.  See John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. v. Livingston, 376 U.S. 543, 557 (1964).  In Wiley, the 
Court made clear that procedural questions include such 
issues as "whether grievance procedures or some part of 
them apply to a particular dispute, whether such procedures 
have been followed or excused, or whether the unexcused 
failure to follow them avoids the duty to arbitrate."  Id. at 
557;  see Denhardt v. Trailways, Inc., 767 F.2d 687, 690 (10th 
Cir. 1985) (quoting Wiley, 376 U.S. at 557);  see also McKes-
son Corp. v. Local 150 IBT, 969 F.2d 831, 834 (9th Cir. 1992) 
(question of limitations on time in which arbitrator may 
render decision is procedural);  Beer, Soft Drink, Water, 
Fruit Juice, Carbonic Gas, Liquor Sales Drivers et al., Local 
Union No. 744 v. Metro. Distribs. Inc., 763 F.2d 300, 303 (7th 
Cir. 1985) (issues of waiver and timeliness of filing are 
procedural under Wiley).

     As the district court observed, there is no dispute that a 
quorum existed at the outset of the January 20 hearing 
during which the Committee decided to proceed to the merits.  
See JA 252;  see also Oral Arg. Tr. at 4 (Local 61 stating that 
"[a]t the beginning of the hearing, all three members of each 

side were present and the neutral arbitrator was present").  
Neither the collective bargaining agreements nor the Com-
mittee's Rules of Procedure (Committee Rules)2 clearly ad-
dress the question whether the union members' subsequent 
walkout prevented a quorum.  True, the Committee Rules 
provide that the Committee "shall be composed of members 
or alternates representing the [u]nion and members or alter-
nates representing the [e]mployer."  Committee Rules, Arti-
cle II, section 2.  And they provide that each Committee 
"shall consist" of an equal number of management and union 
members.  Committee Rules, Article IV, section 2;  see also 
Supplement, Article 49, section 2(e).  But these provisions 
might simply require the presence of an equal number of 
management and union members at the commencement of 
any particular Committee hearing.

     Whether the provisions require an equal number of man-
agement and union Committee members at the time of voting 
and whether the union members' walkout prevented further 
proceedings--that is, "whether [these] grievance procedures 
or some part of them apply to [Thompson's discharge arbitra-
tion], whether such procedures have been followed or excused 
[here], or whether the unexcused failure to follow them avoids 
the [union's] duty to arbitrate," Wiley, 376 U.S. at 557--are 
procedural questions.  It is likely that one reason the parties 
bargained for a neutral arbitrator in the first place was to 
provide a vehicle for resolving on a case-by-case basis these 
very questions--ones the collective bargaining agreements 
left unclear but ones that still "grow out of the dispute and 
bear on its final disposition."  Id. at 556-57 ("Questions 
concerning the procedural prerequisites to arbitration do not 
arise in a vacuum;  they develop in the context of an actual 
dispute about the rights of the parties to the contract or those 

__________
     2 Pursuant to an agreement between "[t]he Local Unions party to 
the Atlantic Area Supplement" and UPS, the Rules of Procedure 
"implement the provisions set forth in the grievance procedure of 
the Atlantic Area Supplement," although nothing contained in the 
Rules "shall in any way be deemed to alter or amend the proce-
dures set forth in such Supplement."  JA 108 (Committee Rules, 
Article I).

covered by it.").  Given the special deference we owe the 
arbitrator on procedural matters, see id. at 557, we cannot say 
that his January 20 decision to go forward in spite of the 
union members' walkout was in error.

     Moreover, even if the arbitrator's decision to proceed were 
substantive,3 as Local 61 contends, the holding in Garvey 
would still counsel deference.  It is at least "arguabl[e]" 
under the Garvey standard that because there was a quorum 
at the beginning of the January 20 session, any quorum 
requirement that existed was met.  As the district court put 
it:

     If an arbitration [decision] ... draws its essence from 
     the collective bargaining agreement, the Court will up-
     hold the [decision]....  Article 7 of the National Master 
     Agreement states that "The [u]nion agrees it will not 
     unreasonably delay the processing of [discharge] cases." 
     ... The arbitrator's decision to go forward after re-
     peated and unexplained departures by the [u]nion [Com-
     mittee] members is consistent with this provision of the 
     collective bargaining agreement.
     
JA 254 (citations omitted).

     Like the district court, we conclude that the arbitrator was 
"within the scope of his authority," Garvey, 532 U.S. at __, 
121 S. Ct. at 1728, in first declaring and then breaking the 
deadlock on January 20.  Contrary to Local 61's contentions, 
the arbitrator is "more suited than the courts to interpret 
[the NMA] and to resolve contractual problems which occur 
between labor and management."  Teamsters Local 623 v. 
UPS, Inc., 786 F. Supp. 509, 511 (E.D. Pa. 1992);  see United 
Steelworkers of Am. v. Warrior & Gulf Navigation Co., 363 

__________
     3 Local 61 asserts that "substantive" questions include "whether 
non-parties to the contract may be compelled to arbitrate a dispute" 
and whether "fundamental procedural irregularities [have tainted] 
the arbitration proceeding."  Br. of Appellant at 19 (citations omit-
ted).  It cites no authority, however, for its proposition that a 
quorum vel non is a "substantive" issue.  See id.

U.S. 574, 582 (1960) (arbitrator "is usually chosen because of 
the parties' confidence in his knowledge of the common law of 
the shop and their trust in his personal judgment to bring to 
bear considerations which are not expressed in the contract 
as criteria for judgment").  Consistent with this principle, the 
district court recognized that "[t]he party seeking to vacate 
an arbitration award," here Local 61, "faces a 'steep upward 
grade.' "  JA 251 (quoting Local 2094, American Fed'n of 
State, County & Mun. Employees v. Howard Univ. Hosp., 
996 F. Supp. 61, 65 (D.D.C. 1998)).4

     Local 61 is mistaken in its assertion that the union Commit-
tee members' conduct in absenting themselves constituted 
misconduct that serves as a basis for vacating the Commit-
tee's decision to proceed.  Local 61 did not challenge the 
union Committee members' conduct at any time before this 
appeal.  Here, Local 61 alleges for the first time that the 
union members' alleged misconduct in walking out should be 
attributed to the Committee as a whole.  Because this argu-
ment was not raised in the district court, it is not properly 
before this court.  See United States v. Wider, 951 F.2d 1283, 
1287 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (adhering to "general rule ... that a 
federal appellate court does not consider an issue not passed 
upon below") (quoting Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 120 
(1976)).

     More importantly, if we were to accept this argument, the 
practical result would be perverse at best--whenever union 
members believed a grievant's discharge was wrongful, they 
could simply refuse to participate in the arbitration, claim the 
Committee was "biased" and by default the grievant would 
retain his job with pay.  See NMA Article 7.  This is not the 
arbitration procedure for which UPS bargained.  Article 7 
prevents both sides from derailing the arbitration process.  
Under that provision, UPS agreed to allow the discharged 

__________
     4 Moreover, Local 61 does not, and cannot, dispute the district 
court's finding that the vote to proceed caused it no harm because 
the arbitrator decided to count the union Committee members' 
absence as three votes to uphold Local 61's point of order.  See JA 
253.

employee to remain on the job, without loss of pay, "unless 
and until the discharge or suspension is sustained under the 
grievance procedure" and, in return, the union agreed that it 
"will not unreasonably delay the processing of [discharge] 
cases."  Id.  We decline to deny UPS the benefit of its 
bargain by holding that the union Committee members' tac-
tics provide a basis for vacating the Committee's January 20 
decision to proceed.

     Local 61's second ground of appeal is that the district court 
committed reversible error in failing to scrutinize the Com-
mittee's January 20 decision to proceed under a narrow 
"public policy" exception that denies enforcement of an arbi-
tration award if it "violates established law or seeks to compel 
some unlawful action."  Am. Postal Workers Union, AFL-
CIO v. United States Postal Serv., 789 F.2d 1, 8 (D.C. Cir. 
1986) (citing W.R. Grace & Co. v. Local Union 759, Int'l 
Union of United Rubber Workers, 461 U.S. 757, 766 (1983)).  
The claim is without merit.

     We have explained that the public policy exception to the 
enforceability of an arbitration award "is extremely narrow[,] 
... [and] applies only when the public policy emanates from 
clear statutory or case law, not from general considerations 
of supposed public interests."  Id. (internal quotations omit-
ted) (emphasis in original).  Local 61 cites no statutory 
authority or case law supporting its proposition that a quo-
rum is required as a matter of public policy.  It correctly 
observes that "[n]ational labor policy concerning arbitration 
awards flows from the statutory principle that '[f]inal adjust-
ment by a method agreed upon by the parties is ... the 
desirable method for settlement of grievance disputes.' "  Br. 
of Appellant at 16 (quoting 29 U.S.C. s 173(d)).  That princi-
ple, however, supports UPS's position, not Local 61's--the 
parties accepted an arbitration method under which procedur-
al conflicts are to be resolved by an arbitrator, see Wiley, 376 
U.S. at 557, and agreed that neither side would derail the 
resolution of discharge cases, see NMA Article 7.  According-
ly, we conclude that the district court properly deferred to 
the Committee's January 20 decision to proceed to the merits 
of Thompson's grievance.

     Local 61's third challenge goes to the Committee's Febru-
ary 16 merits decision to uphold Thompson's discharge.  The 
union asserts, simply, that a merits decision made in the 
absence of a quorum is void per se.  This claim can be 
disposed of in short order.

     Neither the NMA nor the Supplement nor any of the 
Committee Rules uses the word "quorum."  As we men-
tioned, the Supplement and Rules do state that each monthly 
Committee is to consist of an equal number of management 
and union members.  See Supplement, Article 49, section 2(e);  
Committee Rules, Article IV, section 2.  Nevertheless, it is at 
least "arguabl[e]" under Garvey deference that whatever 
"quorum" requirement the Supplement and Rules may im-
pose was met when all five Committee members were present 
at the commencement of the February 16 proceeding.  More-
over, Article 7 of the NMA at least suggests that Committee 
action in the absence of a quorum is appropriate if union 
Committee members "unreasonably delay the processing" of 
a discharge case by subsequently boycotting the proceeding.5

     For the foregoing reasons, the district court's grant of 
summary judgment to UPS is

                                                                  Affirmed.

__________
     5 The only support Local 61 can muster for its claim is Robert's 
Rules of Order, which state that "[i]n the absence of a quorum, any 
business transacted ... is null and void."  Robert's Rules of Order, 
Newly Revised 341 (9th ed. 1990).  These, of course, are no support 
at all.  The parties' collective bargaining agreements (and the 
arbitrator's interpretations thereof) determine Committee proce-
dure.  Nowhere do the agreements or the Committee Rules (or the 
arbitrator's interpretations thereof) suggest that Robert's Rules 
apply.  Therefore, like the district court, we are unpersuaded by 
Local 61's "analogy between the proceedings before the [Commit-
tee] and proceedings before Congress."  JA 255.

                                                                