                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 24, 2000       Decided June 27, 2000 

                           No. 99-3153

                    United States of America, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                   Archibald R. Schaffer III, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 96cr00314-02)

     Charles M. Kagay, Chief Appellate Counsel, Office of Inde-
pendent Counsel, with whom Donald C. Smaltz, Independent 
Counsel, Joseph P. Guichet, Senior Associate Independent 
Counsel, and Wil Frentzen, Associate Independent Counsel, 
were on the briefs, argued the cause for appellant.

     William H. Jeffress, Jr., with whom Joe R. Caldwell, Jr., 
Scott L. Nelson, Grant R. Vinik, and Woody Bassett were on 
the brief, argued the cause for appellee.

     Before Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson, Circuit Judge, 
and Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

       Opinion for the court filed by Senior Judge Buckley.

     Buckley, Senior Judge:  In 1998, Archibald R. Schaffer III 
was convicted of attempting to influence the Secretary of 
Agriculture in violation of the Meat Inspection Act.  The 
United States appeals the district court's decision to grant 
Schaffer a new trial based on "newly discovered evidence."  
Because we find that Schaffer was not diligent in his efforts 
to procure the evidence before his trial and that the evidence 
would not be likely to result in an acquittal upon retrial, we 
reverse.

                          I. Background

     The facts of this case are set forth in detail in our opinion 
reviewing the district court's grant of Archibald Schaffer's 
earlier post-trial motion for a judgment of acquittal.  See 
United States v. Schaffer, 183 F.3d 833, 836-39, 847-50 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999).  We present here only those facts that are rele-
vant to this appeal.

     In 1993, when Alphonso Michael Espy was serving as its 
Secretary, the Department of Agriculture ("USDA") was 
developing and implementing certain food safety initiatives 
related to meat and poultry that would have an impact on 
Tyson Foods International.  See id. at 837, 849.  On April 21, 
1993, Don Tyson, Chairman of the Board of Directors of 
Tyson Foods, sent Secretary Espy both a printed invitation to 
a lavish birthday party he was hosting in Russellville, Arkan-
sas over the weekend of May 14-16 and a handwritten note.  
The note advised the Secretary that he would also be invited 
to attend an Arkansas Poultry Federation ("APF") event 
during that same weekend and confirmed that a private plane 
would be available to fly him to and from Arkansas.  See id. 
at 847.  Five days later, the Senior Vice President of the APF 

signed a letter inviting Secretary Espy to address the APF 
on May 15 in Russellville.  He sent the letter to Schaffer, who 
was Tyson Foods' Director of Media, Public and Governmen-
tal Affairs.  Schaffer in turn mailed and faxed the letter to 
the Secretary.  Schaffer also helped Secretary Espy's office 
coordinate some of the Secretary's weekend travel and ac-
commodations.  The Government presented evidence that, in 
making those arrangements, Schaffer mentioned only the 
APF meeting, ostensibly to conceal the fact that the Secre-
tary and a woman companion planned to attend the Tyson 
birthday party.

     On May 15, Secretary Espy flew to Russellville and spoke 
to a group of APF invitees.  He attended the Tyson birthday 
party that evening, stayed with his companion at the Tyson 
Foods Management Training Complex, and returned with her 
to Washington the next day on a Tyson Foods corporate 
airplane.  Schaffer subsequently caused the APF and not 
Tyson Foods to be reimbursed by the USDA for the cost of 
Secretary Espy's travel and lodging.

     In January 1998, an independent counsel who had been 
appointed to investigate charges that had been made against 
Espy indicted Schaffer on several counts alleging violations of 
federal criminal statutes in connection with these and other 
events.  Espy, who was by then facing charges under a 
separate indictment, did not testify at Schaffer's trial.  In 
June 1998, the jury found Schaffer guilty under two counts:  
the first, for violating the Meat Inspection Act ("MIA"), 21 
U.S.C. s 622 (1994), by working to secure Espy's attendance 
at the Tyson birthday party;  and the second (which is not 
before us), for having provided Espy with unlawful gratuities 
in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 201(c) (1994).  Schaffer, 183 F.3d 
at 850.

     After the jury's verdict, Schaffer moved for a judgment of 
acquittal under Rule 29 of the Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure, challenging the sufficiency of the evidence to 
sustain the convictions.  The district court granted judgment 
of acquittal on both counts.  The independent counsel appeal-
ed, and this court affirmed the judgment of acquittal on the 

gratuities count but reinstated the jury's verdict on the MIA 
count, holding that a reasonable juror could have found that 
Schaffer participated in securing Espy's attendance at the 
party with the intent to influence him with respect to specific 
policies of concern to Tyson Foods.  Id. at 847-50.

     While Schaffer's appeal was pending, a jury acquitted Espy 
on all charges. Following the final disposition of Schaffer's 
appeal and the conclusion of Espy's case, Schaffer filed a 
motion for a new trial pursuant to Rule 33 of the Federal 
Rules of Criminal Procedure.  He argued, among other 
things, that Espy's testimony constituted "newly discovered" 
evidence because it had only become available at the conclu-
sion of the Espy trial, which resulted in the expiration of 
Espy's Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.  
Because the district court agreed that Espy's testimony 
might constitute newly discovered evidence likely to produce 
an acquittal upon retrial, it held an evidentiary hearing to 
evaluate Espy's testimony.  See United States v. Schaffer, 
Crim. Action No. 96-0314, Mem. at 4-5, reprinted in Joint 
Appendix ("J.A.") at 252-53.

     At the hearing, Espy testified that he considered the APF 
appearance to be a legitimate event and that it was the 
primary reason for his trip to Arkansas.  He stated that he 
attended the Tyson birthday party as a "courtesy" to Don 
Tyson and his son John, whom he had met on a few occasions.  
Espy asserted that he did not know Schaffer and that he had 
no knowledge of Schaffer's involvement in his visit to Arkan-
sas that weekend.  Finally, Espy testified that he did not 
recall any discussion with anyone from Tyson Foods at either 
the APF meeting or the birthday party that related to Tyson 
Foods or USDA policies;  nor did he recall any attempt to 
influence him with respect to his duties as Secretary of 
Agriculture.

     During the course of the hearing, Schaffer's counsel ad-
vised the court that, prior to Schaffer's trial, he had been told 
by Espy's counsel that Espy had declined Schaffer's request 
for an interview.  Espy's counsel revealed enough of Espy's 
view of the relevant events, however, for Schaffer to know 

that he "very much want[ed Espy] as a witness."  Tr. of 
Hearing on Motion for a New Trial at 24, reprinted in J.A. at 
384.  When Schaffer's counsel stated that he wanted Espy to 
testify in Schaffer's trial, "the answer was no, that [Espy] was 
not going to testify."  Id. at 26, reprinted in J.A. at 386.  In 
light of this exchange, Schaffer's counsel saw no point in 
subpoenaing Espy, "put[ting] him in here in a public court-
room ... and mak[ing] him take the Fifth."  Id.  Nor did his 
counsel move for a continuance until after Espy's trial or 
otherwise make the district court aware of his desire to have 
Espy testify.  He explained that he did not feel he had a good 
faith basis for seeking a continuance in light of the certainty 
that Espy would appeal any conviction and remain unavail-
able as a witness for an indefinite period.  See id. at 26-30, 
reprinted in J.A. at 386-90.

     At the hearing's conclusion, the district court found Rule 
33's requirements had been satisfied and granted Schaffer's 
motion for a new trial.  The independent counsel timely filed 
this appeal, and we have jurisdiction pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 
s 3731.

                           II. Analysis

     Rule 33 authorizes a district court to grant a new trial "if 
the interests of justice so require."  It also provides:

     A motion for new trial based on newly discovered evi-
     dence may be made only within three years after the 
     verdict or finding of guilty....  A motion for a new trial 
     based on any other grounds may be made only within 7 
     days after the verdict or finding of guilty....
     
Fed. R. Crim. P. 33.  Because Schaffer filed his motion 
approximately fifteen months after his conviction, the parties 
agree that the motion was timely only if Espy's testimony 
constituted "newly discovered evidence."

     To evaluate a motion for a new trial based on newly 
discovered evidence, we apply the standards we first set out 
in Thompson v. United States, 188 F.2d 652 (D.C. Cir. 1951).  
Thompson holds that a court may grant a new trial on the 

basis of newly discovered evidence only where each of the 
following conditions has been met:

     (1) the evidence must have been discovered since the 
     trial;  (2) the party seeking the new trial must [have 
     shown] diligence in the attempt to procure the newly 
     discovered evidence;  (3) the evidence relied on must not 
     be merely cumulative or impeaching;  (4) [the evidence] 
     must be material to the issues involved;  and (5) [be] of 
     such nature that in a new trial it would probably produce 
     an acquittal.
     
Id. at 653;  see also United States v. Gloster, 185 F.3d 910, 
914 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (same).  A district court's grant of a new 
trial will be reversed "only if the court abused its discretion 
or misapplied the law."  Gloster, 185 F.3d at 914 (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).  We find that the 
district court abused its discretion in this case because Schaf-
fer failed to satisfy Thompson's second and fifth require-
ments, namely, that a party seeking a new trial demonstrate 
diligence in procuring the evidence and that the evidence 
would be likely to produce an acquittal upon retrial.

A.   Diligence in procuring evidence

     What constitutes diligence in the pursuit of evidence de-
pends entirely on the circumstances of the particular case.  
When, as here, a defendant believes that a particular person's 
testimony would be vital to his defense but either cannot 
locate the witness or believes it would be futile to subpoena 
him, the defendant has the obligation to seek a continuance of 
his trial or to explain to the trial court why the desired 
witness will not be produced.  A defendant who fails to 
inform the court of his predicament will not satisfy Thomp-
son's second prerequisite.  See, e.g., United States v. Gar-
land, 991 F.2d 328, 335 (6th Cir. 1993) (defendant who sought 
continuance after unsuccessful attempt to locate witness satis-
fied diligence requirement);  United States v. Kamel, 965 F.2d 
484, 493 (7th Cir. 1992) ("If there is possible evidence which 
would exonerate a defendant, he may not simply ignore 
it....");  United States v. Kulczyk, 931 F.2d 542, 549 (9th 

Cir. 1991) (counsel's failure to inform court before or during 
trial that he could not locate two witnesses "indicates a lack of 
due diligence");  United States v. Wright, 625 F.2d 1017, 1019 
(1st Cir. 1980) (defendant who failed to seek continuance to 
locate witness was not diligent).

     Schaffer repeats the argument made at the motion hearing 
that it would have been futile to subpoena Espy or seek a 
continuance.  As suggested by the cases cited in the preced-
ing paragraph, however, a belief in the futility of any such 
action will not satisfy the need for a concrete attempt either 
to compel the production of relevant evidence or to seek some 
accommodation from the trial court that would preserve the 
defendant's right to present evidence that was critical to his 
case.  Whatever the minimum requirement of diligence, it 
cannot be a purely private evaluation of the availability of the 
testimony or the likelihood of relief from the court.  Such a 
standard would seriously impair the important goal of finality 
that the diligence requirement serves.  See United States v. 
Ugalde, 861 F.2d 802, 808 (5th Cir. 1988) (motion for new trial 
is subject to "an unusually stringent [five requirement] test 
... [that] gives great weight to society's interest in the 
finality of criminal convictions").

B.   Likelihood of an acquittal

     Schaffer has failed to establish that Espy's testimony would 
be likely to result in an acquittal because his testimony is not 
relevant to the crime for which Schaffer was convicted.  
Schaffer was found guilty of violating the MIA, which pro-
vides in relevant part:

     Any ... agent or employee of any person, firm, or 
     corporation, who shall give, pay, or offer, directly or 
     indirectly, to any ... officer or employee of the United 
     States authorized to perform any of the duties prescribed 
     by this chapter ... any money or other thing of value, 
     with intent to influence said ... officer or employee of 
     the United States in the discharge of any duty provided 
     for in this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a felony....
     
21 U.S.C. s 622.  The prior appeal of Schaffer's MIA convic-
tion centered on "whether the prosecution presented suffi-
cient evidence for a reasonable jury to conclude that Schaffer 
acted with the requisite intent to influence any of the Secre-
tary's duties under the Meat Inspection Act."  Schaffer, 183 
F.3d at 845 (emphasis added).  As the prosecuting attorney 
emphasized in his closing argument to the jury, "this case is 
not ... about whether ... Secretary Espy was bought or 
could be bought.  This is about the giver and what was in the 
giver's mind when the things given were given."  Trial Tr. at 
1702, reprinted in J.A. at 500.

     As is evident from Espy's testimony during the evidentiary 
hearing on the motion for a new trial, his testimony at a new 
trial would do little to undermine the independent counsel's 
case.  Espy testified that he believed that the APF function 
was a legitimate event, that his primary reason for traveling 
to Arkansas the weekend of the Tyson birthday party was to 
attend the APF function, and that he was aware of no 
attempt to influence his exercise of his official duties during 
the course of the weekend.  Nothing in that testimony bears 
on Schaffer's intent in helping to arrange for Espy's attend-
ance at these functions.  The jury, for example, could fully 
accept Espy's statement that he believed the meeting was a 
legitimate event and still "reasonably infer that the [APF] 
meeting, while legitimate, had nevertheless been set up to 
provide Espy with official cover."  Schaffer, 183 F.3d at 847.

     Because we conclude that the district court erred in finding 
that Schaffer had satisfied Thompson's second and fifth re-
quirements, we do not reach the question of whether Espy's 
newly available testimony may be considered to be "newly 
discovered" within the meaning of Rule 33.  Although we 
have previously noted this circuit's "strong[ ] suggest[ion]" 
that "a non-party witness' post-trial offer to testify would fail 
to qualify as newly discovered evidence where the substance 
of the testimony was known to defendant at the time of trial," 
Gloster, 185 F.3d at 915, we leave for another day the 
question of the vitality of this court's earlier opinions in Di 
Giovanni v. Di Giovannantonio, 233 F.2d 26, 28-29 (D.C. 
Cir. 1956), and Amos v. United States, 218 F.2d 44, 44 (D.C. 

Cir. 1954), in which we granted new trials on the basis of 
"newly discovered" evidence that was known to exist but was 
unavailable to the defendant at the time of trial.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the reasons given above, former Secretary Espy's 
newly available testimony is not a sufficient basis for granting 
Schaffer a new trial.  Accordingly, we reverse the order 
granting a new trial, reinstate the jury's verdict on the Meat 
Inspection Act count, and remand the case to the district 
court for sentencing.

                                                                           So ordered.

           