                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 5, 1999    Decided January 4, 2000 

                           No. 97-5093

                        Kenneth L. Cones, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                  Donna E. Shalala, Secretary, 
             Department of Health & Human Services, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96cv00701)

     Roland G. Schroeder argued the cause for appellant. With 
him on the briefs was William D. Hopkins.

     Diane M. Sullivan, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee. With her on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence and Kimberly 
N. Brown, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Williams, Ginsburg and Tatel, Circuit Judges.*

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  In this case, we consider a federal 
government employee's complaint that his agency denied him 
a promotion on the basis of race and then retaliated against 
him when he complained.  Because we disagree with the 
district court's conclusion that appellant failed to establish a 
prima facie case of discrimination and retaliation, and because 
the record contains sufficient evidence from which a jury 
could infer that the agency's stated reason for selecting a 
white person was pretext for racial discrimination, we reverse 
the district court's grant of summary judgment to the govern-
ment.

                                I

     Appellant Kenneth Cones, an African American, began 
working for the federal government in 1970 as a GS-1.  
Advancing up the career ladder during the next two decades, 
Cones eventually became a GS-14 Special Assistant to the 
Director of the Division of Buildings Management and Tele-
communications, part of the Office of the Assistant Secretary 
for Management and Budget ("ASMB") at the Department of 
Health and Human Services.  At ASMB, Cones received 
uniformly excellent evaluations and applied for several pro-
motions but was never selected.  Each time HHS filled the 
position with a white person.

     In 1992, the head of ASMB, Assistant Secretary Arnold 
Tompkins, also an African American, reorganized ASMB, 
dissolving the Office of Management and Acquisition where 
Cones was working and dividing its functions between two 
newly created entities.  One of the new entities, the Adminis-
trative Service Center ("ASC"), was given responsibility for 
day to day physical operations of HHS, including building 
maintenance, management of the wellness center, and special 
program coordination.  Tompkins detailed Cones to serve as 

__________
     * Circuit Judge Ginsburg was present for oral argument but took 
no part in either the consideration or the decision of this case.

Acting Director of ASC.  Although the new position was 
rated GS-15 and Cones was still a GS-14, personnel regula-
tions permitted Tompkins to detail Cones to the position for 
up to 120 days without using the competitive selection pro-
cess.  See 5 C.F.R. s 335.103(c)(1)(ii).  Tompkins testified 
that he detailed Cones to the Acting Director position be-
cause ASMB had been criticized for having a poor EEO 
record and also because he thought Cones deserved an oppor-
tunity to enhance his skills.

     A month and a half into Cones' detail, the 1992 Presidential 
election occurred.  An appointee of President Bush, Tomp-
kins knew that his tenure as Assistant Secretary would soon 
end, so he decided that it would be "inappropriate" to adver-
tise or permanently fill the ASC Director position before he 
left office.  After President Clinton's inauguration, and after 
Elizabeth James, a white female and ASMB's highest ranking 
career employee, became Acting Assistant Secretary, Cones 
requested that the ASC Director position be competitively 
advertised so that he could remain in it either permanently or 
at least for an extended period of time.  James refused, 
instead detailing a white female GS-14, Rosalie Reggetz, to 
the position for 120 days.  In response, Cones filed an 
informal complaint of discrimination with HHS's Equal Em-
ployment Opportunity Office.  Although the EEO Counselor 
recommended reinstating Cones to the ASC Director position, 
HHS refused.  Cones then filed a formal complaint of dis-
crimination, to which he later added a retaliation claim based 
on the Department's failure to consider him for a different 
acting director position.

     During this entire period, ASMB was operating under an 
"informal" hiring freeze, meaning that senior management 
made every effort to avoid hiring new personnel.  On Febru-
ary 10, President Clinton issued an Executive Order estab-
lishing a goal of eliminating 100,000 federal government posi-
tions.  See Executive Order No. 12,839, 58 Fed. Reg. 8515 
(1993).  In relevant part, the Executive Order reads as 
follows:

     Each executive department or agency with over 100 
     employees shall eliminate not less than 4 percent of its 
     civilian personnel positions ... over the next 3 fiscal 
     years.  The positions shall be vacated through attrition 
     or early out programs established at the discretion of the 
     department and agency heads.  At least 10 percent of 
     the reductions shall come from the Senior Executive 
     Service, GS-15 and GS-14 levels or equivalent.
     
Id.

     Several months later, President Clinton's nominee for As-
sistant Secretary, Kenneth Apfel, was confirmed and took 
office.  Because Reggetz's 120 day detail was about to end, 
and because her appointment, like Cones', could not be re-
newed, another ASMB employee, Peggy Dodd, also a white 
female, was selected to serve as Acting Director for 120 days.  
Unlike Cones and Reggetz, Dodd was a GS-15 and had been 
transferred laterally rather than promoted to the position.  
As a result, personnel regulations permitted HHS to appoint 
her as permanent ASC Director without competitively adver-
tising the position.  See 5 C.F.R. s 335.103(c)(3)(v).  This 
HHS did on December 12.

     Cones then amended his still-pending EEO complaint, add-
ing an allegation that HHS had discriminated and retaliated 
against him by failing to consider and hire him for the 
permanent ASC Director position.  After his EEO complaint 
had been pending for well over a year, Cones filed suit in the 
United States District Court for the District of Columbia 
charging race discrimination and retaliation with respect to 
the permanent position.  He also charged discrimination in 
connection with the Department's failure to hire him for other 
positions dating back to 1989.

     Granting summary judgment for the Department, the dis-
trict court found that Cones had failed to establish a prima 
facie case of discrimination with respect to the ASC Director 
position because Dodd, the white person selected to fill the 
position, had been laterally transferred rather than promoted.  
See Cones v. Shalala, 945 F. Supp. 342, 349 (D.D.C. 1996).  
Alternatively, the district court found, HHS had articulated a 

non-discriminatory reason for selecting Dodd--that it was in 
the midst of downsizing--and Cones had failed to present 
sufficient evidence to establish that this reason was pretext 
for discrimination.  Id.  The district court dismissed Cones' 
retaliation claim, again concluding that Cones had established 
neither a prima facie case nor pretext.  Id. at 350.  As to the 
pre-1993 claims of discrimination, the district court found 
that Cones had failed timely to file an EEO complaint.  Id. at 
346-47.  Cones moved for reconsideration of the dismissal of 
his claims related to the ASC Director position.  The district 
court denied the motion.

     Cones appeals only the district court's grant of summary 
judgment with respect to the ASC Director position.  Our 
review is de novo.  See Tao v. Freeh, 27 F.3d 635, 638 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) ("Our review of the grant of summary judgment is 
de novo, applying the same standards as the district court").

                                II

     Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 
makes it unlawful for the federal government to discriminate 
in employment on the basis of race.  42 U.S.C. s 2000e-16.  
Where, as here, the record contains no direct evidence of 
discrimination, we employ the familiar burden shifting frame-
work of McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802 
(1973).  See Brown v. Brody, No. 97-5347, slip op. at 8-9 
(D.C. Cir. Dec. 21, 1999) (McDonnell Douglas test applies to 
federal employees' Title VII claims).  To establish a prima 
facie case, the plaintiff must show that (1) he is a member of a 
protected class;  (2) he applied for and was qualified for an 
available position;  (3) despite his qualifications he was reject-
ed;  and (4) either someone not of his protected class filled the 
position or the position remained vacant and the employer 
continued to seek applicants.  See McDonnell Douglas, 411 
U.S. at 802;  Kolstad v. American Dental Association, 108 
F.3d 1431, 1436 (D.C. Cir. 1997), rev'd in part on other 
grounds en banc, 139 F.3d 958 (D.C. Cir. 1998), en banc 
opinion vacated, 119 S. Ct. 2118 (1999).  Of particular signifi-
cance to this case, the burden of establishing a prima facie 

case "is not onerous."  Texas Dept. of Community Affairs v. 
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).  Its function is limited to 
eliminating the two most common nondiscriminatory reasons 
for a plaintiff's rejection:  "an absolute or relative lack of 
qualifications or the absence of a vacancy in the job sought."  
International Bhd. of Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 
324, 358 n.44 (1977).  "Elimination of these reasons for the 
refusal to hire," the Supreme Court has explained, "is suffi-
cient, absent other explanation, to create an inference that 
the decision was a discriminatory one."  Id.  With this stan-
dard in mind, we turn to the facts of this case.

     In granting summary judgment for HHS, the district court 
held that in order to establish a prima facie case, it was not 
sufficient for Cones to have demonstrated that a white person 
had been selected for the position.  The district court re-
quired Cones to show that a white person had been promoted 
to the position.  Cones, 945 F. Supp. at 349.  Because Dodd 
had been laterally transferred into the position--i.e., not 
promoted--the district court concluded that Cones had failed 
to establish a prima facie case.  Id.  We agree with Cones 
that this ruling adds undue weight to his relatively light 
prima facie burden.

     The district court, as well as HHS in defending the district 
court's action, seems to have conflated two different types of 
promotion cases.  One concerns employees like Cones who 
claim to have been denied promotions to vacant positions.  In 
such cases, the relevant inquiry is controlled by the precise 
terms of McDonnell Douglas:  Was the plaintiff rejected for 
the position and a person outside of his protected class 
selected?  As we said in Kolstad, "[w]here sex discrimination 
in promotion is alleged, a plaintiff proves her prima facie case 
by showing that she is female, that she was refused a position 
for which she applied and was qualified, and that the employ-
er filled the position with a male."  108 F.3d at 1436.  See 
also Barbour v. Merrill, 48 F.3d 1270, 1276 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

     The other type of promotion case involves employees de-
nied increases in pay or grade.  In such cases, the traditional 
McDonnell Douglas test does not fit.  As we explained in 

Bundy v. Jackson, 641 F.2d 934, 951 (D.C. Cir. 1981), a case 
in which the plaintiff sought an increase in her grade based 
on years of employment, "the literal McDonnell formula ... 
designed for a claim of discriminatory refusal to hire ... does 
not precisely apply to a claim, like Bundy's, of discriminatory 
refusal to promote."  Id.  We therefore "adjust[ed] the 
McDonnell formula" to ask whether a similarly situated 
person outside of Bundy's protected class requested and 
received the benefit she sought.  Id.

     In this case, the district court erred by applying the Bundy 
test, designed expressly for denials of pay or grade increases, 
to Cones' McDonnell Douglas-controlled non-selection claim, 
where the only relevant question is whether Cones was 
rejected for the position and a white person selected.  It 
matters not whether the person ultimately selected was pro-
moted to that position, hired from a pool of outside candi-
dates, or, as in this case, laterally transferred.  Requiring 
plaintiffs like Cones to establish that a similarly situated 
person had been promoted into the position would create a 
truly anomalous situation.  An agency hiring an external 
candidate would be liable under Title VII only to other 
external candidates that it failed to hire.  An internal candi-
date seeking a promotion to that position could never estab-
lish a prima facie case because the person selected would not 
have been promoted to the position.  Surely the McDonnell 
Douglas prima facie showing was not intended to create this 
absurd outcome.

     Nothing in Johnson v. Brock, 810 F.2d 219 (D.C. Cir. 1987), 
requires a different result.  Although Johnson, a non-
selection case, did include a citation to Bundy, the only part 
of the prima facie case the Court discussed was whether the 
plaintiff had "applied" for the position, an element of both the 
Bundy and McDonnell Douglas formulations.  Id. at 225.  
Johnson, moreover, predates our clear statements in Kolstad 
and Barbour that plaintiffs in non-selection cases need show 
only that they applied for the vacant position and that a 
person not of their protected class was selected.

     Having concluded that the district court erred in requiring 
Cones to show that a similarly situated white person had been 
promoted to the position, we consider whether Cones has 
established the elements of a prima facie case.  It is undis-
puted that Cones is African American and that a white person 
was selected for the ASC Director position.  HHS argues 
that because it never opened the ASC Director position for 
competition, Cones cannot establish either that he was quali-
fied for the position or that he applied for it.  We disagree on 
both counts.

     First the qualification issue.  Cones complains that HHS 
refused to consider him for the position despite his substan-
tive qualifications.  HHS does not challenge Cones' substan-
tive qualifications, and for good reason:  Cones served in the 
position for four months, received positive evaluations, and, 
according to abundant record evidence, was familiar with the 
job's duties.  Indeed, at oral argument, HHS's counsel con-
ceded that the testimony of every witness "is that [Cones] 
was substantively qualified had the position been advertised."  
Instead, HHS maintains, Cones cannot establish a prima facie 
case because he was not "technically" qualified insofar as he 
was not a GS-15.

     If accepted, HHS's theory of "qualification" would open a 
potential loophole in Title VII.  Agencies seeking to prevent 
minority employees from advancing to higher level positions 
could simply refuse to open those positions to competition and 
instead laterally transfer non-minorities.  Agency employees 
would be unable to mount Title VII cases because none would 
be "technically" qualified.  Nothing in Title VII or McDon-
nell Douglas supports such a counterintuitive result.

     This does not mean that the relative qualifications of Cones 
and Dodd are irrelevant.  To the contrary, their qualifications 
and the role those qualifications played in HHS's decision to 
select Dodd over Cones relate quite directly to the ultimate 
question that a jury will face:  whether HHS discriminated 
against Cones when it selected Dodd for the position.  For 
purposes of the prima facie case, however, it is sufficient that 
Cones has established that he was substantively qualified and 

that HHS selected a white person.  See St. Mary's Honor 
Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 509-10 (1993) (if "reasonable 
minds could differ as to whether a preponderance of the 
evidence establishes the facts of a prima facie case, then a 
question of fact does remain, which the trier of fact will be 
called upon to answer");  Barbour, 48 F.3d at 1276 (issue of 
qualification was question of fact for jury where "the jury 
reasonably could have determined, from the evidence before 
it ... that Barbour was qualified and that private sector 
experience was not an absolute prerequisite");  Mitchell v. 
Baldrige, 759 F.2d 80, 85 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 1985) ("the initial 
responsibility of explaining the relative qualifications of the 
plaintiff and the selectee" lies with the defendant, not with 
the plaintiff as part of his prima facie case).

     The Department's second argument--that Cones failed to 
apply for the job--requires little discussion.  According to 
HHS, Cones cannot establish that he applied for the position 
because ASMB never opened the position to competition.  
Yet HHS concedes that Cones "applied" for the position in 
precisely the same way as did Margaret Dodd:  he expressed 
his interest to Elizabeth James, the Deputy Assistant Secre-
tary who assisted Apfel with management of ASC.  If Marga-
ret Dodd could get the position by expressing her interest to 
Elizabeth James, Cones can certainly establish a prima facie 
case by demonstrating that he did precisely the same thing.  
See, e.g., EEOC v. Metal Service Co., 892 F.2d 341, 348 (3d 
Cir. 1990) ("Courts have generally held that the failure to 
formally apply for a job opening will not bar a Title VII 
plaintiff from establishing a prima facie case of discriminatory 
hiring, as long as the plaintiff made every reasonable attempt 
to convey his interest in the job to the employer.");  Holsey v. 
Armour & Co., 743 F.2d 199, 208-09 (4th Cir. 1984);  Grant v. 
Bethlehem Steel Corp., 635 F.2d 1007, 1016 (2nd Cir. 1980).

                               III

     Turning to the remaining steps of the McDonnell Douglas 
analysis, we ask first whether HHS has rebutted the prima 

facie case's inference of discrimination by producing evidence 
of a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for not selecting 
Cones.  See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802.  We agree 
with the district court that HHS met its burden.  The agency 
offered evidence that it selected Dodd to serve as ASC 
Director because it was in the midst of downsizing, at least 
partially in response to Executive Order 12,839.

     The only remaining issue, then, is whether Cones produced 
sufficient evidence from which a jury could infer that HHS's 
downsizing rationale was actually pretext for discrimination.  
See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804;  Aka v. Washington 
Hospital Center, 156 F.3d 1284, 1289 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (en 
banc).  We think that he has.

     As an initial matter we must deal with the government's 
argument that Cones cannot establish discriminatory motiva-
tion because, although Apfel made the final decision to trans-
fer Dodd, Cones alleged that it was James who harbored 
discriminatory intent.  The government relies on Hall v. 
Giant Food, Inc., 175 F.3d 1074 (D.C. Cir. 1999), but then 
ignores several key distinctions between that case and this 
one.  See also Holbrook v. Reno, Case No. 98-5462, 1999 WL 
1065159 at *4-5 (D.C. Cir. Nov. 26, 1999).  For one thing, 
unlike in both Hall and Holbrook, where the plaintiffs had 
offered "no evidence" to establish that the person with the 
alleged discriminatory animus "was even involved in the 
decisionmaking process," Hall, 175 F.3d at 1079, or "partici-
pated in" the adverse decision, Holbrook, 1999 WL 1065159 at 
*4, the record here is replete with evidence of James' involve-
ment in the hiring decision.  Asked about this at oral argu-
ment, HHS's counsel conceded, "[a]bsolutely, no question 
about it" that James was "actively involved" in the decision to 
transfer Dodd.  More fundamentally, the plaintiff in Hall 
offered no evidence of pretext--his entire case rested on a 
single allegedly discriminatory comment by a person uncon-
nected to the challenged employment decision.  In contrast, 
Cones has offered sufficient evidence of pretext.

     To begin with, as Cones points out, Apfel never asserted 
that Dodd was selected for the position because of downsizing 

or because she was a GS-15.  Although Apfel testified that 
laterally transferring Dodd "was certainly consistent with the 
overall philosophy of hire from within, try to keep as few new 
GS-14s or 15s in the organization" and that downsizing 
"permeated how we did everything in the organization," he 
recalled no conversation in which downsizing was discussed as 
a reason to hire Dodd.  Nor can we find any evidence in the 
record that Apfel considered whether laterally transferring 
Dodd would result in the elimination of her former position.  
If HHS really selected Dodd because it was downsizing and 
seeking to eliminate a GS-15 position, wouldn't Apfel have 
wanted to know whether the position that Dodd was vacating 
would be eliminated or whether he would have to hire another 
GS-15 to fill that position?

     To be sure, were this Cones' only evidence, it might well be 
insufficient for a jury to conclude that HHS's downsizing 
rationale was not just pretext, but pretext for discrimination.  
Aka, 156 F.3d at 1291 ("in some instances ... the fact that 
there are material questions as to whether the employer has 
given the real explanation will not suffice to support an 
inference of discrimination").  Cones, however, has provided 
more.  During the ten months immediately following the 
issuance of the Executive Order and preceding Dodd's trans-
fer, the record shows that ASMB promoted three white 
GS-14s to GS-15.  From this evidence, a jury could conclude 
that downsizing did not prevent HHS from promoting white 
GS-14s and that the Department's assertion that downsizing 
was the reason it did not consider Cones was a lie.  As we 
said in Aka:  "If the jury can infer that the employer's 
explanation is not only a mistaken one in terms of the facts, 
but a lie, that should provide even stronger evidence of 
discrimination....  The jury can conclude that an employer 
who fabricates a false explanation has something to hide;  that 
'something' may well be discriminatory intent."  Id. at 1293.

     HHS argues that the three white GS-14s were not similar-
ly situated to Cones because they had been serving in acting 
capacities in the positions to which they were promoted.  
Perhaps so, but this explanation is hardly conclusive at this 
stage of the litigation.  Although the evidence could well 

persuade a jury that no discrimination had occurred, a jury 
could just as easily infer that the alleged differences between 
Cones and the white GS-14s were irrelevant, or that they 
were themselves the product of discrimination since the De-
partment had failed to permanently promote Cones to ASC 
Director when he was serving in an acting capacity.

     The text of the Executive Order may also provide a jury 
with a basis for concluding that HHS's asserted concern with 
downsizing was pretext for discrimination, particularly when 
considered in combination with the promotion of the three 
white GS-14s.  Although the Executive Order clearly re-
quires HHS to reduce the number of upper-level positions, it 
does not differentiate between eliminating GS-14 and GS-15 
positions.  See Executive Order 12,839, 58 Fed. Reg. 8515.  It 
provides only that "[a]t least 10 percent of the reductions 
shall come from the Senior Executive Service, GS-15 and GS-
14 levels or equivalent."  Id.  HHS says it selected Dodd 
because by laterally transferring her and eliminating her 
former GS-15 position, the agency would be contributing to 
the Executive Order's downsizing goal.  Possibly, but the 
agency could also have complied with the Executive Order by 
promoting Cones and leaving his former GS-14 position va-
cant.  HHS may well be able to convince a jury, as it did the 
district court, that it reasonably interpreted the Executive 
Order to require it to reduce the number of GS-15s.  The 
availability of a textually obvious alternative interpretation, 
however, is evidence from which a jury could infer that HHS 
deliberately misread the Executive Order to favor Dodd 
because it preferred not to promote an African American.

     HHS points to evidence of actual downsizing, including that 
it promoted far greater numbers of employees prior to the 
issuance of the Executive Order.  But Cones does not dispute 
that the agency was downsizing;  the critical question is what 
motivated the Department's decision not to promote Cones--
downsizing or discrimination.  Because the record contains 
evidence that downsizing had not prevented the Department 
from promoting white GS-14s, a jury could conclude that 
downsizing was pretext for discrimination.

     In the "Statement of Facts" portion of its brief, HHS 
mentions that in 1993 it selected three African Americans for 
GS-15 positions, two by promotion and one through initial 
hire.  Yet HHS neither explains the significance of these 
personnel actions to its theory of the case nor refers to them 
anywhere else in its brief.  Asked about this at oral argu-
ment, HHS counsel said, "I think this might be in er-
ror....because my recollection does not comport with that 
being a 1993 date."  As HHS's post-hearing submission indi-
cates, its brief in fact was mistaken.  Only one African 
American was promoted or hired as a GS-15 in 1993, and, as 
Cones' counsel points out, that one African American was 
promoted by the Undersecretary of HHS, not by ASMB.

     This is not a case in which the plaintiff "has created only a 
weak issue of material fact as to whether the employer's 
explanation is untrue, and there is abundant independent 
evidence in the record that no discrimination has occurred."  
Aka, 156 F.3d at 1291.  Not only has Cones provided evi-
dence that raises serious questions about the role of downsiz-
ing, but the Department has provided little if any record 
evidence that no discrimination occurred.  As in Aka, this 
case ultimately turns on witness credibility.  HHS's downsiz-
ing explanation presents a question of fact that is as "quintes-
sentially one for the finder of fact" as was the employer's 
claim in Aka that the plaintiff was not "enthusiastic."  Id. at 
1298-99.

                                IV

     This brings us finally to Cones' retaliation claim.  He 
alleges that HHS refused to allow him to compete for the 
ASC Director position as retaliation for his having filed EEO 
complaints.  In evaluating this claim, we again apply a 
burden-shifting mechanism:  the plaintiff must first establish 
a prima facie case;  if he meets that burden, the employer 
must articulate a legitimate non-retaliatory reason for its 
action;  finally, the plaintiff has the ultimate burden of estab-
lishing that the reason asserted by the employer is pretext 
for retaliation.  See Berger v. Iron Workers Reinforced Rod-
men Local 201, 843 F.2d 1395, 1423 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  The 

district court concluded that Cones had failed to establish a 
prima facie case of retaliation and that, even if he had, he 
failed to establish that HHS's non-retaliatory reason for 
laterally transferring Dodd was pretext for retaliation.  Again 
we disagree.

     We have described the elements of a prima facie case of 
retaliation as follows:  the plaintiff must establish that he 
engaged in activity protected by Title VII, that the employer 
took an adverse employment action against him, and that the 
adverse action was causally related to the exercise of his 
rights.  See Paquin v. Federal Nat'l Mortgage Ass'n, 119 
F.3d 23, 31 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  HHS concedes that Cones 
engaged in protected activity when he filed informal and 
formal discrimination complaints, but it disputes Cones' asser-
tion that he has established the other two elements.

     As to the first element--whether HHS took an adverse 
employment action against Cones--it is undisputed that the 
Department refused to allow Cones to compete for the ASC 
Director position.  HHS argues that only employment actions 
of "some significance," such as hiring, firing, or promotion, 
are actionable under Title VII.  A decision not to competitive-
ly advertise a position, it asserts, is not actionable.  But even 
assuming that only hiring, firing, and promotion decisions can 
give rise to Title VII liability, the crux of Cones' complaint is 
that refusing to allow him to compete for the promotion was 
tantamount to refusing to promote him.  Furthermore, 
HHS's narrow definition of adverse employment action con-
flicts with our precedent.  As we just recently recognized, "no 
particular type of personnel action [is] automatically excluded 
from serving as the basis of a cause of action" under Title 
VII, as long as the plaintiff is "aggrieved" by the action.  
Brown, slip op. at 13-14;  see also Passer v. American 
Chemical Society, 935 F.2d 322, 331 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (action 
for retaliation under parallel retaliation provision of the Age 
Discrimination in Employment Act is not limited "only to acts 
of retaliation that take the form of cognizable employment 
actions such as discharge, transfer or demotion").  Unable to 
dispute that its refusal to compete the position adversely 

affected Cones, HHS cannot legitimately contend that it took 
no adverse personnel action against him.

     The Department next argues that Cones failed to demon-
strate a causal connection between the filing of his discrimina-
tion complaint and the refusal to consider him for the ASC 
Director position.  We agree with Cones, however, that given 
the circumstances of this case the close temporal proximity of 
his discrimination complaints to the refusal to consider him 
for the ASC Director position is sufficient to establish a 
causal connection.  See Mitchell, 759 F.2d at 86 ("The causal 
connection component of the prima facie case may be estab-
lished by showing that the employer had knowledge of the 
employee's protected activity, and that the adverse personnel 
action took place shortly after that activity.").  Elizabeth 
James, the Deputy Assistant Secretary who actively partici-
pated in the decision to fill the position non-competitively, 
knew that Cones had filed a discrimination complaint.  More-
over, at the same time HHS was deciding not to open the 
ASC Director position for competitive promotion, an EEO 
counselor was investigating Cones' informal discrimination 
complaint, and Cones was filing formal complaints of both 
discrimination and retaliation.

     Having determined that Cones has established a prima 
facie case of retaliation, we again consider HHS's evidence of 
a legitimate reason for transferring Dodd into the position--
downsizing--and conclude that HHS has met its burden of 
production.  But for the reasons stated above, we also con-
clude that Cones has produced evidence from which a jury 
could conclude that downsizing was pretext for retaliation.  
Like Cones' discrimination claim, his retaliation claim raises 
genuine issues of material fact that on this record may not be 
resolved on summary judgment.

                                V

     The judgment of the district court is reversed, and the case 
is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.

                                                      So ordered.

      