                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 13, 2000   Decided January 12, 2001 

                           No. 99-5327

                         Jane G. Fitts, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

            Federal National Mortgage Association and 
             Unum Life Insurance Company of America, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv00617)

     John J. Witmeyer III argued the cause for appellant.  
With him on the briefs was David E. Schreiber.

     M. Carolyn Cox argued the cause for appellee Federal 
National Mortgage Association.  With her on the brief was 
Craig Goldblatt.

     Frank C. Morris, Jr. argued the cause for appellee Unum 
Life Insurance Company of America.  With him on the brief 
was Ann M. Courtney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed Per Curiam.

     Per Curiam:  Jane G. Fitts sued her former employer and 
the insurance company that administers claims under the 
employer's long-term disability plan, alleging that they violat-
ed the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) 
by terminating her disability benefits after 24 months.  The 
district court dismissed Fitts' ADA counts and granted sum-
mary judgment against her on the ERISA count.  We affirm 
the dismissal of the ADA counts on the ground that the long-
term disability plan comes within the safe harbor provisions 
of that statute.  Because we conclude that the district court 
applied the wrong standard of review to the ERISA count, 
however, we reverse the grant of summary judgment and 
remand the case for further proceedings.

                                I

     Under its employee welfare benefit plan, the Federal Na-
tional Mortgage Association ("Fannie Mae")1 offers its em-
ployees the opportunity to select from an array of benefits, 
including a long-term disability insurance policy provided by 
Unum Life Insurance Company of America.  In the event 
that an employee insured under the policy later becomes 
totally disabled, the policy pays a percentage of the employ-
ee's income until the age of 65.  The policy, however, places a 
24-month cap on benefits for disabilities due to mental illness, 
which it defines as "mental, emotional or nervous diseases or 
disorders of any type."

__________
     1 Fannie Mae is a federally-chartered, private corporation that 
facilitates the secondary market in residential mortgages.  Federal 
National Mortgage Association Charter Act, 12 U.S.C. s 1716b.

     Jane Fitts, an attorney, was employed by Fannie Mae from 
1982 to 1995 and paid the required premiums for the long-
term disability policy.  In 1995, Fitts became disabled by 
bipolar disorder, an illness characterized by cycles of depres-
sive and manic episodes.  See Am. Psychiatric Ass'n, Diagnos-
tic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 395 (4th ed. 
text rev. 2000).  Fitts applied to Unum for benefits under the 
policy, which Unum granted.  Because Unum classified her 
disorder as a mental illness, however, it limited her benefits 
to 24 months.  Fitts unsuccessfully protested Unum's deci-
sion, arguing that bipolar disorder is associated with changes 
in the physical structure of the brain and often runs in 
families, suggesting genetic causation.  Unum asserts that it 
invited Fitts to submit additional medical information sup-
porting her claims, but that she responded only with "conclu-
sory" letters from her treating psychiatrist and two other 
psychiatrists.  Fitts asserts that she signed a release permit-
ting Unum to view her entire medical file, which contained 
data supporting her claim.  Unum refused to alter its classifi-
cation of bipolar disorder as a mental illness and ceased 
paying Fitts benefits after 24 months.

     Fitts sued both Unum and Fannie Mae, contending that the 
termination of her benefits after 24 months violated Titles I 
and III of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. ss 12101-12213.  Title I 
prohibits a covered employer from discriminating "against a 
qualified individual with a disability because of the disability 
of such individual in regard to ... [the] terms, conditions and 
privileges of employment."  42 U.S.C. s 12112(a).  Title III 
prohibits discrimination "on the basis of disability in the full 
and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privi-
leges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public 
accommodation ...."  42 U.S.C. s 12182(a).  Fitts also 
claimed that the termination of her benefits violated ERISA, 
29 U.S.C. ss 1001-1461, which entitles a participant or bene-
ficiary of a covered plan "to recover benefits due to him under 
the terms of his plan," 29 U.S.C. s 1132(a)(1)(B).2

__________
     2 In addition, Fitts asserted claims under the District of Columbia 
Human Rights Act (DCHRA), D.C. Code s 1-2501 et seq., and 

     Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), the 
district court dismissed Fitts' claim under Title I of the ADA 
because, as a totally disabled individual, she was not a 
"qualified individual with a disability" eligible to sue under 
Title I.  Fitts v. Federal Nat'l Mortgage Ass'n, 44 F. Supp. 
2d 317, 322-23 (D.D.C. 1999).  The court also dismissed Fitts' 
claim under Title III of the ADA, finding that the long-term 
disability policy was not a good or service provided by a 
public accommodation and hence that neither Fannie Mae nor 
Unum was subject to suit under that Title.  Id. at 324.  
Finally, the court granted Unum's motion for summary judg-
ment on Fitts' ERISA claim, ruling that Unum had not acted 
in an arbitrary and capricious manner in classifying bipolar 
disorder as a mental illness.  Fitts v. Federal Nat'l Mortgage 
Ass'n, 77 F. Supp. 2d 9, 24 (D.D.C. 1999).  We review both 
the dismissal of the ADA claims and the grant of summary 
judgment on the ERISA claim de novo.  See Systems Council 
EM-3 v. AT&T Corp., 159 F.3d 1376, 1378 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  
Heller v. Fortis Benefits Ins. Co., 142 F.3d 487, 492 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

                                II

     In EEOC v. Aramark Corp., 208 F.3d 266 (D.C. Cir. 2000), 
plaintiffs challenged an employee benefit plan that provided 
24 months of long-term disability benefits for persons with 
disabilities caused "to any extent" by mental conditions, but a 
longer benefit period for those with physical disabilities.  As 
Fitts does here, the Aramark plaintiffs contended that the 

__________
District of Columbia common law.  The district court dismissed 
those claims.  Fitts did not appeal the dismissal of her common law 
claims and has not argued the DCHRA issue in her briefs.  Accord-
ingly, neither is before us on this appeal.  See Fed. R. App. P. 
28(a)(9) (brief must "contain appellant's contentions and the reasons 
for them");  see also Artis v. Greenspan, 158 F.3d 1301, 1302 n.1 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (issues listed but not briefed may be deemed 
waived).  The one sentence Fitts provides on the DCHRA issue in 
her reply brief is insufficient, and we would not in any event 
consider an argument raised for the first time in a reply brief.  See 
Herbert v. Nat'l Acad. of Sciences, 974 F.2d 192, 196 (D.C. Cir. 
1992).

early termination of disability benefits violated Titles I and 
III of the ADA.  The district court dismissed the Aramark 
plaintiffs' claims for the same reasons relied upon by the 
district court here.  On appeal, we declined to address the 
district court's reasons, affirming instead on a different 
ground--that the challenged plan was protected by the 
ADA's safe harbor for bona fide employee benefit plans.  
Aramark, 208 F.3d at 268.  That provision, contained in ADA 
s 501(c), states:

     Subchapters I through III of this chapter and title IV of 
     this Act shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict--
     
               (1) an insurer ... or any agent, or entity that 
          administers benefit plans, or similar organizations 
          from underwriting risks, classifying risks, or adminis-
          tering such risks that are based on or not inconsistent 
          with State law;  or
          
               (2) a person or organization covered by this chapter 
          from establishing, sponsoring, observing or administer-
          ing the terms of a bona fide benefit plan that are based 
          on underwriting risks, classifying risks, or administer-
          ing such risks that are based on or not inconsistent 
          with State law;  or
          
               (3) a person or organization covered by this chapter 
          from establishing, sponsoring, observing or administer-
          ing the terms of a bona fide benefit plan that is not 
          subject to State laws that regulate insurance.
          
     Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall not be used as a 
     subterfuge to evade the purposes of subchapter[s] I and 
     III of this chapter.
     
42 U.S.C. s 12201(c).

     The Aramark parties agreed that the benefit plan came 
within the language of s 501(c)(3), because it was "bona fide 
in that it exists and pays benefits," 208 F.3d at 269 (quoting 
Public Employees Ret. Sys. of Ohio v. Betts, 492 U.S. 158, 166 
(1989)), and because the preemption provisions of ERISA 
rendered it "not subject to State laws that regulate insur-
ance," id. (quoting 42 U.S.C. s 12201(c)(3)).  Plaintiffs ar-

gued, however, that the plan failed to qualify for safe harbor 
because it was a "subterfuge."  Id. We disagreed, holding 
that because Aramark's long-term disability benefit plan, 
including the 24-month cap on mental disability benefits, had 
been in place since 1982--long before the ADA's 1990 enact-
ment--the 24-month benefit limit could not fall within 
s 501(c)'s subterfuge exception to the safe harbor.  Aramark, 
208 F.3d at 269-70.

     At Fitts' request, her appeal was held in abeyance pending 
the decision in Aramark.  The parties have fully briefed the 
safe harbor issue, including the applicability of Aramark to 
the instant case.  We conclude that Aramark controls here 
and requires that we affirm the dismissal of Fitts' ADA 
claims.

     Like the plaintiffs in Aramark, Fitts does not dispute that 
Fannie Mae's long-term disability plan, as implemented 
through the Unum policy, comes within the language of 
s 501(c)(3) as a bona fide benefit plan not subject to state law 
because of ERISA preemption.  Fitts does contend that the 
plan is a "subterfuge," but in light of Aramark that argument 
is unavailing:  Fitts concedes that the 24-month cap on dis-
ability benefits for mental illness has been in place--without 
modification--since at least 1985.  Although Fitts argues that 
the intentional retention of the cap since the 1990 passage of 
the ADA renders the subterfuge provision applicable, adop-
tion of such a theory would eviscerate the rule announced in 
Aramark.  Accordingly, we conclude that Fannie Mae falls 
within the protection of the safe harbor provision of 
s 501(c)(3).

     Unum is likewise eligible for safe harbor protection, al-
though as the insurer it is protected under s 501(c)(1) rather 
than (c)(3).  Subsection (c)(1) requires both that the long-
term disability plan not be a subterfuge to evade the purposes 
of the ADA and that it not be "inconsistent with State law."  
The record contains an uncontested declaration that the 
Unum policy was approved by the District of Columbia 
Department of Insurance and Securities Regulation, J.A. at 
30, and Fitts cites no District of Columbia case or statute 
with which the plan is inconsistent.  Accordingly, we affirm 

the dismissal of appellant's ADA claims against both Fannie 
Mae and Unum.

                               III

     Under ERISA, a participant in or beneficiary of a covered 
plan may sue "to recover benefits due to him under the terms 
of his plan."  29 U.S.C. s 1132(a)(1)(B).  Fitts contends that 
Unum and Fannie Mae improperly classified her disability as 
mental rather than physical, and hence improperly terminat-
ed her long-term disability benefits after only 24 months.  
The district court concluded that the appropriate standard of 
review for that classification was whether it was arbitrary and 
capricious, determined that it was not, and granted summary 
judgment for defendants.

     In Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. Bruch, 489 U.S. 101 
(1989), the Supreme Court held that a denial of benefits 
challenged under ERISA s 1132(a)(1)(B) is to be reviewed 
under a de novo standard--not under the more deferential 
arbitrary and capricious standard--"unless the benefit plan 
gives the administrator or fiduciary discretionary authority to 
determine eligibility for benefits or to construe the terms of 
the plan."  489 U.S. at 115.  Firestone's employee benefit 
plan provided severance benefits for employees "if released 
because of a reduction in work force or if ... physically or 
mentally unable to perform [the] job."  Id. at 105-06.  The 
Court held that those provisions did not require that the 
administrator's eligibility determinations be given deference.  
Id. at 111-12.

     Unum contends that, as the claims administrator of the 
long-term disability policy, it has discretionary authority to 
determine benefits eligibility because the policy requires the 
insured to submit proof of disability.  Such a requirement, 
Unum asserts, necessarily gives the insurer discretion be-
cause it must evaluate the legitimacy of the proof submitted.  
Unum Br. at 10.  As Unum conceded at oral argument, 
however, virtually all insurance policies require proof of eligi-
bility before the dispensation of benefits--hardly a surprising 
fact, since insurance companies are not in the business of 

giving away money to anyone who requests it.  Accordingly, 
if we were to regard any plan that requires proof of eligibility 
as conferring discretion, Firestone's exception would swallow 
its rule and render the standard of review deferential in 
almost every case.  As Unum's argument would effectively 
circumvent the Supreme Court's decision, we cannot accept 
it.3

     As a fallback, Unum points out that under Fannie Mae's 
Flexible Benefits Plan, of which the long-term disability 
insurance plan is a part, the company's Benefit Plans Com-
mittee is designated the Plan Administrator, s 2.01(e), and is 
to "be afforded maximum deference allowed by law" in all of 
its "decisions, interpretations [and] determinations," s 7.01.  
The Plan further provides that the Committee "may" dele-
gate its authority to "outside consultants or companies," 
including "those matters involving the exercise of discretion."  
s 7.03 (emphasis added).  Unum contends that "by purchas-
ing and incorporating into its plan the terms of the long-term 
disability policy, which itself grants Unum discretion, Fannie 
Mae in fact did delegate discretionary authority to Unum."  
Unum Br. at 9.

     First, as we have noted above, the policy does not grant 
Unum discretion;  hence the purchase and incorporation of 

__________
     3 Most circuits that have considered the issue have concluded that 
the mere requirement of proof of eligibility does not confer discre-
tion upon an administrator.  See Herzberger v. Standard Ins. Co, 
205 F.3d 327, 332 (7th Cir. 2000) ("That the plan administrator will 
not pay benefits until he receives satisfactory proof of entitlement 
... states the obvious, echoing standard language in insurance 
contracts not thought to confer any discretionary powers on the 
insurer.");  see also Feder v. Paul Revere Life Ins. Co., 228 F.3d 
518, 524 (4th Cir. 2000);  Kinstler v. First Reliance Standard Life 
Ins. Co., 181 F.3d 243, 252 (2d Cir. 1999);  Kearney v. Standard Ins. 
Co., 175 F.3d 1084, 1089-90 (9th Cir. 1999) (en banc).  Unum relies 
heavily on the Sixth Circuit's decision in Perez v. Aetna Life Ins. 
Co., 150 F.3d 550 (6th Cir. 1998).  The policy at issue there, 
however, did not simply require proof of eligibility but "satisfacto-
ry" proof.  No such language appears in Unum's policy.  Moreover, 
Perez's view has been rejected by the above-cited circuits.

the policy into the benefits plan establishes nothing.  Nor is 
there any other indication that Fannie Mae (or, more precise-
ly, the Committee) has delegated any discretionary authority 
to Unum to determine eligibility.4  Finally, there is no "deci-
sion[ ], interpretation[ ] [or] determination[ ]" by Fannie Mae 
itself at issue here.  Fannie Mae has renounced its own 
discretionary authority with respect to disability benefits 
determinations.  See Fannie Mae Br. at 11.  At oral argu-
ment, the parties agreed that Fannie Mae exercised no 
discretion with respect to the eligibility determination in this 
case, and further agreed that there is no appeal to Fannie 
Mae from Unum's disability benefit determinations.  Thus, 
neither Unum nor Fannie Mae exercised the discretion that 
would justify the application of arbitrary and capricious re-
view.

     For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that Unum's classi-
fication of Fitts' illness as mental rather than physical must 
be reviewed de novo.  We do not, however, proceed with the 
de novo review ourselves, because numerous factual disagree-
ments persist.  Fitts contends that if Unum's classification is 
reviewed de novo, the record will demonstrate that her 
disability is physical;  Unum asserts the contrary.  Fitts 
contends that current medical research on bipolar disorder 
supports her claim;  Unum argues that there is no such 
medical consensus.  Unum asks us to rule on a motion to 
exclude certain items of evidence proffered by the plaintiff;  
Fitts argues that the evidence is admissible.  Although the de 
novo standard might theoretically permit this court to per-
form the necessary review, the intensely factual nature of the 
record counsels that we return the case for the district court's 
examination.  In light of the change in the standard of 
review, the parties will be free to supplement the existing 
record by, inter alia, submitting current medical evidence 
regarding bipolar disorder.

__________
     4 Indeed, section 7.10(d) of the Plan provides that "notwithstand-
ing any other provision of this section 7, claims with respect to the 
benefits provided under an insurance contract ... shall be made 
and reviewed under the terms of such contract."  As discussed, the 
terms of the long-term disability policy do not confer discretion on 
Unum.

                                IV

     We affirm the district court's dismissal of Fitts' claims 
under the ADA on the ground that the long-term disability 
plan is protected by the statute's safe harbor provision.  We 
reverse the court's grant of summary judgment on the 
ERISA claim, however, and remand for de novo review of 
Unum's classification of Fitts' disability as a mental illness.

   