                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 14, 2002     Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 01-7085

           David J. Gorman, d/b/a Cashbackrealty.com, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

     Ameritrade Holding Corporation and Freetrade.com, Inc., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv01259)

     John M. Shoreman argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellant.

     Brian D. Craig argued the cause for appellees.  With him 
on the brief was Robert S. Brennen.

     Before:  Henderson and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  In this case, we consider whether 
the courts of the District of Columbia may assert general 
jurisdiction over a defendant that is "doing business" in the 
District through the medium of the Internet.  We hold that 
they may, although we ultimately affirm dismissal of the 
complaint because service of process on the defendant was 
insufficient.

                                I

     Plaintiff David Gorman is the sole proprietor of Cashback-
realty.com, a real estate broker with its principal place of 
business in McLean, Virginia.  Defendant Ameritrade Hold-
ing Corporation is a securities broker-dealer licensed in the 
District of Columbia with its principal place of business in 
Omaha, Nebraska.  Ameritrade provides online brokerage 
services through its Internet site to individuals across the 
country, including District residents.  In November 1999, 
Ameritrade acquired Freetrade.com, Inc., as well as its Inter-
net domain name, "Freetrade.com."  Like Ameritrade, defen-
dant Freetrade has its principal place of business in Omaha.  
Gorman alleges that he had an agreement with the prior 
owner of Freetrade, under which Cashbackrealty.com was 
entitled to a front-page link on the Freetrade.com website.  
According to Gorman, although Ameritrade assumed the obli-
gations of this agreement when it acquired the Freetrade.com 
domain name, it refused to provide a front-page link for 
Cashbackrealty.com.

     On June 2, 2000, Gorman filed a complaint in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia, alleging 
that Ameritrade and Freetrade (hereinafter referred to col-
lectively as "Ameritrade") were in breach of contract for 
refusing to honor the front-page-link agreement.  Without 
permitting discovery, the district court dismissed Gorman's 
complaint for lack of personal jurisdiction and insufficiency of 
service of process.  With respect to personal jurisdiction, the 
court held that a "company that acts to encourage or maxim-
ize the use by District of Columbia residents of its website 

does not establish the necessary 'minimum contacts' with this 
forum through Internet accessibility," and does not "operate 
so continuously and substantially within [the District] that it 
is fair to allow anyone to sue the enterprise in [the District] 
on any claim, without regard to where the claim arose."  
Gorman v. Ameritrade Holding Corp., No. 00-1259, Mem. 
Op. at 3 (D.D.C. Mar. 30, 2001) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  The court further held that Gorman's service of his 
complaint upon the Securities Director of the District of 
Columbia was insufficient under District of Columbia law.  
Id. at 2-3.  We review the district court's grant of Ameri-
trade's motion to dismiss de novo, see Second Amendment 
Found. v. United States Conference of Mayors, 274 F.3d 521, 
523 (D.C. Cir. 2001), and we consider its two grounds for 
dismissal in Parts II and III below.

                                II

     The district court has subject matter jurisdiction in this 
breach of contract action because of the diversity of citizen-
ship of the parties.  28 U.S.C. s 1332(a).  In a diversity case, 
the court's personal jurisdiction over nonresident defendants 
depends upon state law, here the law of the District of 
Columbia, the application of which is subject to the con-
straints of constitutional due process.  See Crane v. Carr, 814 
F.2d 758, 762 (D.C. Cir. 1987);  4 Charles Alan Wright & 
Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure s 1068.1, 
at 592 & n.2 (3d ed. 2002).  The requirements of due process 
"are satisfied when in personam jurisdiction is asserted over 
a nonresident corporate defendant that has 'certain minimum 
contacts with [the forum] such that the maintenance of the 
suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and 
substantial justice.' "  Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, 
S.A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408, 414 (1984) (quoting International 
Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945)) (additional 
internal quotation marks omitted).

     Under the District of Columbia's long-arm statute, local 
courts may exercise so-called "specific jurisdiction" over a 
person for claims that arise from the person's "transacting 
any business" in the District.  D.C. Code s 13-423(a)(1).  See 
generally Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 472-

73 & n.15 (1985);  Crane, 814 F.2d at 763.  However, because 
Gorman's breach of contract claim against Ameritrade does 
not arise out of any business transacted between the parties 
in the District, this font of jurisdiction is unavailable.

     District of Columbia law also permits courts to exercise 
"general jurisdiction" over a foreign corporation as to claims 
not arising from the corporation's conduct in the District, if 
the corporation is "doing business" in the District.  See D.C. 
Code s 13-334(a);  AMAF Int'l Corp. v. Ralston Purina Co., 
428 A.2d 849, 850 (D.C. 1981);  see also Helicopteros, 466 U.S. 
at 414 n.9;  Crane, 814 F.2d at 763.1  Under the Due Process 
Clause, such general jurisdiction over a foreign corporation is 
only permissible if the defendant's business contacts with the 
forum district are "continuous and systematic."  Helicopteros, 
466 U.S. at 415 (quoting Perkins v. Benguet Consol. Mining 
Co., 342 U.S. 437, 438 (1952));  see El-Fadl v. Central Bank of 
Jordan, 75 F.3d 668, 675 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  see also Crane, 814 
F.2d at 763 (describing the required contacts for general 
jurisdiction as "continuous and substantial");  Hughes v. A.H. 
Robins Co., 490 A.2d 1140, 1142, 1149 (D.C. 1985) (same).2  
The District of Columbia Court of Appeals has indicated that 

__________
     1 D.C. Code s 13-334(a) provides:

     In an action against a foreign corporation doing business in the 
     District, process may be served on the agent of the corporation 
     or person conducting its business, or, where he is absent and 
     can not be found, by leaving a copy at the principal place of 
     business in the District, or, where there is no such place of 
     business, by leaving a copy at the place of business or resi-
     dence of the agent in the District, and that service is effectual 
     to bring the corporation before the court.
     
Although on its face s 13-334(a) appears only to specify proper 
methods of service, the District of Columbia Court of Appeals has 
held that compliance with the statute gives rise to personal jurisdic-
tion over a foreign corporation doing business in the District.  
AMAF Int'l Corp., 428 A.2d at 850;  see El-Fadl v. Central Bank of 
Jordan, 75 F.3d 668, 673 n.7 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     2 See generally Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Robertson-Ceco 
Corp., 84 F.3d 560, 568 (2d Cir. 1996) (declaring that "[b]ecause 

the reach of "doing business" jurisdiction under s 13-334(a) 
is coextensive with the reach of constitutional due process.  
See Hughes, 490 A.2d at 1148 ("[W]e may find jurisdiction if 
[the defendant] ... has 'been carrying on in [the District] a 
continuous and systematic, but limited, part of its general 
business.' " (quoting Perkins, 342 U.S. at 438));  see also 
Everett v. Nissan Motor Corp., 628 A.2d 106, 108 (D.C. 1993).

     In his pleadings below, Gorman contended that Ameritrade 
"sells securities and provides other online brokerage services 
to residents of the District of Columbia on a continuous 
basis," and is therefore "continuously doing business in the 
District of Columbia."  Pl.'s Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss at 1-2.  
He further argued that he was "[a]t the very least ... 
entitled to jurisdictional discovery to determine the exact 
nature of Ameritrade's contacts with the District."  Id. at 5.  
And although "[a]s a general matter, discovery ... should be 
freely permitted, and this is no less true when discovery is 
directed to personal jurisdiction," Edmond v. United States 
Postal Serv. Gen. Counsel, 949 F.2d 415, 425 (D.C. Cir. 1991), 
the district court granted Ameritrade's motion to dismiss 
without permitting the plaintiff to undertake discovery.

     Ameritrade contends that Gorman was not entitled to 
discovery because there are no factual circumstances under 
which the district court could have asserted personal jurisdic-
tion over Ameritrade.  The defendant concedes that it en-
gages in "electronic transactions" with District residents, and 
that "Ameritrade undoubtedly derives revenue from those 
customers."  Reply Mem. in Supp. of Defs.' Mot. to Dismiss 

__________
general jurisdiction is not related to the events giving rise to the 
suit, courts impose a more stringent minimum contacts test" than 
for specific jurisdiction);  4 Wright & Miller s 1067.5, at 499-507 
(noting that, although "[s]pecific jurisdiction ... may be asserted 
when the defendant's forum contacts are isolated or sporadic, but 
the plaintiff's cause of action arises out of those contacts with the 
state," when "the cause of action sued on does not arise from the 
defendant's contacts with the forum state, an assertion of general 
jurisdiction must be predicated on contacts that are sufficiently 
continuous and systematic to justify haling the defendant into a 
court in that state").

at 6.  But Ameritrade maintains that those transactions do 
not occur in the District of Columbia.  Rather, the firm 
declares, Ameritrade's business is conducted "in the border-
less environment of cyberspace."  Appellees' Br. at 5.

     "Cyberspace," however, is not some mystical incantation 
capable of warding off the jurisdiction of courts built from 
bricks and mortar.  Just as our traditional notions of personal 
jurisdiction have proven adaptable to other changes in the 
national economy,3 so too are they adaptable to the transfor-
mations wrought by the Internet.  In the last century, for 
example, courts held that, depending upon the circumstances, 
transactions by mail and telephone could be the basis for 
personal jurisdiction notwithstanding the defendant's lack of 
physical presence in the forum.4  There is no logical reason 

__________
     3 Cf. Burger King Corp., 471 U.S. at 476 (holding that specific 
jurisdiction "may not be avoided merely because the defendant did 
not physically enter the forum State," since "it is an inescapable 
fact of modern commercial life that a substantial amount of business 
is transacted solely by mail and wire communications across state 
lines, thus obviating the need for physical presence within a State in 
which business is conducted");  World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. 
Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 292-93, 294 (1980) (noting that the "limits 
imposed on state jurisdiction by the Due Process Clause ... have 
been substantially relaxed over the years ... largely attributable to 
a fundamental transformation in the American economy," and that 
" '[a]s technological progress has increased the flow of commerce 
between the States, the need for jurisdiction over nonresidents has 
undergone a similar increase' " (quoting Hanson v. Denckla, 357 
U.S. 235, 250-51 (1958)));  McGee v. International Life Ins. Co., 355 
U.S. 220, 222-23 (1957) (noting a trend "expanding the permissible 
scope of state jurisdiction over foreign corporations ... [i]n part 
... attributable to the fundamental transformation of our national 
economy over the years," including a "great increase in the amount 
of business conducted by mail across state lines").

     4 See Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 84 F.3d at 572 (noting that a 
defendant's mail-order sales to forum residents may satisfy the 
"continuous and systematic" standard (citing Sollinger v. Nasco 
Int'l, Inc., 655 F. Supp. 1385 (D. Vt. 1987)));  Michigan Nat'l Bank 
v. Quality Dinette, Inc., 888 F.2d 462, 466 (6th Cir. 1989) (holding 

why the same should not be true of transactions accomplished 
through the use of e-mail or interactive websites.  Indeed, 
application of this precedent is quite natural since much 
communication over the Internet is still transmitted by ordi-
nary telephone lines.  See AT&T Corp. v. City of Portland, 
216 F.3d 871, 874 (9th Cir. 2000);  Bell Atlantic Tel. Cos. v. 
FCC, 206 F.3d 1, 4 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  Accordingly, the test 
that we will apply to determine whether the District has 
general personal jurisdiction in this case is the traditional 

__________
that, inter alia, appellees' "mail order solicitations of Michigan 
businesses," and the fact that they "made at least one sale in 
Michigan each and every month" for two years, "indicate that 
appellees have conducted a 'continuous and systematic part of their 
general business' in Michigan ... thereby warranting general per-
sonal jurisdiction");  cf. Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, 504 U.S. 298, 
308 (1992) (holding that "[i]n 'modern commercial life' it matters 
little that ... solicitation is accomplished by a deluge of catalogs 
rather than a phalanx of drummers," that the "requirements of due 
process are met irrespective of a corporation's lack of physical 
presence in the taxing State," and that due process therefore 
permits "the imposition of [a] collection duty on a mail-order house 
that is engaged in continuous and widespread solicitation of busi-
ness within a State");  McGee, 355 U.S. at 223 (basing a finding of 
specific jurisdiction on the mailing of an insurance contract into the 
state and the mailing of premiums from the state);  Travelers 
Health Ass'n v. Virginia, 339 U.S. 643, 648 (1950) (holding that an 
Omaha mail-order company, with no physical presence in Virginia, 
was subject to Virginia regulation because it "did not engage in 
mere isolated or short-lived transactions[;]  [i]ts insurance certifi-
cates, systematically and widely delivered in Virginia ... , create 
continuing obligations between the Association and each of the 
many certificate holders in the state");  Neogen Corp. v. Neo Gen 
Screening, Inc., 282 F.3d 883, 892 (6th Cir. 2002) (holding that a 
defendant's "contact with Michigan customers through the mail and 
the wires," where it "constitute[d] the doing of business there, 
rather than simply the exchange of information," rendered the 
assertion of specific jurisdiction consistent with due process);  Neal 
v. Janssen, 270 F.3d 328, 332 (6th Cir. 2001) (holding that "making 
phone calls and sending facsimiles into the forum" may be sufficient 
to confer specific jurisdiction);  Oriental Trading Co. v. Firetti, 236 
F.3d 938, 943 (8th Cir. 2001) (same).

one:  Were Ameritrade's contacts with the District "continu-
ous and systematic"?  See GTE New Media Servs. Inc. v. 
Bell South Corp., 199 F.3d 1343, 1350 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("We 
do not believe that the advent of advanced technology, say, as 
with the Internet, should vitiate long-held and inviolate prin-
ciples of federal court jurisdiction.");  4A Wright & Miller 
s 1073.1, at 327-28.

     For support of its claim that Internet-based transactions 
are outside the jurisdiction of District of Columbia courts, 
Ameritrade relies on our decision in GTE.  Ameritrade mis-
reads the case.  In GTE, we held that defendants who 
operated Internet Yellow Pages websites accessible to D.C. 
residents had insufficient contacts with the District to permit 
the exercise of specific jurisdiction under the District's long-
arm statute.  In reaching that conclusion, we emphasized that 
District residents did not engage in business transactions 
with the defendants.  Rather, "[a]ccess to an Internet Yellow 
Page site is akin to searching a telephone book--the consum-
er pays nothing to use the search tool, and any resulting 
business transaction is between the consumer and a business 
found in the Yellow Pages, not between the consumer and the 
provider of the Yellow Pages."  GTE, 199 F.3d at 1350.  The 
"mere accessibility of the defendants' websites," we held, does 
not "establish[ ] the necessary 'minimum contacts' with this 
forum."  Id.5

__________
     5 In GTE, we described Internet cases in which other courts of 
appeals had dismissed complaints for lack of specific jurisdiction as 
also involving "essentially passive" sites.  See GTE, 199 F.3d at 
1348 (describing Cybersell, Inc. v. Cybersell, Inc., 130 F.3d 414, 
419-20 (9th Cir. 1997), as finding that an Arizona court lacked 
personal jurisdiction over a Florida corporation where the corpora-
tion's website "was essentially passive," where the defendant did 
not encourage Arizona residents to access the site, and where there 
was no evidence that any part of the defendant's business was 
sought or achieved in Arizona or that any Arizona resident other 
than the plaintiff had ever visited the site);  id. (citing Bensusan 
Restaurant Corp. v. King, 126 F.3d 25, 29 (2d Cir. 1997), as holding 
that New York's long-arm statute did not extend to the operator of 
a Missouri jazz club whose website merely had a hyperlink to a 

     This case, however, is substantially different from GTE.  
Ameritrade's contact with the District is not limited to an 
"essentially passive" website through which customers merely 
access information about the financial markets.  GTE, 199 
F.3d at 1348;  see supra note 5.  To the contrary, Ameritrade 
concedes that District residents use its website to engage in 
electronic transactions with the firm.  See Reply Mem. in 
Supp. of Defs.' Mot. to Dismiss at 6.  The firm's customers 
can open Ameritrade brokerage accounts online;  transmit 
funds to their accounts electronically;  and use those accounts 
to buy and sell securities, to borrow from Ameritrade on 
margin, and to pay Ameritrade brokerage commissions and 
interest.  Using e-mail and web-posting, Ameritrade trans-
mits electronic confirmations, monthly account statements, 
and both financial and product information back to its cus-
tomers.  As a result of their electronic interactions, Ameri-
trade and its District of Columbia customers enter into 
binding contracts, the customers become the owners of valu-
able securities, and Ameritrade obtains valuable revenue.6

__________
New York club of the same name);  id. (quoting Mink v. AAAA 
Dev. LLC, 190 F.3d 333, 337 (5th Cir. 1999), as declining to find 
jurisdiction where the defendant's website was accessible to forum 
residents, but where "[t]here was no evidence that [the defendant] 
conducted business over the Internet by engaging in business 
transactions with forum residents or by entering into contracts over 
the Internet");  see also SOMA Med. Int'l v. Standard Chartered 
Bank, 196 F.3d 1292, 1297 (10th Cir. 1999) (holding that a "passive" 
website that merely makes information "available" is insufficient to 
confer general jurisdiction);  Bancroft & Masters, Inc. v. Augusta 
Nat'l Inc., 223 F.3d 1082, 1086 (9th Cir. 2000) (same).

     6 See http://www.ameritrade.com/tell_me_more/tell_me_more.fht 
ml;  http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/apply_online. 
html;  http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/fund_ac 
count.html;  http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/login. 
html; http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/forms/ATI_845_F. 
pdf; http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/tc.html (form 
contract at pp 26, 37, 38).

     What may serve best to take the mystery out of the 
process--and to demonstrate that nothing about the Ameri-
trade website need alter our traditional approach to personal 
jurisdiction--is the fact that Ameritrade also offers its cus-
tomers the alternative of accomplishing virtually all of the 
above-described transactions by ordinary mail or telephone.7  
Indeed, if anything, Ameritrade appears susceptible to appli-
cation of the "doing business" test in a much more literal way 
than a traditional brokerage firm.  Ameritrade's website al-
lows it to engage in real-time transactions with District of 
Columbia residents while they sit at their home or office 
computers "in the District of Columbia."  And by permitting 
such transactions to take place 24 hours a day,8 the site 
makes it possible for Ameritrade to have contacts with the 
District of Columbia that are "continuous and systematic" to 
a degree that traditional foreign corporations can never even 
approach.

     In short, on the record before this court, it is quite possible 
that, through its website, Ameritrade is doing business in the 
District of Columbia by continuously and systematically "en-
ter[ing] into contracts with residents of a foreign jurisdiction 
that involve the knowing and repeated transmission of com-
puter files over the Internet."  Zippo Mfg. Co. v. Zippo Dot 
Com, Inc., 952 F. Supp. 1119, 1124 (W.D. Pa. 1997) (describ-
ing similar websites as ones where the defendant "clearly 
does business over the Internet," in the context of a case 
involving specific jurisdiction);  see Mink v. AAAA Dev. LLC, 
190 F.3d 333, 336 (5th Cir. 1999) (adopting the Zippo test for 
assertions of general jurisdiction).  Of course, determining 
whether Ameritrade is actually "doing business" in the Dis-
trict requires an examination of the frequency and volume of 
the firm's transactions with District residents.  But those 
facts are unavailable because Gorman was not permitted to 

__________
     7 See http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/apply_on 
line.html;  http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/check. 
html;  http://www.ameritrade.com/getting_started/html/login.html.

     8 See http://www.ameritrade.com/services/ways_trade.fhtml.

undertake discovery.  Because the plaintiff has "demon-
strate[d] that it can supplement its jurisdictional allegations 
through discovery, ... jurisdictional discovery is justified" 
and should have been afforded.  GTE, 199 F.3d at 1351;  see 
El-Fadl, 75 F.3d at 676;  Edmond, 949 F.2d at 425;  Crane, 
814 F.2d at 760, 764.  Accordingly, were it not for the 
conclusion of the following Part--that although dismissal on 
personal jurisdiction grounds was unwarranted, dismissal for 
insufficient service of process was justified--we would re-
mand the case for jurisdictional discovery.9

                               III

     Even if there are sufficient contacts for a court to assert 
personal jurisdiction over a defendant, it lacks power to do so 
unless the procedural requirements of effective service of 
process are satisfied.  See Omni Capital Int'l, Ltd. v. Rudolf 
Wolff & Co., 484 U.S. 97, 104 (1987).  Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 4(h)(1) provides that a foreign corporation may be 
served

     in a judicial district of the United States in the manner 
     prescribed for individuals by subdivision (e)(1), or by 
     delivering a copy of the summons and of the complaint to 
     an officer, a managing or general agent, or to any other 
     agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive 
     service of process and, if the agent is one authorized by 
     statute to receive service and the statute so requires, by 
     also mailing a copy to the defendant.
     
Subdivision (e)(1), in turn, permits individuals to be served 
"pursuant to the law of the state in which the district court is 
located ... for the service of a summons upon the defendant 
in an action brought in the courts of general jurisdiction of 
the State."  Gorman contends that he perfected service of 

__________
     9 Because we affirm dismissal on other grounds, we need not 
consider whether, in general jurisdiction cases, due process requires 
not only that the defendant have "continuous and systematic" 
contacts with the forum, but also that the assertion of personal 
jurisdiction be "reasonable."  Compare Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 
84 F.3d at 567-69, with id. at 576-78 (Walker, J., dissenting).

process on Ameritrade in two ways that were consistent with 
Rule 4.

     First, Gorman mailed a copy of the summons and complaint 
to Ameritrade's corporate headquarters in Omaha, Nebraska.  
The plaintiff argues that this manner of service was effective 
because it was "pursuant to the law of the state in which the 
district court is located."  Fed. R. Civ. P. 4(e)(1).  Although 
Rule 4(c)(4) of the D.C. Superior Court Rules of Civil Proce-
dure does appear to permit service upon corporations by mail, 
the District of Columbia Court of Appeals has held that "Rule 
4's general prescription for service of process cannot replace 
the specific jurisdictional requirement of D.C. Code 
s 13-334(a) that service be made in the District of Columbia."  
Everett, 628 A.2d at 108.  Where the basis for obtaining 
jurisdiction over a foreign corporation is s 13-334(a), as it is 
here, a plaintiff who serves the corporation by mail outside 
the District is "foreclosed from benefitting from [the stat-
ute's] jurisdictional protection."  Id.;  see Gowens v. Dyncorp, 
132 F. Supp. 2d 38, 42 (D.D.C. 2001) (following Everett).

     Second, Gorman served the summons and complaint on the 
Securities Director of the Public Service Commission of the 
District of Columbia.  This, he contends, constituted service 
upon an "agent authorized by appointment or by law to 
receive service of process," Fed. R. Civ. P. 4(h)(1), by virtue 
of D.C. Code s 2-2615(f).  At the time Gorman filed his 
complaint, that D.C. Code section provided:

     Any applicant for a license under this chapter shall file 
     with the Department ... an irrevocable consent appoint-
     ing the Securities Director ... to receive service of any 
     lawful process in any noncriminal suit ... against him 
     ... which shall arise under this chapter....10
     
Although Ameritrade did obtain a securities license in the 
District, close attention to the wording of s 2-2615(f) makes 
clear that it only requires Ameritrade's consent to receipt of 

__________
     10 Section 2-2615 was subsequently recodified as s 3-3615, and 
then repealed.  See Securities Act of 2000, s 804, 47 D.C. Reg. 
7837, 7886.

service by the Securities Director in suits "which shall arise 
under this chapter."  Because the referenced "chapter" in-
cludes only the securities laws, see D.C. Code ss 2-2601 to 
-2619 (1981), and because Gorman's breach of contract com-
plaint is unrelated to any securities transaction, the Director 
was not an agent "authorized by appointment or by law to 
receive service of process" in this case.  Accordingly, deliver-
ing a copy of the complaint to the Director did not perfect 
service of process.

     Gorman further contends that, even if s 2-2615(f) does not 
authorize the Securities Director to receive service of process 
in a case like this, service upon the Director was nonetheless 
consistent with District of Columbia case law and was there-
fore "pursuant to the law of the state in which the district 
court is located" under Federal Rule 4(e)(1).  In support, 
Gorman cites District of Columbia cases that, he claims, stand 
for the proposition that "service upon a foreign corporation 
'doing business' in D.C. is valid if it gives reasonable assur-
ance that the defendant would be notified, even if service is 
made upon an agent of the corporation otherwise not autho-
rized to accept service."  Reply Br. at 4 (emphasis added).

     Whether or not the above proposition is generally a fair 
statement of District of Columbia case law, none of the cases 
cited by Gorman suggests that it is applicable here.  The 
principal case upon which he relies, Key v. S.C. Johnson & 
Son, Inc., 189 A.2d 361 (D.C. 1963), does not even support the 
general proposition.  In Key, the D.C. Court of Appeals did 
hold that service of process in a private products liability case 
was perfected by delivery of a complaint to the defendant's 
"government liaison officer," located in the District, who dealt 
solely with government officials.  189 A.2d at 362.  But the 
opinion is silent as to whether the liaison officer was autho-
rized to receive service of process for the company.  Similarly 
inapposite is Weinstein v. Ajax Distributing Co., 116 A.2d 580 
(D.C. 1955), in which the court held that process was properly 
served on a foreign corporation's "location supervisor" when 
he was present in the District.  The court did not hold that 
such service was permissible regardless of whether the super-
visor was authorized to accept it;  rather, the court rejected 

the defendant's claim that the location supervisor was unau-
thorized and found that the record left "no doubt" that he was 
present in the District "as agent or representative of defen-
dant company and was conducting its business."  116 A.2d at 
583;  see id. at 582.

     Gorman's best case is District Grocery Stores, Inc. v. 
Brunswick Quick Freeze Co., 106 A.2d 134 (D.C. 1954), 
where, in the course of holding that service had been validly 
made, the Court of Appeals said that "we need not here be 
concerned with the precise character of the relationship be-
tween" the company and the person upon whom process was 
served.  106 A.2d at 135.  Indeed, the court declared that 
"[w]hether, then, the person served with process may be 
regarded as the agent of the defendant corporation is, in our 
view, immaterial."  Id. (internal alterations and quotation 
marks omitted).  But the scope of the recipient's agency was 
immaterial in District Grocery Stores because it was clear 
that he "was, at least, conducting the business which ... the 
defendant was doing in the District of Columbia."  Id. (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted).  And as the court emphasized, 
the District's "doing business" statute expressly authorizes 
service upon a foreign corporation's "agent ... or person 
conducting its business."  Id. (quoting D.C. Code s 13-103, 
the predecessor of the current s 13-334);  see supra note 1.

     In this case, however, it is clear that the recipient of 
service, the Securities Director of the District of Columbia, is 
not a person "conducting [the] business" of Ameritrade in the 
District.  Nor is he otherwise a company employee or agent 
whose authority the company may or may not have circum-
scribed.  Rather, the Securities Director is a government 
official whose authority to receive service of process on behalf 
of Ameritrade is created by, and expressly limited by, the 
D.C. Code.  See D.C. Code s 2-2615(f).  This court is without 
power to extend that authority beyond the scope granted by 
the statute, and no District of Columbia court has ever found 
service upon such an unauthorized official to be valid against 
a foreign corporation.  Accordingly, we conclude that service 

upon the Director was ineffective to bring Ameritrade within 
the jurisdiction of the district court.

     Finally, Gorman urges that it would be unfair if a foreign 
corporation, lawfully subject to the jurisdiction of the District 
of Columbia because it does business here, could evade that 
jurisdiction by keeping its agents out of the District and 
hence beyond the range of effective service of process.  If 
such a loophole does exist, the legislature can, of course, 
remove it by amending s 13-334 to provide an alternative 
method of service.  But we are not at all certain that legisla-
tive action is required.  Section 29-101.99(e)(2) of the D.C. 
Code, cited by neither party, provides that "[w]henever any 
foreign corporation does not have an agent for service of 
process ... the Mayor shall be the agent for service of 
process for the corporation."11  Although on its face this 
section appears to close the loophole identified by Gorman, we 
need not determine whether service upon the Mayor would 
have been sufficient to bring Ameritrade within the jurisdic-
tion of the district court because Gorman never attempted to 
make such service.

                                IV

     Ameritrade is quite wrong in treating "cyberspace" as if it 
were a kingdom floating in the mysterious ether, immune 
from the jurisdiction of earthly courts.  Nevertheless, in this 
case Ameritrade is saved from the jurisdiction of the district 
court by a much more mundane problem:  the plaintiff simply 
failed to serve the corporation properly.  For that reason, 
and for that reason alone, the judgment of the district court is

                                                                      Affirmed.

__________
     11 The section further provides that "[i]n the event of service to 
the Mayor, the Mayor shall immediately cause one of the copies to 
be forwarded by certified or registered mail, addressed to the 
foreign corporation at its principal office or at its last known 
address."  D.C. Code s 29-101.99(e)(2);  see also id. s 29-101.108.

                                  