                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 24, 2000   Decided December 15, 2000 

                           No. 99-3063

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                     Winston Delano Weaver, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 92cr00038-01)

     Ed Wilhite, appointed by the court, argued the cause and 
filed the brief for appellant.

     Ryan H. Rainey, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher and Elizabeth Tros-
man, Assistant U.S. Attorneys. Mary-Patrice Brown, Assis-
tant U.S. Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Winston Delano Weaver appeals 
the denial of his motion under 28 U.S.C. s 2255 to vacate his 
conviction because of ineffective assistance of counsel in fail-
ing to obtain information about the three suicide attempts of 
a government witness.1  He contends that the district court 
erred in denying his motion without an evidentiary hearing to 
determine the significance of the attempts and why they had 
not been ascertained or disclosed prior to trial.  Assuming 
that trial counsel's performance was deficient, we hold that, 
given the relative unimportance of the witness to Weaver's 
conviction, the degree to which the witness was impeached, 
and the strength of the government's other evidence, Weaver 
has failed to show the requisite prejudice.  Accordingly, we 
affirm.

                                I.

     The government introduced evidence at Weaver's trial to 
show that on four separate occasions he supplied quantities of 
cocaine to an undercover officer of the Metropolitan Police 
Department.  That evidence showed that Weaver supplied 
the drugs in response to arrangements made by Antonio 
"Hub" Johnson, who was a government informant working 
with Officer Dale Sutherland.

     The first sale occurred on November 14, 1991.  Sutherland 
had told Johnson to contact Weaver.  Johnson did so and 
informed Weaver that Sutherland wanted to buy three ounces 
of powder cocaine for $3000.  That evening, the three men 
met.  While Sutherland waited in his truck, Johnson accom-
panied Weaver into a restaurant (near the intersection of 18th 
Street and Columbia Road, N.W.) where Weaver retrieved a 

__________
     1  The district court certified this issue for appeal by Order of 
November 10, 1999.  See Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penal-
ty Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-132, 110 Stat. 1214 (codified at 28 
U.S.C. s 2253(c)(1)(B) (1996)).

bag containing powder cocaine.  Weaver and Johnson re-
turned to Sutherland's truck, Johnson showed the cocaine to 
Sutherland, and the three men then left the area.  The 
second sale occurred on November 21, 1991.  Johnson again 
asked Weaver to sell Sutherland powder cocaine, this time 
four-and-a-half ounces for $3500.  The three men met that 
afternoon (at the corner of Benning Road and H and Florida 
Streets, N.E.) and Johnson accompanied Weaver to a pay 
phone nearby, where Weaver telephoned the cocaine supplier.  
The supplier stated that he would be ready to make the 
exchange in an hour, so the three men reconvened then at the 
corner of 18th Street and Columbia Road, N.W., where the 
first exchange had taken place.  Weaver retrieved the drugs 
from the same place as he had before and gave the drugs to 
Johnson, who delivered them to Sutherland.  Weaver and 
Sutherland agreed to continue to do business together.  The 
third sale occurred on December 18, 1991, when Weaver 
retrieved, again from the same area, two ounces of powder 
cocaine for Johnson to deliver to Sutherland for $2200.

     Weaver was arrested on December 30, 1991 in connection 
with a planned fourth undercover sale, which was to take 
place in a shopping center parking lot.  On this date, Suther-
land negotiated with Weaver, again through Johnson, for the 
purchase of eighteen ounces of powder cocaine;  the telephon-
ic negotiations were recorded.2  A video camera recorded 

__________
     2  In the first telephone call, Johnson asked Weaver if he could 
get half a kilo and an additional two-and-a-half ounces of cocaine;  
Weaver said he would try.  At Sutherland's direction, Johnson told 
Weaver that he had given Sutherland some of his own money for 
the cocaine and, hence, wanted to remain involved in transactions 
between Weaver and Sutherland.  In a second telephone call, 
Weaver suggested that the three men meet at his house, but 
Johnson refused, expressing concern over robberies of drug buyers.  
In a third telephone call, Sutherland spoke directly to Weaver, who 
assured Sutherland that he would find a safe place to make the 
exchange;  Weaver said he would talk to his supplier about making 
the exchange at a local hotel.  In the fourth telephone conversation, 
the three men agreed to meet in a shopping center parking lot at 
the intersection of Alabama and Pennsylvania Avenues, S.E.  Al-

parts of the transaction, and several undercover police offi-
cers were positioned in the parking lot for the surveillance 
operation.

     Before going to the shopping center, Johnson drove Weav-
er to a parking lot (near 46th Street and Fletcher Johnson 
High School in Southeast) where Weaver saw his supplier, 
Gregory Barnes, in a car with George Denny.  Weaver left 
Johnson's car and spoke to Barnes.  At the same time, Denny 
got out of Barnes' car and into the back seat of Johnson's car.  
Johnson then drove Weaver and Denny to the Fairfax Village 
parking lot, with Barnes following in his car.  On the way, 
Denny showed Johnson some of the cocaine.  After the men 
arrived in the shopping center parking lot, Sutherland and 
Weaver argued about whether Sutherland would pay first or 
Weaver would produce the drugs first.  As soon as Suther-
land agreed to produce the money before receiving the drugs, 
he opened the hatch of his jeep to get the money, and the 
arrest teams, by prearranged signal, moved in to make the 
arrests.  When Weaver appeared to be getting away, Suther-
land revealed that he was a police officer and placed Weaver 
under arrest.

     Weaver and Barnes were indicted on four counts in connec-
tion with the events of December 30, 1991.3  At their consoli-

__________
though there were no negotiations as to the purchase price for the 
eighteen ounces of powder cocaine at the December 30th sale, 
Officer Sutherland testified that he "had assumed [the price] would 
be about $14,000."

     3  Weaver and Barnes were indicted for conspiracy to distribute 
more than fifty grams of a mixture containing cocaine base, in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. ss 841(a)(1), 841(b)(1)(A)(iii), and 841(b)(1)(C);  
two counts of attempted distribution of a mixture containing cocaine 
base within 1000 feet of a school zone, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 
ss 846, 860(a) and 18 U.S.C. s 2;  and unlawful use of a communica-
tion facility to facilitate the attempted distribution of a mixture 
containing cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. ss 841(a)(1) and 
843(b).  In addition, on May 28, 1992, Weaver was indicted on seven 
counts in connection with his drug distributions on November 14 
and 21, and December 18, 1991.  Weaver's appeals from his convic-
tions were consolidated by the court.

dated trial, the government called Johnson, Sutherland, and 
Denny, among others, as witnesses to testify against Weaver 
and Barnes.  As relevant to this appeal, Denny testified that 
he sold drugs for Barnes, and that on December 30th, he 
gave Weaver drugs that Barnes, not Johnson, supplied him.  
Weaver testified in his own defense, claiming that although he 
had used cocaine for at least twenty years, he had never 
before sold it, and that on the four dates in question, he was 
paying off a debt to Johnson, who had at one point sold drugs 
to Weaver on credit.  Weaver had not wanted to sell drugs, 
but Johnson told him that Sutherland was "excited about the 
purchase."  Johnson even coached Weaver on how to act like 
a drug dealer.  When Weaver tried to back out of the 
December 30th sale, Johnson struck him across the face with 
a pistol, chipping Weaver's tooth.  Weaver testified that he 
had never before met Barnes and did not know who he was.  
Weaver also presented a witness who testified that Johnson 
was selling drugs during the time that he was working with 
the police.  On April 21, 1992, a jury convicted Weaver on all 
counts;  a mistrial was declared as to Barnes.

     Two years after his conviction was affirmed on appeal, see 
United States v. Weaver, 55 F.3d 685 (D.C. Cir. 1995), Weav-
er filed a pro se motion under 28 U.S.C. s 2255 to vacate, set 
aside, or correct his sentence on the ground of ineffective 
assistance of counsel.  As relevant here, Weaver alleged that 
trial counsel had failed to obtain information that was avail-
able about Denny's three suicide attempts in the D.C. Jail.4  
Weaver argued in his motion that although Denny was a 
"scoundrel" and a "hyperfallacious perjuror," trial counsel 
failed to impeach him, despite the fact that Denny's suicide 

__________
     4  In his pro se motion, Weaver also raised claims of prosecutori-
al misconduct and prosecutorial vindictiveness.  In reply to the 
government's opposition, Weaver claimed that he was entitled to 
relief not only because trial counsel failed to obtain information 
about Denny's three suicide attempts, but also because trial counsel 
failed to seek production of evidence regarding Denny's ownership 
of a safe, to impeach Denny for visitation with his fiancee, and to 
contact a witness who would have testified that Johnson was selling 
drugs while working for the government.

attempts raised questions about his "competency as a wit-
ness."  Weaver argued later, through counsel, that the sui-
cide evidence was "probative of the ends to which Mr. Denny 
would go to get out of jail."

     The district court denied the motion without a hearing.  
Relying on United States v. Smith, 77 F.3d 511, 516 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996), for the proposition that "only a mental disorder 
that would potentially impair a witness' ability or willingness 
to tell the truth is enough to make a witness incompetent and, 
consequently, a trial unfair," the district court found that 
neither Denny's suicide attempts nor any prior mental history 
indicated that he suffered from a mental illness that would 
prevent him from testifying truthfully.  Furthermore, the 
court found that Denny had been "extensively cross-
examined" and that "his competency to serve as a witness 
was satisfactory."

                               II.

     On appeal, Weaver contends that "[i]n the context of multi-
ple allegations as to the ineffectiveness of [trial] counsel and 
prosecutorial misconduct and the apparent multiple suicide 
attempts by a key government witness George Denny, the 
[district c]ourt [ ] was obligated to conduct a hearing regard-
ing the significance of the attempts and why they had not 
been ascertained and/or disclosed prior to trial."  Weaver 
maintains that it is "logically impossible to determine the 
possible impact of a mental illness upon testimony without 
knowing what the illness might be," and that Denny's suicide 
attempts are "indicative of the desperation of a witness to 
escape punishment."  Continuing, Weaver maintains that "[a] 
distinction should be made between the suicide attempts and 
the underlying psychiatric disorder they might indicate."  
Finally, he notes that the district court stated in its certifica-
tion of appealability that he had made "a substantial showing 
that he was denied his constitutional right to counsel by the 
alleged ineffectiveness of counsel in failing to obtain informa-
tion regarding Mr. Denny's three suicide attempts."

     Under Strickland, Weaver must demonstrate both that 
trial counsel's performance was deficient or unreasonable 
under the circumstances, and that the deficient performance 
prejudiced the defendant such that there was "a reasonable 
probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the 
result of the proceeding would have been different."  Strick-
land v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 694 (1984);  see also 
Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U.S. 365, 381 (1986).  A rea-
sonable probability is "a probability sufficient to undermine 
confidence in the outcome."  Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694.  In 
Strickland, the Court labeled relevant findings regarding the 
performance and prejudice prongs as mixed questions of law 
and fact, see id. at 698;  however, "that does not settle what 
standard of appellate review is appropriate."  United States 
v. Askew, 88 F.3d 1065, 1070 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Normally, the 
court's review of the district court's findings of fact is "highly 
deferential," such that the district court's findings will be 
reversed only if they are "clearly erroneous," United States v. 
Del Rosario, 902 F.2d 55, 58 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (citing Strick-
land, 466 U.S. at 698 and Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a));  see also 
Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U.S. 552, 558 (1988), while review of 
the district court's legal conclusions is de novo.  See id.;  
United States v. Ahn, 231 F.3d 26, slip op. at 18 (D.C. Cir. 
Nov. 14, 2000) (citing United States v. Pollard, 959 F.2d 1011, 
1023 (D.C. Cir. 1992)).  We need not decide which standard is 
appropriate because even on de novo review we find no error.  
See Askew, 88 F.3d at 1071.

     Section 2255 provides that hearings shall be granted "[u]n-
less the motion and the files and records of the case conclu-
sively show that the prisoner is entitled to no relief."  28 
U.S.C. s 2255.  When a s 2255 motion involves ineffective 
assistance of counsel, a hearing is not required if the district 
court determines that the "alleged deficiencies of counsel did 
not prejudice the defendant."  United States v. Sayan, 968 
F.2d 55, 66 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (citing United States v. Patterson, 
652 F.2d 1046, 1047-48 (D.C. Cir. 1981)).

     The ultimate question is whether, despite the fact that the 
evidence presenting Denny's suicide attempts was not pre-
sented to the jury, Weaver received a fair trial, that is "a trial 

resulting in a verdict worthy of confidence."  Kyles v. Whit-
ley, 514 U.S. 419, 434 (1995).  Our disposition of Weaver's 
contention that a hearing was required might be different if, 
as Weaver asserts on appeal, Denny had been a "key govern-
ment witness" against him.  Then, because the nature and 
significance of Denny's suicide attempts is not a matter of 
record, a hearing might have been in order.  Further, be-
cause it is also unclear in the record when information about 
the suicide attempts became available to the government and 
defense counsel, the matter might need to have been explored 
at a hearing.  These issues might need to have been explored 
if Denny had been a key witness against Weaver because 
cross-examination regarding the extent of Denny's willingness 
to exculpate Johnson might have demonstrated Denny's lack 
of credibility to a greater extent than the defense attacks on 
his credibility that the jury, in fact, heard.  If Denny had 
been a key witness inculpating Weaver, and the government's 
evidence was otherwise weak, the jury's evaluation of Weav-
er's coercion defense could have been affected.

     In contending that the district court abused its discretion in 
summarily denying his motion, Weaver, however, faces a 
series of hurdles.  As to the performance prong of Strick-
land, the government notes, the district court found, and this 
court has recognized, attempted suicide by itself does not 
render a witness' testimony less credible.  See United States 
v. Brooks, 966 F.2d 1500, 1503 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  Weaver has 
not proffered any evidence suggesting that Denny was incom-
petent, much less that Denny could have been impeached by 
information relating to his suicide attempts.5  Under the 

__________
     5  At oral argument, the government advised that during a later 
trial, Denny asserted a privilege with respect to the disclosure of 
evidence of his suicide attempts;  the district court upheld the 
privilege.  Apparently, the defense did not challenge the assertion 
of the privilege.  In Smith, the court noted both that "evidence 
regarding mental illness is relevant only when it may reasonably 
cast doubt on the ability or willingness of a witness to tell the 
truth," and that "[f]ederal courts often permit cross-examination 
regarding a witness' previous mental history, and may even allow 
extrinsic evidence such as hospital records to be used for impeach-

circumstances, having failed to proffer a basis to show that 
counsel's performance was deficient, the district court was not 
required to hold an evidentiary hearing.  See Machibroda v. 
United States, 368 U.S. 487, 495 (1962);  United States v. 
Green, 680 F.2d 183, 184, 189 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  But assuming 
Weaver has met the performance prong of Strickland, by 
showing that information about Denny's suicide attempts was 
available for trial counsel to discover and could have been 
used to impeach Denny's testimony by showing that he was 
so desperate not to testify against Johnson that he would do 
and say anything to stay out of jail, Weaver must still 
demonstrate a "reasonable probability" that the outcome of 
his trial would have been different.6  Strickland, 466 U.S. at 
694.

     At the outset, Weaver's attempt to show prejudice as a 
result of the cumulative effect of alleged errors by trial 
counsel and the district court is an attempt to circumvent the 
provisions of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty 
Act,7 and this he knows he cannot do.  See United States v. 
Winston Delano Weaver, 195 F.3d 52, 53 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  
Because Weaver did not appeal the district court's certifica-
tion, only his allegation regarding trial counsel's failure to 

__________
ment purposes," provided there is a sufficient temporal nexus.  77 
F.3d at 516.

     6  The district court found that the government disclosed Den-
ny's suicide attempts on May 12, 1992 (after the jury returned its 
verdict in Weaver's trial).  Weaver points to no evidence that would 
have alerted defense counsel to Denny's suicide attempts before 
then.

     7  The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act requires a 
defendant to obtain a certificate of appealability from the district 
court in order to pursue an appeal, see 28 U.S.C. s 2253(c)(1)(B), 
and provides that "[t]he certificate of appealability ... shall indicate 
which specific issue or issues satisfy the showing required by 
paragraph (2)."  Id. s 2253(c)(3) (emphasis added).  Paragraph (2) 
provides that a certificate of appealability may be issued only if the 
defendant makes a "substantial showing of the denial of a constitu-
tional right."  Id. s 2253(c)(2).

learn of Denny's suicide attempts is properly before the 
court.  See id.

     Additionally, characterizing Denny as a "key government 
witness" against Weaver both misstates the nature of Denny's 
role at Weaver's trial and ignores the key eyewitness testimo-
ny against Weaver by informant Johnson and undercover 
officer Sutherland, as well as the December 30th video and 
telephonic recordings.8  Denny's testimony was, at most, 
cumulative with respect to Weaver.  Moreover, Weaver's 
attempt to distinguish United States v. Moore, 104 F.3d 377 
(D.C. Cir. 1997), is unpersuasive.  In Moore, the court reject-
ed the defendant's claim of ineffective assistance of trial 
counsel because "[e]ven had [trial counsel] located the[ ] 
[missing] witnesses, the testimony they allegedly would have 
provided was tangential at best," and in light of the strong 
evidence against the defendant, any error by counsel would 
have been harmless.  Id. at 391.  Similarly here, the strength 
of the government's evidence against Weaver would remain 
virtually unchanged had Denny never testified.

     To the extent that Denny's suicide attempts could have 
further impeached his testimony, the district court could 
properly conclude that the extensive cross-examination of 
Denny provided the jury with strong grounds to doubt his 
credibility.  Not only was Denny cross-examined about his 
own past drug-selling activities, his possession of weapons, his 
assaultive conduct against his girlfriend, and his false state-
ments about his prior criminal conduct to authorities, includ-
ing the trial judge and his probation officer, but the jury also 
learned about his agreement to cooperate with the govern-
ment.  In closing argument, trial counsel continued to attack 
the credibility of the government's witnesses, arguing that 
both Johnson's and Denny's necks were on the line and that 
they were trying to "work[ ] a beef off for the police, and 

__________
     8  Even if, as Weaver's counsel argued in closing argument at 
trial, the tape recordings were not entirely clear, transcriptions 
were made available to the jury.  In any event, the recordings 
provided some corroboration of the eyewitness' testimony against 
Weaver.  See supra n.2.

would say anything to Mr. Weaver and do anything to get 
Mr. Weaver involved in this transaction."

     Because Denny played an insubstantial role with regard to 
the evidence against Weaver, the district court properly ruled 
that Weaver had failed to meet his burden of showing preju-
dice under Strickland, and that the verdict was "worthy of 
confidence."9  Kyles, 514 U.S. at 434.  Accordingly, because 
Weaver fails to show that the district court abused its discre-
tion in denying his s 2255 motion without an evidentiary 
hearing, we affirm the order denying the motion.

__________
     9  Weaver's contention that the district court may have failed to 
apply the correct prejudice standard is patently meritless.  In its 
memorandum opinion, the district court set forth Strickland's two-
pronged test and concluded, upon reviewing Weaver's allegations, 
that "[trial c]ounsel's performance was not deficient and did not 
prejudice [Weaver's] presentation to the jury."  See, e.g., Walton v. 
Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 653 (1990).

                             