                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 7, 2000   Decided December 19, 2000 

                           No. 99-1440

               Yukon-Kuskokwim Health Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     James E. Glaze argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Lloyd Benton Miller, Donald J. Simon, 
Stephen H. Hutchings and Douglas S. Burdin.

     Sharon I. Block, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, 
Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy 

Associate General Counsel, and Charles Donnelly, Superviso-
ry Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Separate statement dissenting in part filed by Circuit 
Judge Randolph.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  The Yukon-Kuskokwim Health 
Corporation (Yukon), a non-profit organization controlled by 
Alaska Native tribes, challenges the National Labor Relations 
Board's assertion of jurisdiction over a hospital that Yukon 
operates.  The Board properly rejected the employer's claim 
to be exempt pursuant to s 2(2) of the National Labor 
Relations Act (NLRA) on the ground that it is an Indian tribe 
acting in a governmental capacity.  The Board failed, howev-
er, to consider the employer's argument that it is entitled to 
exemption under s 2(2) because the Indian Self-
Determination Act (ISDA) authorizes it to act as an arm of, 
and thus to share in the exemption of, the United States.  
Accordingly, we remand this matter to the Board for further 
proceedings.

                          I. Background

     A group of Alaska Native tribes formed Yukon in 1969 to 
provide health services, primarily to Alaska Natives, in South-
western Alaska.  Yukon is controlled by a board of directors 
elected by the tribal councils of the 58 tribes in the region.

     In 1975 the Congress enacted the ISDA, 25 U.S.C. ss 450 
et seq., to bring about "an orderly transition from the Federal 
domination of programs for, and services to, Indians to 
effective and meaningful participation by Indian people in the 
planning, conduct, and administration of those programs and 
services."  25 U.S.C. s 450a(b).  The federal government 
recognized Yukon as an "Indian tribe" for purposes of the 
ISDA and, pursuant to that statute, Yukon began to assume 
responsibility from the Indian Health Service, an agency 
within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
for the operation of clinics in native villages throughout 
Southwestern Alaska.

     In 1991 Yukon took over a hospital previously operated by 
the IHS in Bethel, Alaska, the largest town in the region.  
Most of the federal employees at the hospital, including 40 
nurses, remained on staff.  In 1996 the Board received an 
election petition from a union seeking to represent the nurs-
es.  Yukon opposed the petition on the basis of s 2(2) of the 
NLRA, which excludes from the definition of "employer" "the 
United States or any wholly owned Government corporation 
... or any State or political subdivision thereof."  29 U.S.C. 
s 152(2).  Yukon argued that it qualified for exemption under 
s 2(2) both as a political subdivision (because it is an Indian 
tribe acting in a governmental capacity) and as an arm of the 
United States (because it operates a federal hospital pursuant 
to the ISDA).

     The Board overruled Yukon's objection on the ground that 
the Board had never applied the exemption in s 2(2) to the 
activities of an Indian tribe not conducted on an Indian 
reservation.  The Board certified the union and Yukon took a 
refusal to bargain charge so that it could get judicial review 
of the Board's order under ss 10(e) and (f) of the NLRA.  29 
U.S. ss 160(e) and (f).

                           II. Analysis

     Yukon advances two arguments for the proposition that its 
hospital is not subject to the NLRA.  First, Yukon argues 
that it qualifies under s 2(2) as a "State or political subdivi-
sion" because it is an Indian tribe acting in a governmental 
capacity.  Second, Yukon argues that it shares in the exemp-
tion that s 2(2) grants to the federal government because the 
ISDA authorizes it to operate a federal hospital pursuant to a 
government-to-government compact with the United States.

A.   Governmental Capacity

     Yukon argues that the Board acted arbitrarily in limiting 
the exemption afforded to Indian tribes under s 2(2) to 
activities conducted on a reservation, rather than limiting the 
exemption to "governmental activities" of Indian tribes, wher-
ever conducted.  In our review of the Board's decision, we 
"must accept the Board's position unless it conflicts with the 

'unambiguously expressed intent' of the Congress or is [oth-
erwise] not 'a permissible construction of the statute.' "  Hor-
mel v. NLRB, 962 F.2d 1061, 1065 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (quoting 
Chevron v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 843 (1984)).

     In the past, the Board has interpreted the exemption under 
s 2(2) for "any State or political subdivision thereof," to 
include "entities that are either (1) created directly by the 
State, so as to constitute departments or administrative arms 
of the government, or (2) administered by individuals who are 
responsible to public officials or to the general electorate."  
NLRB v. Natural Gas Utility District of Hawkins County, 
Tennessee, 402 U.S. 600, 604-605 (1971).  In Fort Apache 
Timber Co. v. NLRB, 1976-77 NLRB Dec. (CCH) p 17,475 
(Oct. 19, 1976), the Board applied this test to conclude that 
because "the Fort Apache Timber Company is an entity 
administered by individuals directly responsible to the Tribal 
Council ... [it is] exempt as a governmental entity recog-
nized by the United States, to whose employees the Act was 
never intended to apply."  Id. at 28,876 n.22.

     More recently, in Southern Indian Health Council v. 
NLRB, 1988-89 NLRB Dec. (CCH) p 15,052 (July 29, 1998), 
the Board applied the "direct responsibility" test to a hospital 
located on a reservation and operated by a consortium of 
seven tribes.  The Board concluded that the hospital was 
exempt from the NLRA pursuant to the "State or political 
subdivision" exemption because "the directors of the Employ-
er are directly appointed by, and subject to removal by, the 
governing bodies of the member tribes."  Id. at 28,226.

     Later, in Sac & Fox Industries v. NLRB, 1992-93 NLRB 
Dec. (CCH) p 17,250 (Apr. 24, 1992), the Board modified its 
test for application of the "State or political subdivision" 
exemption to Indian tribes.  In that case the tribe had 
secured a $30 million supply contract with the Department of 
Defense, for which it had built or acquired four factories not 
on its reservation.  Many of the workers employed at the 
acquired factories previously had been represented by a 
union, but the tribe argued that its substitution as the em-
ployer made the operation exempt from the NLRA and, 

hence, from the obligation to bargain with the union.  The 
Board rejected this claim, explaining that "[a]lthough the 
Board's decision in Fort Apache [ ] contains statements to the 
contrary ... we read that decision as limited to situations in 
which the tribal enterprise is located on the reservation."  Id. 
at 32,416.

     Yukon argues that the Board should read Sac & Fox as 
having denied exemption to the off-reservation factories in 
material part because of their commercial nature, not simply 
because of their location off the reservation.  The Board, 
however, has never drawn a distinction based upon the nature 
of the Indian enterprise.  The Board first said somewhat 
tentatively in Sac & Fox that the "exemption in Section 2(2) 
for a 'political subdivision' of a 'State' does not clearly include 
an off-reservation tribal enterprise."  Id.  Now, the Board 
has firmly concluded that an Indian tribe does not qualify as a 
"State or political subdivision" for purposes of s 2(2) when it 
conducts activities off its reservation.  We can hardly say that 
position is unreasonable.

     An Indian tribe, like any other governmental unit, typically 
operates in its governmental capacity only within its geo-
graphical jurisdiction.  There are, to be sure, exceptions to 
that general rule, as recognized, for example, in the Foreign 
Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA), 28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(2).  
The distinction between commercial and governmental activi-
ties, however, is often elusive, see Princz v. Federal Republic 
of Germany, 26 F.3d 1166, 1172 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (noting that 
FSIA, rather than attempting to define "commercial" and 
"governmental" activity, leaves to courts the task of distin-
guishing between the two), and the Board has long and 
reasonably preferred bright line rules in order to avoid 
disputes over its jurisdiction.  See, e.g., Siemons Mailing 
Service, 122 N.L.R.B. 81, 85 (1958) (setting dollar threshold 
for the "effect on commerce" sufficient to support Board 
jurisdiction).  Accordingly, we defer to the Board's interpre-
tation and reject Yukon's argument to the contrary.

B.   The ISDA

     Yukon also argues that it is exempt from the NLRA 
pursuant to s 2(2) because that provision exempts "the Unit-

ed States" and here Yukon "stepped into the shoes of" and 
"acts exactly for, and as, the United States" because it 
operates a federal hospital pursuant to a government-to-
government compact authorized under the ISDA.*  Addition-
ally, Yukon argues that for the Board to assert jurisdiction 
over it would undermine the purpose of the ISDA, namely, to 
increase tribal self-governance.

     In the decision under review the Board mentioned but 
dismissed the ISDA in a single sentence:

     We further reject the Employer's contention that it is 
     exempt from coverage because in light of the govern-
     ment-to-government Compact delegating Federal func-
     tions to the tribes on Federal property reserved and 
     intended for that purpose, the Employer functions as an 
     arm to [sic] the United States, and is, thus, an 'integral 
     part of the government of the United States as a whole.'
     
328 NLRB No. 101 at 4.  The Board then repeated its 
conclusion that it has limited tribes' exemption under s 2(2) 
"to situations in which the tribal enterprise is located on the 
reservation."  Id. (emphasis in original).  The Board appears 
simply to have misunderstood the tribe's argument here, 
which is that its exemption derives not from its own sover-
eignty as an entity akin to a "State or political subdivision" 
but, rather, from the exemption granted to "the United 
States."  For the Board to limit to the confines of an Indian 

__________
     * Judge Randolph, in his dissent, states that his "colleagues think 
that perhaps Yukon also wanted to be considered the United States 
for the purpose of s 2(2)." Lest we be thought utterly mad, he 
acknowledges a "hint here and there" in its briefs to this court that 
Yukon "might have had this in mind," but says that this was not 
"the thrust of its presentation," either before the Board or here.  
We think that it was a thrust.  The heading of Part IV of Yukon's 
brief to the Board asserted that "The 58 Tribes are Exempt as an 
Integral Part of the United States [Government]," and the ensuing 
five pages (28-33) were devoted to arguing the point.  Yukon 
renewed the argument before this court in the section of its brief 
headed "Tribes operating pursuant to the [ISDA] are treated as the 
equivalent of federal agencies under the [NLRA]."

reservation the exemption granted to the United States 
makes no sense.  Additionally, the Board wholly failed to 
address Yukon's argument that asserting jurisdiction over the 
hospital would "directly contraven[e] the ISDA's goal" of 
increasing tribal self-governance.

     As this court explained in New York Shipping v. Federal 
Maritime Commission, 854 F.2d 1338, 1370 (1988):

     [A]n agency, faced with alternative methods of effectuat-
     ing the policies of the statute it administers, (1) must 
     engage in a careful analysis of the possible effects those 
     alternative courses of action may have on the functioning 
     and policies of other statutory regimes, with which a 
     conflict is claimed;  and (2) must explain why the action 
     taken minimizes, to the extent possible, its intrusion into 
     policies that are more properly the province of another 
     agency or statutory regime.
     
The ISDA is undoubtedly intended to remove tribal programs 
from federal oversight.  See Oklahoma Tax Comm'n v. Citi-
zen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 498 U.S. 505, 510 (1991) 
(noting that ISDA "reflect[s] Congress'[s] desire to promote 
the goal of Indian self-government").  Indeed, in the amend-
ments to the ISDA enacted while this case was on review, the 
Congress renewed its commitment to Indian self-
determination.  See Tribal Self-Governance Amendments of 
2000, P.L. 106-260, 114 Stat. 711 s 2(3) (Aug. 18, 2000).

     The Board's one-sentence rejection of Yukon's arguments 
from the ISDA both relies upon what, in this context, is an 
irrelevant distinction and ignores the Board's obligation to 
address and to minimize conflict with another statutory re-
gime with which a disparity is claimed.  Although the General 
Counsel of the Board, in her argument before this court, 
addressed in somewhat greater detail the Board's possible 
reasons for rejecting Yukon's arguments from the ISDA, 
" 'courts may not accept appellate counsel's post hoc rationali-
zations for agency action.' "  NLRB v. Metropolitan Life. 
Ins., 380 U.S. 438, 444 (1965) (quoting Burlington Truck 
Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).

     The Board's inadequate attention to the ISDA requires 
that we remand this matter to the agency for further consid-
eration.  See, e.g., Iowa v. FCC, 218 F.3d 756 (D.C. Cir. 2000) 
(remanding for agency to address potentially dispositive argu-
ment).  On remand, the agency must determine whether 
Yukon qualifies as "the United States" for purposes of s 2(2);  
in reaching its conclusion, the Board will need to consider 
what allowance, if any, the NLRA must make in order to 
accommodate federal Indian law, as reflected in the ISDA.  
As we noted in New York Shipping, our review of such a 
determination "remains a matter of checking the [Board] 
against the terms of the [labor] laws.  This is precisely the 
type of appellate exercise governed by Chevron;  our review 
must be correlatively deferential."  854 F.2d at 1364.  It is 
for the agency, therefore, to consider the petitioner's argu-
ment in the first instance.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the reason set out in Part II B above, we deny 
enforcement of the order issued by the Board and remand 
this case to the agency for further consideration of the 
petitioner's argument from the ISDA.

                                                            So ordered.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, dissenting in part:  I agree with 
the court's opinion except for part II.B., which remands the 
case to the Board for "further consideration of the petitioner's 
argument from the" Indian Self-Determination Act.  Maj. op. 
at 8.

     No principle of administrative law compels an agency to 
respond to gibberish.  It is therefore understandable that the 
Board never responded to an argument that the Indian Self-
Determination Act removed Yukon from the Board's jurisdic-
tion. Maj. op. at 6.  The Board did not respond because 
Yukon never made any coherent argument to this effect.  
And it barely managed to make one in this court.  About all 
Yukon did before the Board and before us is slap the Self-
Determination Act down on the table in the hope that some-
one will figure out why it should matter.

     Here are the few assertions Yukon presented to the Board 
regarding the statute. The Self-Determination Act "autho-
rizes and encourages tribal governments to assume operation 
of federal Indian programs."  Employer's Brief on Review of 
Jurisdictional Determination at 5.  Indeed it does.  "Through 
the Act, Congress intended to shift programs from the feder-
al government to tribal governments, thereby reducing feder-
al domination of Indian programs."  Id.  That appears cor-
rect.  "Nothing in the federal government's authorization 
requires that the tribes' ... activities [conducted pursuant to 
the Self-Determination Act] occur 'on reservation.' " Id. at 8.  
This is obvious;  Yukon's hospital is not on a reservation.  (No 
one--the Board included--has required Yukon or any Indian 
tribe to conduct such activities on reservations.)  What then 
is Yukon's point?  All of its statements about the Self-
Determination Act are contained in the section of its brief 
claiming an exemption as a state or federal government under 
s 2(2).  The section's heading is entitled "THE HOSPITAL 
IS OPERATED BY FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED SOV-
EREIGN TRIBES ENTITLED TO THE GOVERNMEN-
TAL EXEMPTION."  Id. at 4.  The "governmental exemp-
tion" is s 2(2) of the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 
s 152(2), the provision granting an exemption to the federal 

government and state and local governments. The Board 
rejected this argument, correctly we all agree at least to the 
extent Yukon wanted to be considered a state.  So what was 
left of Yukon's reliance on the Self-Determination Act in its 
case before the Board?  There are two possibilities--nothing 
or nothing comprehensible.  In either event, the Board had 
no duty to respond.

     My colleagues think that perhaps Yukon also wanted to be 
considered the United States for the purpose of s 2(2).  (The 
section provides in relevant part that the term employer 
"shall not include the United States or any wholly owned 
Government corporation." 29 U.S.C. s 152(2).)  Yukon's 
briefs in this court hint here and there that it might have had 
this in mind, although the thrust of its presentation to this 
court and the Board was the rather inconsistent assertion 
that it--Yukon--was a separate, independent sovereign.  See, 
e.g., Brief of Petitioner at 36 (characterizing relationship 
under Self-Determination Act as "inter-governmental delega-
tion, transferring responsibility from one sovereign to anoth-
er");  Employer's Brief on Review of Jurisdictional Determi-
nation (No. 19-RC-13271) at 5 ("[a]ccess to the benefits of the 
Act is only available to sovereigns");  id. ("by definition under 
the Act, only sovereigns may compact as an exercise of their 
sovereignty").

     At all events, the Board said enough on this subject, given 
the incoherence of Yukon's position.  The Board wrote:  "Sig-
nificantly, the Employer was not brought into existence by a 
special legislative Act.  Rather, it is a regional nonprofit 
corporation formed ... under applicable Alaska laws.  Under 
these circumstances, we find that the Employer is not exempt 
under Section 2(2) 'as an integral part of the government of 
the United States as a whole.' " Decision and Order, Yukon 
Kuskokwim Health Corp., 329 N.L.R.B. No. 101 at 4 (June 
18, 1999).  In other words, whatever the Self-Determination 
Act means, or whatever Yukon thinks it means, Yukon re-
mains an independent Alaska corporation, not a part of the 
government of the United States.  If Yukon believes the Act 
provides otherwise, it has yet to explain why.

     