                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 30, 2000   Decided March 23, 2001 

                           No. 00-5141

                      Lake Medical Center, 
                            Appellant


                                v.

        Tommy G. Thompson, Secretary of the Department of 
                   Health and Human Services, 
                             Appellee


          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (96cv01389)

     Patric Hooper argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Sonia M. Orfield, Attorney, U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, argued the cause for appellee.  With 

her on the brief were Harriet S. Rabb, General Counsel, 
Sheree R. Kanner, Associate General Counsel, Henry R. 
Goldberg, Deputy Associate General Counsel, David W. Og-
den, Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, 
and Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part filed by 
Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  At issue is the valuation of 
hospital assets for purposes of reimbursement under the 
Medicare statute, 42 U.S.C. s 1395 et seq. Nu-Med, Inc., 
through its subsidiary Nu-Med Lake, purchased a general 
hospital in Florida--the Lake Medical Center--in 1985 for 
about $29 million.  Three years later, Nu-Med sold the 
medical center and its associated assets to Leesburg Regional 
Medical Center for $14.4 million.

     Medicare providers such as Nu-Med are entitled--with 
certain limitations not relevant here--to compensation for 
"the reasonable cost" of services provided to Medicare pa-
tients.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395f(b)(1).  Providers are reim-
bursed by "fiscal intermediaries"--typically private insurance 
companies under contract to the Health Care Finance Admin-
istration to determine the cost basis of medical service and 
make periodic payments.  See 42 C.F.R. s 400.202 (1999).  
Among the costs reimbursed is the depreciation on buildings 
and equipment used to provide Medicare services.  See 42 
C.F.R. s 413.134 (1999).  The intermediary makes deprecia-
tion payments to a provider based on an estimated deprecia-
tion method.  See 42 C.F.R. ss 413.64(b);  413.134(b) (1999).  
When an asset is sold, it may become apparent that the 
intermediary has paid either too much or too little deprecia-
tion because the sales price was either higher or lower than 
expected.  Cf. Glenn A. Welsch & Charles T. Zlatkovich, 
Intermediate Accounting 476 (8th ed. 1989) (noting that 
depreciation is only an estimate).  The Medicare regulations 

permit the intermediary to recover overpayment of deprecia-
tion when an asset is sold for more than its cost basis less 
reimbursed depreciation.  See 42 C.F.R. s 413.134(f) (1999).

     In this case, Nu-Med filed a Medicare cost report on 
March 18, 1988, and claimed a loss on its sale of the Lake 
Medical Center.  The intermediary, Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield of Florida, responded with a Notice of Program Reim-
bursement denying Nu-Med additional payments.  Because 
there was a lump sum sales price, the intermediary allocated 
the price among the assets and, having done so, calculated a 
gain on the sale of the depreciable assets.  Nu-Med appealed 
this determination to the Provider Reimbursement Review 
Board.  The Board found that the intermediary had erred in 
allocating all of the proceeds to depreciable assets, that it 
should obtain an independent appraisal to establish the fair 
market value of all the assets, and that it should then allocate 
the purchase price among the depreciable and nondepreciable 
assets (such as land) to determine what Nu-Med realized in 
the sale.  See Lake Medical Ctr. v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield, 
No. 96-D28, slip op. at 10 (Provider Reimbursement Review 
Bd. Apr. 16, 1996).  After the intermediary obtained an 
appraisal, it issued a new Notice of Program Reimbursement 
calculating Nu-Med's total loss on the sale of $1,757,660.  
The Board affirmed.  See Lake Medical Ctr. v. Blue Cross & 
Blue Shield, No. 97-D107, slip op. at 12 (Provider Reimburse-
ment Review Bd. Sept. 26, 1997).  Nu-Med challenged this 
recalculated loss as too low.  The district court (Flannery, J.) 
rejected Nu-Med's contentions in a thorough and well-
reasoned opinion.  See Lake Medical Ctr. v. Shalala, 89 
F.Supp.2d 83 (D.D.C. 2000).

                                I.

     For depreciable assets, that is for assets that lose value 
over time, an owner's gain or loss on the sale of the asset is 
the difference between the purchase price (the cost basis) less 
accumulated depreciation (the net book value) and the sales 
price.  See Welsch & Zlatkovich, supra, at 447.  If a provid-
er sells a Medicare-depreciable asset at a loss, the Secretary 

assumes that more depreciation occurred than originally esti-
mated and therefore provides additional reimbursement to 
the provider.  If a gain results, the Secretary recaptures the 
previously paid reimbursement.  See Lake Medical Ctr., 89 
F.Supp.2d at 85.

     In 1984, as part of the Deficit Reduction Act or "DEFRA," 
Congress set a limit on providers' historical cost of assets.  
See Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-369, 
s 2314(a), 99 Stat. 494 (July 18, 1984), codified at 42 U.S.C. 
s 1395x(v)(1)(O) (1994).  Under 42 U.S.C. s 1395x(v)(1)(O)(i),1 
when an asset changed hands, "the valuation of the asset ... 
shall be the lesser of the allowable acquisition cost of such 
asset to the owner of record as of July 18, 1984 ... or the 
acquisition cost of such asset to the new owner."  42 U.S.C. 
s 1395x(v)(1)(O)(i) (1994).  A second clause required regula-
tions to "provide for recapture of depreciation in the same 
manner as provided under the regulations in effect on June 1, 
1984."  42 U.S.C. s 1395x(v)(1)(O)(ii) (1994).

     Because Nu-Med sold the Lake Medical Center in 1988, 
the Board found that the first of these provisions--clause 
(i)--required the intermediary to consider the cost basis to be 
the price paid for the facilities by the owner of record in 
1984--namely, $11 million.  See Lake Medical Ctr. v. Blue 
Cross & Blue Shield, No. 97-D107, slip op. at 10 (Provider 
Reimbursement Review Bd. Sept. 26, 1997).  According to 
Nu-Med this was error because clause (i) only specifies the 
basis for calculating the depreciable value of an asset (and 
thus the periodic reimbursement payments from the interme-
diary), whereas clause (ii) specifies the method for calculating 
gain or loss from the sale of an asset.  (Both parties agree 
that even though clause (ii) refers only to "recapture" it 
applies not only to transactions resulting in a gain but also a 
loss.)  Nu-Med's theory is that clause (i) did not exist in 1984 
so the calculation in clause (ii) regarding gain or loss on a sale 
must ignore the DEFRA cap on historical cost.

__________
     1 The statute was amended in 1997, changing clause (i) and 
deleting clause (ii).  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395(v)(1)(O) (Supp. IV 1998).

     The district court rightly rejected Nu-Med's arguments.  
Nu-Med's interpretation of the interplay between clauses (i) 
and (ii) does not exactly leap off the page.  The Secretary's 
reading, on the other hand, is perfectly logical.  It treats 
clause (ii) as dealing with the method of calculating deprecia-
tion (the clause uses the word "manner"), and clause (i) as 
setting the depreciable basis of the asset from which the 
clause (ii) calculation will be made.  It is unnecessary to 
discuss all of the various regulations in effect in 1984 dealing 
with the method of calculating depreciation.  The district 
court mentioned one--42 C.F.R. s 405.415 (1984)--which is 
enough to make the point:  as in 1984, the Secretary under 
DEFRA continued "to compare sales price with the depreci-
ated historical cost basis as defined in [the] existing regula-
tions."  See Lake Medical Ctr., 89 F.Supp.2d at 87.  The 
district court gave other reasons for sustaining the Secre-
tary's interpretation but it would serve no useful purpose to 
repeat them.  Even if the case were not so overwhelming in 
favor of the Secretary's reading, the respect a court must give 
to an agency's statutory interpretation would cause us to 
reach the same result.  See National Medical Enters., Inc. v. 
Shalala, 43 F.3d 691, 695 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  Upholding the 
Secretary here is not inconsistent with the dicta in Whitecliff, 
Inc. v. Shalala, 20 F.3d 488, 489 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1994), that "the 
Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 ... codified at 42 U.S.C. 
s 1395x(v)(1)(O)(ii), ratified the recapture of depreciation reg-
ulations that were in effect as of June 1, 1984."  Clause (ii), as 
we have said, did "ratify" those 1984 regulations dealing with 
the manner in which depreciation is calculated.

                               II.

     Nu-Med's alternative contention is that the intermediary's 
loss valuation was too low because neither it nor the Provider 
Reimbursement Review Board properly accounted for the 
value of medical records in determining Nu-Med's reimbursa-
ble loss.  When Nu-Med sold the Lake Medical Center in 
1988 for $14.4 million, there was no allocation of the sales 
price among the buildings, land, equipment, the name "Lake 
Medical Center," patient files or "good will."  Because not all 

assets are depreciable under Medicare, see 42 C.F.R. 
s 413.134(a) (1999), when assets are sold in a bundle "the 
gain or loss on the sale of each depreciable asset must be 
determined by allocating the lump sum sales price among all 
the assets sold, in accordance with the fair market value of 
each asset ... at the time of sale."  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.134(f)(2)(iv) (1999).

     Naturally, Nu-Med would prefer that as much of Lake 
Medical Center's sale price as possible be apportioned to non-
depreciable assets.  This would lower the allocable sales price 
of the depreciable assets, maximizing both Nu-Med's losses 
and its Medicare cost recovery.  To that end, Nu-Med thinks 
that its reimbursement was inadequate because both the 
intermediary and the Provider Reimbursement Review Board 
assigned no value to the medical records transferred as part 
of the sale.  See Lake Medical Ctr., No. 97-D107, slip op. at 
12.

     It is true that the appraiser placed a fair market value of 
$1.5 million on the medical records out of a total appraisal of 
approximately $17 million for the Center, although everything 
actually sold for $14.4 million.  But those numbers show that 
the purchaser paid nothing for residual going concern value:  
the tangible assets were sold for less than their fair market 
value.  Medical records are, the Board determined, akin to 
goodwill, assigned a positive value only when the sales price 
of the other assets exceeds their fair market value.  See Lake 
Medical Ctr., No. 97-D107, slip op. at 11-12.  In this respect 
the Board's judgment comports with generally accepted ac-
counting practices.  See Financial Accounting Standards 
Board, Current Text:  Accounting Standards B50.145;  
B50.160 (1994) ("goodwill" only recorded when sale price of 
assets exceeds fair market value);  John Downes & Jordan 
Elliot Goodman, Dictionary of Finance and Investment 
Terms 239 (5th ed. 1998) ("going concern value" recorded as 
"goodwill" in acquisition accounting).  The Board sufficiently 
supported its conclusion that Nu-Med's medical records could 
not, as the district court put it, be "valued as an asset 
independent of Lake Medical's ongoing operations."  See 
Lake Medical Ctr., 89 F.Supp.2d at 90.  It is of no moment 

that the sales agreement includes "all books and records of 
the facility."  The sales agreement also includes "good will," 
which only exists if the assets are sold for more than fair 
market value.  The mere fact that an asset was transferred 
does not mean it had a positive fair market value.

     We have considered and rejected Nu-Med's other argu-
ments.  The judgment of the district court is

                                                            Affirmed.


     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and dissent-
ing in part:  I concur in most of the well reasoned opinion of 
the court, but find that I am unable to join Part II.  Although 
I think the result reached by the Secretary, the district court, 
and the majority is a reasonable one, I do not think it is 
consistent with governing HHS regulations.

     The applicable HHS regulation provides:

     If a provider sells more than one asset for a lump sum 
     sales price, the gain or loss on the sale of each deprecia-
     ble asset must be determined by allocating the lump sum 
     sales price among all the assets sold, in accordance with 
     the fair market value of each asset as it was used by the 
     provider at the time of sale.  If the buyer and seller 
     cannot agree on an allocation of the sales price, or if they 
     do agree but there is insufficient documentation of the 
     current fair market value of each asset, the intermediary 
     for the selling provider will require an appraisal by an 
     independent appraisal expert to establish the fair market 
     value of each asset and will make an allocation of the 
     sales price in accordance with the appraisal.
     
42 C.F.R. s 413.134(f)(2)(iv) (emphasis added).  The regula-
tion makes no distinction between tangible and intangible 
assets, nor does it limit the allocation of sale prices to 
depreciable assets.  Most importantly for the purposes of the 
present controversy, it does not adopt "generally accepted 
accounting practices."  Maj. Op. at 6.

     The Secretary's argument that medical records primarily 
have a "going concern" value and that assets with "going 
concern" value should not be allocated a portion of the sale 
price is certainly reasonable, and I accept that following 
"generally accepted accounting practices" would dictate the 
result reached by the court.  Indeed, were the Secretary to 
promulgate regulations to that effect, I have little doubt that 
those regulations would withstand all challenge.  But that is 
not the state of the regulations that governed the sale before 
us.

     As appellant argued, the Secretary's regulations explicitly 
require the intermediary to allocate the sales price "among 
all the assets sold."  There is little ambiguity in this state-

ment.  If the medical records were among "the assets sold" 
by Nu-Med, then they should be allocated a portion of the 
sales price.  The records were listed as a separate asset at 
the time of sale even though all of the assets were sold for a 
lump-sum price.

     Since the buyer and seller did not agree on the value, if 
any, to be assigned to the medical records, the intermediary 
was required to submit this matter for independent appraisal, 
which it did.  Under the plain language of the regulation, this 
appraisal, and not "generally accepted accounting practices," 
controls.  The regulatory language leaves no room for the 
intermediary, or the Secretary, to reallocate portions of the 
sales price because they disapprove of the appraiser's judg-
ment.  While the Secretary's view is most reasonable as a 
policy matter, it is not the view embodied in the Secretary's 
own regulations.  If the medical records were "intended to be 
among the assets transferred in the sale" then they were 
among the "assets sold" and fall under the regulations.  That 
this produces an unreasonable or unconventional result does 
not give the Secretary or the courts license to rewrite the 
regulatory language.

     In all other respects I join Judge Randolph's careful opin-
ion for the court.

 