                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 11, 2000      Decided June 9, 2000 

                           No. 99-1273

                 City of Centralia, Washington, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     James B. Vasile argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs was Joseph E. Stubbs.

     Laura J. Vallance, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 
the brief were John H. Conway, Acting Solicitor, and Susan 
J. Court, Acting Deputy Solicitor.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  The City of Centralia, Washington 
("Centralia") brings this petition for review to challenge an 
order of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
("FERC" or "Commission") requiring Centralia to conduct a 
study of the effects of the Yelm Hydroelectric Project on the 
anadromous fish in the Nisqually River.  Centralia filed an 
application in 1989 for a license to operate the existing Yelm 
Hydroelectric Project.  The National Marine Fisheries Ser-
vice ("NMFS") recommended that FERC require Centralia 
to construct a tailrace barrier to prevent harm to the river's 
anadromous fish population.  The Acting Director of Hydro-
power Licensing determined that the cost of constructing a 
tailrace barrier could not be justified, because the benefits of 
the barrier had not been demonstrated.  He held, however, 
that a study should be undertaken to determine whether, and 
to what extent, the Project was harmful to the fish.  FERC, 
with two Commissioners dissenting, denied Centralia's peti-
tion for rehearing.  Centralia now petitions for review.

     Under sections 4(e) and 10(a) of the Federal Power Act 
("FPA" or "Act"), 16 U.S.C. ss 797(e), 803(a), as amended by 
the Electric Consumers Protection Act ("ECPA"), Pub. L. 
No. 99-495, 100 Stat. 1243 (1994), FERC must balance power 
and non-power values when deciding whether to issue hydro-
power licenses. In this case, Centralia contends that the 
Commission's order requiring a study should be vacated, 
because FERC failed to accurately weigh the high cost of the 
study against the negligible benefits to be derived from the 
study.  We agree.  FERC does not dispute that the study 
will cost Centralia up to $300,000 to determine whether a 
tailrace barrier costing $1,000,000 should be constructed.  
FERC also concedes that the study could prove inconclusive.  
In addition, FERC has no meaningful hard evidence to prove 
that the hydroelectric project is harmful to fish.  In contrast, 
the Nisqually Indian Tribe ("Tribe"), which operates a fishery 
on the river, has submitted concrete data to show that no real 

harm to the fish results from the Project.  In short, the 
record in this case does not support either the construction of 
a tailrace barrier or a study to determine its feasibility.  
Accordingly, the petition for review is granted.

                          I. Background

     Centralia operates the Yelm Hydroelectric Project along 
the Nisqually River.  In the late 1970s, the Nisqually Indian 
Tribe, which operates a fishery along the Nisqually River, 
filed a complaint claiming that the Yelm Project was harming 
the fishery.  Centralia and the Tribe subsequently com-
menced negotiations in an effort to settle the Tribe's claims.  
In 1985, in a separate proceeding, FERC determined that 
Centralia, which had been operating the Yelm Project since 
1930 without a license, was required to file for a license.  
Centralia submitted a license application in 1989.

     The Tribe and Centralia finally reached a settlement in 
1991.  See Stipulation and Settlement Agreement between 
the City of Centralia and the Nisqually Indian Tribe, Execut-
ed Feb. 28, 1991, reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 88.  
Centralia agreed to provide the Tribe with money, land, and 
other concessions in exchange for the Tribe's support in its 
license application with FERC.  Centralia also agreed to 
achieve a minimum flow in the river.

     In the original settlement between Centralia and the Tribe, 
Centralia agreed to construct a tailrace barrier.  Not long 
after the settlement was signed, however, the Tribe submit-
ted a letter to Centralia stating that it did not believe that a 
tailrace barrier was either necessary or desirable.  See Letter 
from Dorian S. Sanchez, Chairman, Nisqually Indian Tribe to 
William C. Cummings, Director, Centralia City Light (July 
25, 1991), reprinted in J.A. 103.  The letter noted that, "since 
minimum flows were established in 1977," the Tribe had "not 
documented any delay problems at the powerhouse."  Id. at 
2, reprinted in J.A. 104.  Moreover, the letter stated that a 
tailrace barrier would "have an immediate and ongoing nega-
tive impact on fisheries habitat."  Id.  Finally, the letter 
acknowledged that, in lieu of constructing a tailrace barrier, 

Centralia had committed to contribute an amount equal to 
one-half the cost of a tailrace barrier to support fisheries 
enhancement projects within the Nisqually River basin.  Id.  
The Tribe viewed these other fisheries enhancements as 
"much more beneficial" than a tailrace barrier.  Id.  On this 
last point, the letter noted that

     [t]he Nisqually Tribe's 1990 settlement agreement with 
     Centralia calls for Centralia to construct a tailrace barri-
     er.  This portion of the agreement was based on the 
     assumption that a tailrace barrier would be required of 
     Centralia by FERC;  it was not based on a lengthy 
     analysis of the need for the barrier and should not be 
     used by FERC or other agencies as a basis for requiring 
     such a barrier.  If the tailrace barrier is not imposed by 
     FERC, Centralia and the Nisqually Tribe will meet to 
     modify the settlement agreement to provide additional 
     funding for fisheries enhancement.
     
Id. at 2-3, reprinted in J.A. 104-05.  Subsequently, in a 
response to FERC's request for additional information, Cen-
tralia maintained that a tailrace barrier would not be in the 
public interest, both because of its "high cost" and the 
"absence of any reliable data to support the need for the 
barrier."  See Centralia's Response to Enclosure B of FERC 
Staff Letter Dated April 12, 1991, reprinted in J.A. 111.

     Meanwhile, as Centralia and the Tribe moved to avoid 
construction of a tailrace barrier, officials from NMFS 
pressed a different view.  NMFS recommended to FERC 
that, as a condition of any license, Centralia should be re-
quired to build a tailrace barrier to protect the fish.  See 
Letter from Dean L. Shumway, Director, Division of Project 
Review, FERC to Merritt E. Tuttle, Division Chief, NMFS 
(Mar. 23, 1992), reprinted in J.A. 169 (noting NMFS' recom-
mendations).  On March 16, 1992, however, FERC issued an 
Environmental Assessment for the license and determined 
that a tailrace barrier was not justified.  See Environmental 
Assessment for Hydropower License, Yelm Project, Mar. 16, 
1992, 22-23, reprinted in J.A. 115, 141-42.  The Assessment 
noted that fish could certainly be attracted to "the high 

velocity of the tailrace discharge flows" which could delay 
migration or could injure or kill the fish, and that a tailrace 
barrier would prevent those harms.  Id. at 22, reprinted in 
J.A. 141.  But, the Assessment stated, no "site-specific stud-
ies have been completed that quantify the numbers, if any, of 
salmon delayed in their upstream migration ... or the num-
bers that are injured or killed."  Id.  The Assessment also 
noted the Tribe's findings that minimum flow had reduced the 
problem and that large numbers of salmon had successfully 
migrated past the Project without a tailrace barrier.  The 
Assessment concluded:

          Since no information exists regarding the magnitude of 
     delay, false attraction, or turbine blade mortality of 
     salmon that the project could be causing, if any, we 
     cannot conclude that tailrace barriers would significantly 
     reduce delay of upstream migrants or turbine runner 
     mortality.
     
          Therefore, we cannot conclude that significant en-
     hancement to the river's salmon populations or fishery 
     would be achieved with construction of the tailrace barri-
     er.  Consequently, a tailrace barrier cannot be justified.
     
Id. at 23, reprinted in J.A. 142.

     Because FERC had rejected NMFS' recommendation of a 
tailrace barrier, an effort was made pursuant to s 10(j) of the 
FPA, 16 U.S.C. s 803(j), to reconcile the disagreement be-
tween the agencies.  FERC allowed NMFS time to substanti-
ate the need for a tailrace barrier.  See Letter to Merritt E. 
Tuttle (Mar. 23, 1992), reprinted in J.A. 169.  In response to 
FERC's inquiry, NMFS claimed that the Environmental As-
sessment was "seriously flawed."  Letter from Merritt E. 
Tuttle, Division Chief, NMFS to Dean L. Shumway, Director, 
Division of Project Review, FERC (Apr. 30, 1992), reprinted 
in J.A. 173.  NMFS argued that there was not enough 
information about harm to the fish, because Centralia had 
failed to do a study on the impact of the Yelm Project.  It 
noted that NMFS' general policy is to require tailrace barri-
ers, because fish can be injured in the tailrace.  It described 

how that happened and noted that "[d]elay and injury has 
been documented at a number of sites."  Id. at 174.

     NMFS also asserted that sufficient evidence demonstrated 
potential harm to the fish.  It claimed that, even without a 
study, injury and false attraction were potential problems, 
because the fish in the river were definitely strong enough to 
swim up to the turbine.  NMFS contended that "FERC's 
failure to order Centralia to conduct [a] tailrace study ...  
has created the informational void present at this time."  Id. 
at 6, reprinted in J.A. 178.  NMFS thus recommended that 
FERC either order the barrier to be built or order Centralia 
to conduct a study evaluating the impacts of the Project on 
the fisheries.

     Two meetings between FERC and NMFS officials (along 
with other interested parties) were held during the summer 
of 1992, and NMFS officials submitted further arguments in 
support of their recommendation.  The meetings did not 
resolve any issues, however.  Everyone agreed that salmon 
can be found in the tailrace area, but the parties disagreed 
about whether the fish were harmed.  NMFS continued to 
insist that either a barrier should be built, or a study done.  
It submitted a so-called "Summary of Key Evidence" to make 
the case for its recommendation.  It noted that fish are 
commonly observed in the tailrace;  that someone witnessed a 
fish trying to swim into the tubes and one fish jumped and 
likely injured itself;  and that false attraction, delay and 
injury "has commonly occurred at other powerhouse tailraces 
in the Pacific Northwest."  Summary of Key Evidence, sub-
mitted by Merritt E. Tuttle, Division Chief, NMFS, Aug. 18, 
1992, reprinted in J.A. 197.

     In April 1996, FERC issued a Final Environmental Impact 
Statement (assessing the cumulative impacts of the Yelm 
Project with another hydroelectric project on the river) that 
concluded that the operation of the two projects would result 
in minor impacts on the environment, which would be out-
weighed by the projects' benefits.  The report also stated 
that the fish stocks at issue were listed "healthy."  A "healthy 
stock" listing means that a "stock of fish [is] experiencing 

production levels consistent with its available habitat and 
within the natural variations in survival for the stock."  Final 
Environmental Impact Statement, Nisqually Hydroelectric 
Project, July, 1996, reprinted in J.A. 206, 226-27 (listing 
chinook salmon, coho salmon, chum salmon, pink salmon, and 
winter steelhead trout stock as "healthy").

     Finally, on March 7, 1997, the Acting Director of the Office 
of Hydropower Licensing issued an order rejecting NMFS' 
recommendation that Centralia build a tailrace barrier, but 
accepting the recommendation that Centralia be required to 
conduct a study on the potential need for a tailrace barrier.  
The order concluded that "the information is not sufficient to 
quantify" the harm to the fish "caused by the Yelm Project's 
tailrace, or the consequences of these potential project-
induced effects on the stream's fishery."  City of Centralia 
Light Dep't, 78 F.E.R.C. p 62,171, at 64,636 (1997).  Thus, the 
incremental benefits of the barrier were not demonstrated 
sufficiently to justify the cost of the barrier.  However, the 
Director agreed with NMFS that "a study is necessary to 
determine how many fish are injured or killed by contact with 
the project turbine blades ... [and] also ... [that] a study is 
needed to determine how much false attraction and delay" is 
occurring.  Id.

     Centralia sought rehearing, claiming that a study was not 
justified.  While the petition for rehearing was pending, the 
Tribe continued to support Centralia's contention that a study 
was neither necessary nor justified.  It reiterated its earlier 
recommendation that a tailrace barrier not be constructed, 
and stated that, in its view, "further studies are not needed 
and would be a waste of resources."  Letter from David A. 
Troutt, Natural Resources Director, Nisqually Indian Tribe 
to Director, Office of Hydropower Licensing, FERC 4 (Apr. 
11, 1997), reprinted in J.A. 317, 320.  The Tribe also elaborat-
ed on the value to be derived from the alternative fishery 
enhancement measures that Centralia would fund if Centralia 
were not required to build the barrier.  Specifically, the Tribe 
noted that

     [t]hese alternative measures address the single greatest 
     threat to the salmon resources along the Nisqually River 
     and tributaries, the threat of increasing development 
     pressure due to urbanization along the basin's shorelines.  
     They will focus on the acquisition for permanent protec-
     tion and rehabilitation of critical habitat areas along the 
     river and major tributaries.  This would further the 
     adaptive management goals discussed above and re-
     quired under current approaches to salmon management, 
     and would be substantially more beneficial than imposing 
     a costly tailrace barrier that addresses a minimal or non-
     existent problem.
     
Id.  The Tribe also submitted additional support in 1998 and 
1999, stating that, in its annual harvest management activi-
ties, there were "no indications through [its] surveys that the 
fish are being delayed at any point during their migration."  
Letter from David A. Troutt, Natural Resources Director, 
Nisqually Indian Tribe to Bill Tobin, Natural Resources 
Attorney, Nisqually Indian Tribe (May 12, 1998), reprinted in 
J.A. 327;  Letter from David A. Troutt, Natural Resources 
Director, Nisqually Indian Tribe to Bill Tobin, Natural Re-
sources Attorney, Nisqually Indian Tribe (Feb. 11, 1999), 
reprinted in J.A. 333.

     Before FERC acted on Centralia's petition for rehearing, 
Centralia and the Tribe concluded an amendment to their 
settlement agreement.  They agreed:

          to use their best efforts to obtain concurrence of 
          FERC [and other agencies] that the tailrace barrier 
          should not be a condition of Centralia's FERC li-
          cense.
          
          if ... Centralia is not required to construct the 
          tailrace barrier, then Centralia and the Tribe shall 
          equally share Centralia's savings from not having to 
          construct the barrier.
          
          money paid by Centralia to the Tribe ... shall be 
          segregated by the Tribe and used exclusively for the 
          protection, rehabilitation or enhancement of the ana-
          dromous fisheries resources of the Nisqually River.
          
Stipulation and Settlement Agreement between the City of 
Centralia and the Nisqually Indian Tribe, Amendment No. 1, 
reprinted in J.A. 328.

     FERC then denied rehearing.  It noted that there is 
evidence of fish in the Project's tailrace, and that, "[b]ased on 
the record before us, during parts of the salmonid migration 
season, the tailrace flows nearly equals flow in the bypassed 
reach," and that fish could be attracted to it, "especially 
during August and September."  City of Centralia Light 
Dep't, 87 F.E.R.C. p 61,383, at 62,421 (1999).  The Commis-
sion thus concluded that fish might be harmed.  FERC noted 
that this sparse evidence, while not enough to support an 
order requiring the construction of a tailrace barrier, was 
enough to require Centralia to conduct a study.

     Two Commissioners dissented.  Commissioner Bailey stat-
ed that she was not convinced that the evidence in the record 
was sufficient to require a study, and she did not believe that 
a study was justified under the balancing required by Part I 
of the Act.  She pointed out that "the record submissions ...  
both before and after the date of the [environmental assess-
ment] do nothing more than suggest, based on isolated obser-
vations and flow-based understandings, the presence of fish 
(including a single jumping adult salmon) in, or the attraction 
of fish to, the tailrace area of the project."  Id. at 62,423.  
She cited with approval the Tribe's studies and stated that 
they demonstrated that there was no need for Centralia to 
conduct a study.  She stated that the Commission had failed 
to engage in the balancing of costs and benefits required by 
the Act and that the costs of a study outweighed any per-
ceived benefits.  She cited Amendment No. 1 of the 
Centralia-Tribe settlement and stated that any concerns she 
might have had about not ordering the barrier were alleviated 
by the parties' agreement to spend the savings on other 
fishery enhancements.  See id. at 62,424.  Commissioner 
HErbert agreed with Commissioner Bailey, adding that 
"funds are more efficiently utilized if spent on species en-
hancement measures, as stipulated between the city and the 
tribe, rather than the study prescribed in this matter."  Id. 

"Let us remember," he added, "it is the survival and enhance-
ment of the species which is paramount."  Id.  This appeal 
followed.
                           II. Analysis

     This case presents an odd conjunction of statutory provi-
sions, which were fully explored in United States Dep't of 
Interior v. FERC, 952 F.2d 538 (D.C. Cir. 1992):

          Under the FPA, FERC may license hydroelectric pro-
     jects on federal lands and on waterways that are subject 
     to congressional regulation under the Commerce Clause.  
     16 U.S.C. s 797(e) (1988).  Under sections 4(e) and 10(a) 
     of the FPA, 16 U.S.C. ss 797(e), 803(a), as amended by 
     the Electric Consumers Protection Act ("ECPA"), Pub. 
     L. No. 99-495, 100 Stat. 1243 (1986), FERC must consid-
     er environmental issues when deciding whether to issue 
     hydropower licenses.
     
          In deciding whether to issue any license under [the 
          FPA] for any project, the Commission, in addition to 
          the power and development purposes for which licens-
          es are issued, shall give equal consideration to the 
          purposes of energy conservation, the protection, miti-
          gation of damage to, and enhancement of, fish and 
          wildlife (including related spawning grounds and habi-
          tat), the protection of recreational opportunities, and 
          the preservation of other aspects of environmental 
          quality.
          
     16 U.S.C. s 797(e) (1988).
     
          All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be on 
          the following conditions:  That the project adopted ...  
          will be best adapted to a comprehensive plan ... for 
          the adequate protection, mitigation, and enhancement 
          of fish and wildlife (including related spawning 
          grounds and habitat)....
          
     16 U.S.C. s 803(a) (1988).
     
          Additionally, under section 10(j) of the FPA, 16 U.S.C. 
     s 803(j), FERC must impose conditions on licenses 
     "based on recommendations received pursuant to the 
     Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (16 U.S.C. s 661 et 
     
     seq.) from the National Marine Fisheries Service, the 
     United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and State fish 
     and wildlife agencies."  s 803(j)(1).  FERC retains ulti-
     mate authority, however, to decide whether any recom-
     mended conditions are "inconsistent with the purposes 
     of" the FPA or other laws.  s 803(j)(2).  When it acts 
     contrary to a recommendation received from a wildlife 
     agency, FERC must make an appropriate finding on the 
     record to justify its decision.  Id.
     
                            *  *  *  *

     The ECPA amendments to the FPA, which added the 
     "equal consideration" language to section 4(e) and creat-
     ed the section 10(j) process, were aimed primarily at 
     increasing FERC's sensitivity to environmental con-
     cerns....
     
          [However], the ECPA amendments do not give envi-
     ronmental factors preemptive force.... FERC still is 
     charged with determining the "public interest," i.e., bal-
     ancing power and non-power values.  Even where the 
     fish and wildlife agencies make formal section 10(j) rec-
     ommendations, those agencies have no veto power.  See 
     National Wildlife Fed'n v. FERC, 912 F.2d 1471, 1480 
     (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("While the Commission must address 
     each recommendation, the discretion ultimately vests in 
     the Commission as to how to incorporate each recom-
     mendation.  If we read the statute any other way, the 
     Commission would be held hostage to every agency 
     recommendation, and the Commission's role of reconcil-
     ing all competing interests would be compromised.").
     
Id. at 543-45.  See also City of Oconto Falls v. FERC, 204 
F.3d 1154, 1160 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("[T]he Commission still is 
charged with determining the 'public interest,' i.e., balancing 
power and non-power values.  Even where the fish and 
wildlife agencies make formal s 10(j) recommendations, those 
agencies have no veto power.") (citations and internal quota-
tion marks omitted).

     The question raised in this petition for review is whether 
FERC's order, "requiring Centralia to conduct a study to 
determine the extent of [Yelm] project impacts on the up-
stream migration of steelhead trout and salmon," City of 
Centralia, 87 F.E.R.C. at 62,421-22, is supported by substan-
tial evidence and is not arbitrary and capricious.  See United 
States Dep't of Interior, 952 F.2d at 545 (stating the substan-
tial evidence and arbitrary and capricious standards of re-
view);  City of Oconto Falls, 204 F.3d at 1159 (same);  Texaco, 
Inc. v. FERC, 148 F.3d 1091, 1095 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (same).  
Because FERC's order is devoid of "reasoned decision mak-
ing," Texaco, 148 F.3d at 1095, and lacks substantial evidence 
to justify requiring Centralia to conduct a study, we are 
constrained to grant the petition for review.

     FERC is required by sections 4(e) and 10(a) of the Act to 
give "equal consideration" to energy and environmental con-
siderations.  In other words, it must "balanc[e] power and 
non-power values."  United States Dep't of Interior, 952 F.2d 
at 545.  The statute does "not give environmental factors 
preemptive force."  Id.  FERC's order in this case makes no 
attempt whatsoever to "balance" power and non-power values 
in justifying the need for a study.  The reason seems obvious:  
there are no material environmental considerations that 
weigh in favor of a study.

     FERC is clear, and the record surely supports its conclu-
sion, that there are no facts sufficient to require Centralia to 
construct a tailrace barrier.  See City of Centralia, 87 
F.E.R.C. at 62,421.  The agency's Environmental Assessment 
report made it plain that there was nothing in the record to 
support the construction of a tailrace barrier.  Environmental 
Assessment at 23, reprinted in J.A. 142.  In other words, 
FERC's own studies could uncover no non-power concerns.  
And during the s 10(j) exchanges between FERC and NMFS 
officials, FERC never varied from the position taken in the 
Environmental Assessment that the costs of a barrier could 
not be justified.

     Having acknowledged that a barrier is not justified, FERC 
stumbles badly in concluding that the costs of a study could 

be justified.  FERC is certainly empowered to require an 
applicant to conduct a study when there is some evidence of a 
problem and a study is necessary to determine the extent of 
the harm.  But not even FERC is suggesting that an appli-
cant has a duty to determine if a problem exists.  Yet, that is 
the result of the disputed order in this case.

     FERC's order articulates no evidence of harm.  Rather, 
FERC relies on the fact that fish are observed in the 
Project's tailrace and the assertion that "during parts of the 
salmonid migration season, the tailrace flows nearly equals 
flow in the bypassed reach."  Thus, FERC argues, "salmon-
ids could be attracted to the tailrace discharge or the by-
passed reach" and "either be delayed in their migrations or 
injured or killed if they enter the draft tubes and are struck 
by the turbines."  City of Centralia, 87 F.E.R.C. at 62,421.  
FERC's conclusion is based on sheer speculation.  Therefore, 
it cannot be said that there is substantial evidence justifying a 
study.  See Bangor Hydro-Elec. Co. v. FERC, 78 F.3d 659, 
663 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (rejecting characterization that an agency 
conclusion was a "finding" where it was merely a prediction 
based on opinions).  That fish could be attracted to the flow 
is not evidence of a problem that warrants a study.  Indeed, 
FERC's only evidence that fish are harmed is that someone 
saw a single jumping fish that hit a concrete barrier and may 
have been hurt.  City of Centralia, 87 F.E.R.C. at 62,421 n.7.  
This is not evidence enough to support the disputed conclu-
sion in this case.

     Not only is there no substantial evidence to support 
FERC's order, there is substantial evidence to support the 
opposite position endorsed by Centralia and the Tribe.  As 
already noted, the record contains abundant submissions from 
the Tribe showing that, based on the Tribe's surveys, no 
harm results from the Project.  See Letter to Director of the 
Office of Hydropower Licensing (Apr. 11, 1997) (stating that 
the Tribe believed that both the barrier and a study were 
unnecessary and describing the benefits of the other fishery 
enhancement projects), reprinted in J.A. 317.  See also Let-
ter to William C. Cummings (July 25, 1991), reprinted in J.A. 
103 ("[S]ince minimum flows were established in 1977 we 

have not documented any delay problems at the powerhouse," 
and "we have studied chinook and pink migration and deter-
mined that these species were found far upstream of the 
powerhouse at an early date.");  Letter to Bill Tobin (May 12, 
1998), reprinted in J.A. 327 (noting that after conducting field 
surveys on foot, boat, raft or helicopter, the Tribe had "not 
noticed any delays caused by the power plant associated with 
the Centralia hydroelectric project");  Letter to Bill Tobin 
(Feb. 11, 1999), reprinted in J.A. 333 (same).  Neither NMFS 
in its submissions nor FERC in its order point to record 
evidence to refute the Tribe's submissions.

     Finally, Centralia contends, and we agree, that FERC's 
order is arbitrary and capricious for want of reasoned deci-
sionmaking.  On the record here, "the costs of [FERC's] 
prescription far outweigh any benefits to fish or the general 
environment and is therefore unreasonable."  Bangor Hydro-
Elec., 78 F.3d at 663.  FERC acknowledges that "a study 
could be rather expensive [i.e., as much as $300,000] and 
could prove inconclusive."  City of Centralia, 87 F.E.R.C. at 
62,421 n.3.  And Centralia and the Tribe convincingly argue 
that the more than $500,000 that Centralia will contribute to 
pay for alternative fishery enhancement measures is a far 
superior way to protect the fish and river environment than a 
$300,000 expenditure for what will likely be an inconclusive 
study on the feasibility of a tailrace barrier.

     FERC has no reasonable answer to Centralia's argument, 
because it has failed to weigh the relative costs and benefits 
of the proposed study.  Standing alone, the study is arguably 
too expensive, for it is difficult to justify a $300,000 expendi-
ture for an inconclusive study to determine whether to spend 
another $1,000,000 to construct a tailrace barrier to address a 
problem that has not been identified.  When weighed against 
the alternative remedies proposed by Centralia and the Tribe, 
however, the order requiring a study borders on absurd.

     Given the record in this case, we must conclude that FERC 
has not provided reasonable support, i.e., "substantial evi-
dence," either for the construction of a tailrace barrier or a 
study to determine its feasibility;  and we also must conclude 

that FERC has failed to show, in the required statutory 
balancing of power and non-power values, that a study is 
"reasonably related to its goal" of enhancing the fishery of 
the Nisqually River.  Bangor Hydro-Elec., 78 F.3d at 664.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the aforementioned reasons, the petition for review is 
granted.  FERC's order requiring Centralia to conduct a 
study is hereby reversed and vacated.

                                         