                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 15, 2000   Decided March 16, 2001 

                           No. 99-3075

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                          Joann McCoy, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00082-01)

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Suzanne Grealy Curt, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for Appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher and Elizabeth Tros-
man, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  On September 22, 1998, defendant 
Joann McCoy was found guilty of making a false statement 
for the purpose of influencing a federally insured bank, 
making a false statement for the purpose of influencing the 
Small Business Administration (SBA), and committing perju-
ry at a 1995 bankruptcy proceeding.  In this appeal, McCoy 
argues that her perjury conviction was supported by insuffi-
cient evidence and that the district court committed five 
errors in calculating her sentence under the United States 
Sentencing Guidelines (U.S.S.G.).  We affirm McCoy's perju-
ry conviction and four of the five challenged sentencing 
calculations.  We remand the case to the district court for 
further proceedings with respect to the fifth sentencing calcu-
lation.

                                I

     In 1993, McCoy formed McCoy Waste Industries and Man-
ufacturing Co. (MWI), of which she became president and 
51% owner.  The company was in the business of recycling 
waste paper into fuel pellets, and earned revenues from both 
hauling paper ("tipping fees") and selling pellets.  On Sep-
tember 3, 1993, McCoy--on behalf of MWI--applied for a 
$296,014 loan from Adams National Bank to finance the 
purchase of a $385,000 pellet-making machine from Lundell 
Manufacturing Co.  Adams National eventually approved the 
loan, and the SBA agreed to guarantee 80% of the principal.  
The collateral for the loan included a lien on MWI's furniture, 
fixtures, machinery, and equipment;  a guarantee from MWI;  
and guarantees from McCoy and four of her close relatives.

     As part of her loan application, McCoy submitted three 
documents to Adams National, which were forwarded to the 
SBA for approval:  a personal financial statement declaring 
that McCoy and her husband had $1,482,000 in assets and 
$12,000 in liabilities, a resume indicating that McCoy had 
received a degree from Northern Virginia Community Col-
lege, and a financial projection that MWI would earn tipping 

fees for hauling 100 tons of waste paper per day.  McCoy 
subsequently admitted, at her criminal trial, that the personal 
financial statement failed to disclose her liability for a 
$100,000 loan from Central Fidelity Bank and that she had 
not received a degree from Northern Virginia Community 
College.

     On October 4, 1993, an Adams National loan officer re-
quested additional evidence to support MWI's tipping fees 
projection.  In response, McCoy requested and received a 
faxed letter from Ed Warmus, a plant manager for 
Browning-Ferris Industries Recyclery.  McCoy had listed 
Browning-Ferris on the loan application as one of MWI's 
primary suppliers of waste paper.  Warmus' letter stated that 
Browning-Ferris anticipated supplying MWI with "at least 16 
tons" of paper per day.  McCoy directed her secretary, Kim 
Turner, to "white-out" the term "16 tons" each time it ap-
peared in the letter, and to replace it with the term "100 
tons."  She then instructed Turner to fax the altered letter to 
Adams National.  When Adams National expressed concern 
because the letter's tonnage figures were handwritten, McCoy 
directed Turner to type them in, mark the initials "EW" (for 
"Ed Warmus") beside each appearance of "100 tons," and 
refax the letter to Adams National.  At trial, Warmus testi-
fied that he had not authorized the change to 100 tons.1

     Several days prior to the November 1993 loan closing, 
Warmus informed McCoy that Browning-Ferris had decided 
to open its own landfill and would no longer provide waste 
paper to MWI.  At the closing, however, McCoy certified that 
there had been "no substantial adverse change in financial 
condition, organization, operations, or fixed assets" since she 
filed the loan application.  McCoy did not disclose Browning-
Ferris' decision to cease supplying paper to MWI.

     MWI failed to make the first payment on the loan.  There-
after, Adams National placed the loan in default, and, togeth-
er with two other creditors, filed an involuntary bankruptcy 

__________
     1 The government also introduced MWI invoices showing that 
Browning-Ferris had been paying MWI to haul a daily average of 
only 16 tons.

petition against MWI.  MWI countered by suing Adams 
National and Lundell in bankruptcy court for breach of 
contract, alleging misconduct in the sale and financing of the 
pellet-making machine.  During the 1995 bankruptcy pro-
ceeding, Adams National argued that McCoy had fraudulent-
ly induced it to provide the loan by altering the Warmus 
letter.  In reply, McCoy testified that she had telephoned 
Warmus, and that he had authorized her to change the 
estimate from 16 to 100 tons, with the understanding that 100 
tons was the "maximum amount" his facility could provide.

     On March 13, 1998, a grand jury returned a ten-count 
indictment against McCoy.  Four counts charged McCoy with 
making false statements for the purpose of influencing Adams 
National, in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 1014.  These counts 
alleged that:  (i) the personal financial statement submitted 
with the loan application failed to list McCoy's $100,000 loan 
from Central Fidelity Bank; (ii) the resume submitted with 
the application falsely represented that McCoy had a degree 
from Northern Virginia Community College; (iii) the Warmus 
letter was falsely altered to indicate that Browning-Ferris 
would supply 100 tons of paper instead of 16; and (iv) McCoy 
failed to reveal at the closing that Browning-Ferris would not 
continue to provide waste paper to MWI.  Four additional 
counts charged McCoy with making these same false state-
ments to the SBA, in violation of 15 U.S.C. s 645.  The 
indictment's final two counts alleged that McCoy committed 
perjury at the 1995 bankruptcy proceeding, in violation of 15 
U.S.C. s 1623, by testifying, inter alia, that Warmus had 
authorized her to change his supply estimate from 16 tons to 
100.

     On June 29, 1998, the district court ordered that the 
indictment's non-perjury counts be consolidated to avoid po-
tential prejudice to the defendant.  Thereafter, the govern-
ment obtained a superseding indictment with four counts:  the 
first alleged that McCoy made four false statements to 
Adams National;  the second alleged that she made four false 
statements to the SBA;  and the third and fourth repeated 
the original perjury counts.  In July of 1998, the case was 
transferred to a second district judge, who further pared the 

indictment by ordering the government to elect one of the 
two perjury counts.2

     On September 22, 1998, the jury returned a guilty verdict 
on each of the three remaining counts.  Using a special 
verdict form for Counts One and Two, the jury determined 
that McCoy had knowingly, and for the purpose of influencing 
Adams National and the SBA:  (i) failed to disclose her 
financial liability for the Central Fidelity loan; (ii) caused a 
false letter to be submitted stating that Browning-Ferris 
would provide 100 tons of waste paper per day; and (iii) failed 
to reveal that Browning-Ferris would no longer be supplying 
any waste paper to MWI.  Due to an illness of the second 
judge, the case was transferred to a third district judge for 
sentencing.  Following an evidentiary hearing, the court im-
posed concurrent prison terms of 24 months on Count Two 
and 37 months on each of Counts One and Three.  In the 
"Statement of Reasons" supporting this sentence, the court 
"adopt[ed] the factual findings and guideline application in the 
presentence report."  Judgment at 6.

                                II

     McCoy asserts that the evidence supporting her conviction 
for committing perjury at the 1995 bankruptcy proceeding 
was insufficient because the transcript of that perjurious 
testimony was not admitted into evidence.  Because McCoy 
failed to raise this objection before the district court, despite 
raising other specific objections to the sufficiency of the 
evidence, we review this claim for plain error only.  Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 52(b);  United States v. Spinner, 152 F.3d 950, 955 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  The standard of review is not particularly 
important in this case, however, because the record shows 
that the disputed transcript was admitted into evidence.  
Hence, there was no error, plain or otherwise.

__________
     2 At the close of the government's evidence, the court dismissed, 
as immaterial, the allegations concerning McCoy's resume in the 
indictment's first two counts.

     The core of McCoy's argument is that the court reporter's 
transcript of her 1998 criminal trial does not record the 
admission of the 1995 bankruptcy transcript.  There is, how-
ever, a plethora of other evidence that the transcript was 
admitted.  First, the court clerk's exhibit list plainly states 
that the bankruptcy transcript, introduced as Exhibit 30, was 
"received into evidence" on September 17, 1998.3  Second, the 
district court indicated its own understanding that it had 
admitted the bankruptcy transcript.  Rejecting a government 
request to perform a demonstrative reading of the transcript, 
the court ruled such a reading unnecessary because the 
jurors "can read it just like they read all the other exhibits."  
9/17/98 Tr. at 66.4  Finally, McCoy's trial counsel made clear, 
as the court reporter's transcript shows, that she understood 
that the bankruptcy transcript had been admitted.  Opposing 
the government's (renewed) attempt to have a tape of the 
bankruptcy testimony entered into evidence and played to the 
jury, McCoy's counsel said:  "We have got the transcript.  
That is already in the record....  [T]he tape adds nothing, 
and it is just cumulative...."  9/18/98 Tr. at 3.  See United 
States v. Barrett, 111 F.3d 947, 951 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (holding 
exhibits "deemed admitted" into evidence where they "were 
treated below, without objection, as if they were admitted").5

__________
     3 See Fed. R. App. P. 10(a) (providing that the record on appeal 
includes all "original papers and exhibits filed in the district court");  
cf. Toucet v. Maritime Overseas Corp., 991 F.2d 5, 8 & n.1 (1st Cir. 
1993) (including district court clerk's minutes as part of appellate 
record).

     4 Earlier, the court had also rejected government requests to 
have a tape recording of McCoy's 1995 testimony admitted into 
evidence and played to the jury, declaring that there was no "need 
for playing the tape.  You can put in the transcript.  If you offer 
the transcript I will admit it into evidence, but that is all I am going 
to do."  9/17/98 Tr. at 65.  In the same colloquy, the prosecutor 
moved the transcript into evidence.  Id. at 64.

     5 In her closing argument, the prosecutor likewise indicated her 
understanding that the transcript had been admitted, quoting it 
repeatedly and advising the jury that:  "you'll have this transcript, 
Government Exhibit No. 30, which shows the entire portion of the 

     Because we conclude that the bankruptcy transcript was 
admitted into evidence, we find no ground for McCoy's chal-
lenge to her perjury conviction.

                               III

     McCoy also disputes the district court's application of five 
provisions of the Sentencing Guidelines, which collectively 
increased her offense level from 6 to 21, thereby substantially 
increasing her range of imprisonment.  McCoy asserts that 
the court erroneously imposed:  (i) an eight-level increase 
based on a loss calculation of $200,000 to $350,000, pursuant 
to U.S.S.G. s 2F1.1(b)(1);  (ii) a two-level increase for "more 
than minimal planning," pursuant to s 2F1.1(b)(2);  (iii) a two-
level increase because McCoy "willfully obstructed or imped-
ed ... the administration of justice," pursuant to s 3C1.1;  
(iv) a one-level increase because McCoy's perjury conviction 
was not grouped with her other two convictions, pursuant to 
s 3D1.2;  and (v) a two-level increase for McCoy's role as an 
"organizer, leader, manager, or supervisor," pursuant to 
s 3B1.1(c).

     In reviewing these sentencing challenges, we "give due 
regard to the opportunity of the district court to judge the 
credibility of the witnesses," "accept the findings of fact of the 
district court unless they are clearly erroneous," and "give 
due deference to the district court's application of the guide-
lines to the facts."  18 U.S.C. s 3742(e);  United States v. 
Breedlove, 204 F.3d 267, 272 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  Issues of law 
are reviewed de novo.  United States v. Drew, 200 F.3d 871, 
876 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  United States v. Kim, 23 F.3d 513, 517 
(D.C. Cir. 1994).

__________
testimony .... and I've also made copies for each of you so you 
won't have to share one piece of paper here."  9/21/98 Tr. at 6A-25.  
In rebuttal, the prosecutor asked the jurors to "[p]lease read the 
transcript excerpts that have been introduced into evidence."  Id. at 
6A-56.  Neither McCoy's trial counsel nor the district court voiced 
any objection to these statements or to the jurors' receipt of 

                                A

     McCoy's first challenge is to the application of Guideline 
s 2F1.1(b)(1), which prescribes an eight-level increase for 
conduct that caused a loss of $200,000 to $350,000.  Applica-
tion Note 8(b) to the guideline explains that "[i]n fraudulent 
loan application cases .... the loss is the amount of the loan 
not repaid ... reduced by the amount the lending institution 
has recovered (or can expect to recover) from any assets 
pledged to secure the loan."  U.S.S.G. s 2F1.1, comment., 
n.8(b).  Here, it is undisputed that the amount of the unre-
paid loan to MWI was $296,014.00, and that the SBA ulti-
mately recovered a total of $24,113.22 by selling the pellet-
making machine back to its manufacturer at a liquidation 
sale.6  Accordingly, the court calculated the loss as 
$271,900.78 and increased McCoy's offense level by eight.

     McCoy objects that this dollar figure understates "what the 
SBA could reasonably have expected to recover."  Appellant's 
Br. at 44.  Her principal argument is that the SBA should 
have been able to obtain more for the pellet-making machine, 
since the machine had been purchased for $385,000 only two 
years before.  But whatever the SBA "should" have been able 
to recover, the fact remains that, in the words of the applica-
tion note, "the amount the lending institution has recovered" 
is only $24,113.22.  (Emphasis added).  Moreover, since the 
machine has been sold, the SBA "can expect to recover" 
nothing more.  Hence, under the application note, no greater 
offset is indicated.

     Nor is there any evidence that the liquidation sale was a 
sham, or that the SBA artificially depressed the value of the 
recovery.  To the contrary, all circumstances indicate that the 
matter was handled as an arms-length, business transaction:  
The SBA engaged an independent appraisal company, which 
valued the machine at between $37,000 and $56,000;  a profes-
__________
individual copies of the transcript.  Id.;  see Barrett, 111 F.3d at 
951.

     6 MWI's only other asset of value was a forklift, which was 
appraised at $1,200 and sold to MWI's landlord for $1,000 to offset 
storage costs.  No buyer could be found for MWI's residual office 
furniture and equipment, which were abandoned because their  
appraised worth was below their removal and storage costs.

sional auction company handled the sale;  and the machine 
was sold to the highest of three bidders--which turned out to 
be the original manufacturer--for a price of $45,000.  After 
deducting auctioneer's expenses and pre-sale storage costs, 
the SBA realized a net of $24,113.22.  Although that amount 
is significantly less than MWI originally paid for the machine, 
the government explains the reduction in value as caused by 
market conditions and deterioration of the machine while at 
MWI.  In light of the arms-length nature of the transaction, 
the district court's loss calculation cannot be described as 
clearly erroneous.  Accordingly, McCoy's offense level was 
properly increased by eight levels pursuant to U.S.S.G. 
s 2F1.1(b)(1).7

                                B

     McCoy's second challenge is to the two-point increase she 
received under Guideline s 2F1.1(b)(2) for "more than mini-
mal planning."  The Guidelines define that phrase as follows:

     "More than minimal planning" means more planning 
     than is typical for commission of the offense in a simple 
     form.  "More than minimal planning" also exists if signif-
     icant affirmative steps were taken to conceal the of-
     fense....
     
     "More than minimal planning" is deemed present in any 
     case involving repeated acts over a period of time, unless 
     it is clear that each instance was purely opportune.  
     Consequently, this adjustment will apply especially often 
     in property offenses.
     
U.S.S.G. s 1B1.1, comment., n.1(f), incorporated by reference 
in s 2F1.1(b)(2), comment., n.2.  As this definition makes 
clear, more than minimal planning may be found in any of the 

__________
     7 McCoy also contends that the SBA unjustifiably delayed in 
attempting to recover funds from the loan's guarantors.  The only 
guarantors other than MWI and McCoy, however, were McCoy's 
relatives, and she has offered no evidence that there was any 
realistic prospect of a recovery from them that would have material-
ly affected her guidelines calculation.

following three circumstances:  (i) the offense entailed more 
planning than is typical for commission of the offense in a 
simple form;  (ii) significant affirmative steps were taken to 
conceal the offense;  or (iii) the offense involved repeated, not 
purely opportune acts over a period of time.8

     McCoy's presentence report ("PSR"), whose findings the 
district court adopted, recommended a more than minimal 
planning enhancement based on the third prong of the guide-
line's framework--repeated acts that were not purely oppor-
tune.  PSR p 43.9  We have previously held that satisfaction 
of the repeated acts criterion requires at least three acts over 
a period of time.  Kim, 23 F.3d at 515.  Once three acts have 
been identified, more than minimal planning is "deemed" 
present, "unless it is clear that each instance was purely 
opportune."  U.S.S.G. s 1B1.1, comment., n.1(f), incorporated 
by reference in s 2F1.1(b)(2), comment., n.2.10

     Every circuit that has addressed the question, including 
our own, has defined "purely opportune" acts as those under-
taken on the spur of the moment, in response to a sudden, 

__________
     8 See United States v. Lutz, 154 F.3d 581, 590 (6th Cir. 1998);  
United States v. Viemont, 91 F.3d 946, 952 (7th Cir. 1996);  United 
States v. Clements, 73 F.3d 1330, 1340-41 (5th Cir. 1996);  United 
States v. Bridges, 50 F.3d 789, 791 (10th Cir. 1994);  United States 
v. Mullins, 996 F.2d 1170, 1171 (11th Cir. 1993);  United States v. 
Rust, 976 F.2d 55, 57 (1st Cir. 1992).

     9 See generally United States v. Valdez-Torres, 108 F.3d 385, 
390 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (holding that "by adopting the presentence 
report, the district court made the requisite finding" under the 
Guidelines);  United States v. Strothers, 77 F.3d 1389, 1394 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996) ("The district court adopted the [presentence] report's 
findings and we may review them only for clear error.").

     10 The literal language of the application note states that an 
increase is appropriate unless each of the three acts was purely 
opportune--i.e., as long as one of the three was not purely oppor-
tune, the increase is appropriate.  As we conclude that none of 
McCoy's three acts was purely opportune, we need not decide 
whether this literal reading is correct.  See United States v. Macia-
ga, 965 F.2d 404, 407 (7th Cir. 1992) (suggesting that the enhance-
ment requires that none of the acts be purely opportune).

fortuitous opportunity of which the defendant took advantage 
without deliberation.11  Moreover, because s 1B1.1's third 
prong is independent of its first, the guideline contemplates 
that an act may not entail more planning than is typical of the 
offense in its simple form, and yet still warrant enhancement 
if it is part of a series of repeated acts that are not purely 
opportune.  Defendant conceded as much at oral argument.  
See also United States v. Monaco, 23 F.3d 793, 797-98 (3d 
Cir. 1994) (requiring enhanced sentence, although defendant's 
submission of repeated false labor sheets constituted only "a 
simple repetition of a simple plan" (emphasis omitted));  Unit-
ed States v. Rust, 976 F.2d 55, 57 (1st Cir. 1992) (requiring 
enhanced sentence for repeated acts, even assuming defen-
dant "engaged in no more planning than would be typical for 
the crime of mail fraud, which, by its very nature, involves 
planning");  see generally Kim, 23 F.3d at 515 (noting two 
"guideline paradigms of more than minimal planning--re-
peated acts and more planning than is typical for the simple 
form of the crime").

     Reviewing the sentencing court's factual findings for clear 
error, and giving due deference to its application of the 
Guidelines to the facts, we find the third prong of the more 
than minimal planning enhancement satisfied here.  See Kim, 
23 F.3d at 517 (holding that appellate court should afford due 
deference to district court determination that defendant en-
gaged in more than minimal planning).12  Although the pre-

__________
     11 E.g., Lutz, 154 F.3d at 590 ("There is no indication that any of 
these actions were the result of spur of the moment conduct such as 
would warrant a finding that the conduct was purely opportune.");  
United States v. Broumas, 69 F.3d 1178, 1183 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(affirming enhancement because acts were not prompted by "fortui-
tous circumstances");  United States v. Monaco, 23 F.3d 793, 797 
(3d Cir. 1994) ("[P]urely opportune ... has been appropriately 
defined as spur of the moment conduct, intended to take advantage 
of a sudden opportunity." (internal quotation omitted));  Rust, 976 
F.2d at 57 (same).

     12 Because we find the enhancement justified by the "repeated 
acts" rationale, we do not consider whether McCoy's sentence could 
also have been properly enhanced under either of the first two 

sentence report did not specifically indicate which of McCoy's 
acts it relied upon to justify the enhancement, it described at 
least three that clearly qualify.13  The first is McCoy's sub-
mission of the September 1993 loan application, which falsely 
understated her liabilities by omitting her $100,000 liability to 
Central Fidelity Bank.  The second is the submission of the 
October 1993 Warmus letter, which McCoy altered to state 
falsely that Browning-Ferris would provide MWI with 100 
tons of paper per day.  The third is McCoy's November 1993 
certification, at the closing on the Adams National loan, 
stating that there had been no substantial adverse change 
since the original application and failing to disclose that 
Browning-Ferris had decided to stop supplying MWI with 
waste paper.

     McCoy does not dispute that these three acts were "part of 
the same course of conduct or common scheme or plan as the 
offense of conviction," thus constituting part of the "relevant 
conduct" used in determining her appropriate guideline 
range.  U.S.S.G. s 1B1.3(a)(2).  Nor does she contest that 
these acts occurred "over a period of time," namely three 
months.  U.S.S.G. s 1B1.1, comment., n.1(f), incorporated by 
reference in s 2F1.1(b)(2), comment., n.2.  Accordingly, the 
two-point increase for more than minimal planning is proper 
unless "it is clear that each [act] was purely opportune."  Id. 
(emphasis added).  Here, that is not at all clear;  to the 
contrary, each act appears to have been a calculated step in 
McCoy's fraudulent pursuit of the Adams National loan.

     McCoy concedes that her first act, submitting a false 
financial statement with her initial loan application, was not 
purely opportune.  Reply Br. at 2.  McCoy initiated the 

__________
prongs--i.e., because her conduct entailed more planning than is 
typical for commission of the offense in a simple form, or because 
significant affirmative steps were taken to conceal the offense.

     13 The fact that not all three of these acts were mentioned by 
the probation officer at the sentencing hearing is not determinative, 
because the district court expressly adopted all of the PSR's factual 
findings and guideline applications without limitation.  See United 
States v. Bridges, 175 F.3d 1062, 1069 n.8 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

application and had ample time to contemplate the financial 
data she included therein.  See United States v. Lutz, 154 
F.3d 581, 590 (6th Cir. 1998) (holding that the submission of 
"false information with regard to loan applications" was not 
the "result of spur of the moment conduct").  Nor was 
McCoy's second act, submitting the altered Warmus letter, a 
spur-of-the-moment event.  See Breedlove, 204 F.3d at 272-73 
(affirming finding that presentation of altered check for de-
posit was not purely opportune).  Indeed, altering the letter 
required McCoy to take a series of component steps, each 
evincing deliberation and calculation:  McCoy sought the let-
ter from Warmus in order to satisfy Adams National's doubts 
concerning the tipping fees projection in her loan application;  
when she received a figure far below that which she had 
submitted to Adams National, McCoy instructed her secre-
tary to white-out the references to 16 tons, replace them with 
handwritten "100 tons," and fax the altered letter to the bank;  
when Adams National expressed concern that the tonnage 
figures were handwritten, McCoy directed her secretary to 
type them in, and, in order to create an aura of authenticity, 
further directed her secretary to inscribe Ed Warmus' initials 
next to the tonnage terms;  she then directed that the letter 
be refaxed to Adams National.  Finally, we do not regard 
McCoy's third act, her false certification at the loan closing, 
as either spur of the moment or fortuitous:  Adams National 
had made clear that MWI's tipping fees projection was criti-
cal, and Warmus had advised McCoy of Browning-Ferris' 
stunning change of plans, which invalidated that projection, 
several days before the closing--again giving her ample 
opportunity for contemplation.

     Accordingly, because McCoy's relevant conduct included 
repeated acts, and because it is not "clear that each instance 
was purely opportune," we conclude that the district court 
properly increased McCoy's offense level under Guideline 
s 2F1.1(b)(2).

                                C

     McCoy also contends that the district court incorrectly 
imposed a two-point increase in offense level because she 

"willfully obstructed ... or attempted to obstruct ... the 
administration of justice" during the course of her prosecu-
tion.  U.S.S.G. s 3C1.1.  The presentence report recom-
mended this increase based on a finding that McCoy had 
committed perjury during her criminal trial by testifying, 
inter alia, that Warmus authorized her to alter his letter's 
tonnage estimates.

     McCoy correctly notes that at the time she committed her 
offenses, this circuit required "clear and convincing" evidence 
for s 3C1.1 enhancements based on a defendant's alleged 
perjury at trial.14  She claims that it is not apparent whether 
the sentencing court used that standard.  And she argues 
that the court could not possibly have found clear and con-
vincing evidence that she lied at trial because there was 
conflicting testimony--most importantly, between her de-
scription of events and that of Warmus.  The sentencing 
judge was not in a position to resolve the alleged conflicts, 
McCoy argues, because that judge did not preside over the 
trial (a transfer having occurred due to the trial judge's 
illness) and hence did not personally observe the witnesses' 
demeanor.

     Defendant's arguments are rendered irrelevant by the trial 
jury's verdict, on Count Three of the indictment, that McCoy 
committed perjury at the 1995 bankruptcy proceeding when 
she testified that Warmus had given her permission to change 
the contents of his letter.  See Second Retyped Indictment 
pp 17-26 (App. 144-48).  McCoy's testimony to the same 
effect at her 1998 criminal trial was the principal ground for 
the presentence report's conclusion, adopted by the sentenc-

__________
     14 Compare United States v. Montague, 40 F.3d 1251, 1254 
(D.C. Cir. 1994) (requiring clear and convincing evidence), with 
United States v. Dozier, 162 F.3d 120, 124 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(noting that guideline amendment, which took effect on November 
1, 1997, now requires only proof by preponderance).  In light of our 
disposition, we need not consider the government's contention that 
the relevant time for determination of the appropriate standard of 
proof is the date of defendant's obstruction--here, her 1998 trial 
perjury--rather than the date of her indicted offenses--the last of 
which occurred in 1995.

ing judge, that McCoy had likewise committed perjury at that 
trial and therefore deserved the two-point enhancement for 
obstruction of justice.  Since the jury reached its conclusion 
based on a standard more stringent than "clear and convinc-
ing" evidence--i.e., evidence beyond a reasonable doubt--and 
since the district court was entitled to rely upon the jury's 
verdict at sentencing, the court's opportunity to observe the 
testimony is irrelevant and the defendant's complaint neces-
sarily fails.  See United States v. Montague, 40 F.3d 1251, 
1256 n.4 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (holding that s 3C1.1 enhancements 
are proper where juries have found "beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the defendant lied, and could not have convicted 
otherwise" (quoting United States v. Thompson, 962 F.2d 
1069, 1071 (D.C. Cir. 1992))).15

     At oral argument, McCoy conceded the force of this point, 
agreeing that if her testimony at the bankruptcy proceeding 

__________
     15 We do not, in any event, accept defendant's proposition that a 
court cannot resolve disputes over the credibility of witnesses 
without directly observing their demeanor.  To the contrary, de-
meanor is only one of many bases upon which factfinders may judge 
credibility.  See Carbo v. United States, 314 F.2d 718, 749 (9th Cir. 
1963) ("Credibility involves more than demeanor.  It apprehends 
the over-all evaluation of testimony in the light of its rationality or 
internal consistency and the manner in which it hangs together with 
other evidence.");  1 J. Strong, McCormick on Evidence s 33, at 
123-24 (5th ed. 1999) (noting that credibility may be attacked 
through, inter alia, prior inconsistent statements, proof of bias, 
evidence of character, capacity to observe, and proof of contrary 
facts);  see also Fed. R. Evid. 608, 609, 801(d)(1)(A).  Moreover, the 
Sentencing Reform Act states that courts of appeals "shall give due 
regard to the opportunity of the district court to judge credibility of 
the witnesses, and shall accept the findings of the district court 
unless they are clearly erroneous."  18 U.S.C. s 3742(e) (emphasis 
added).  Thus, the ultimate question is whether the district court's 
findings are clearly erroneous;  the kind of opportunity the court 
had to evaluate credibility is simply a factor we must take into 
account in making that determination.  In this case, although the 
sentencing judge did not preside at trial, she did have before her a 
transcript of the relevant witnesses' testimony, provided as an 
attachment to the government's sentencing memorandum.

had been the same as her testimony at the criminal trial, the 
jury's finding that she committed perjury at the former would 
establish that she did so at the latter as well.  McCoy argues, 
however, that her testimony was not the same in both pro-
ceedings, and hence that we cannot be certain whether the 
bankruptcy testimony that the jury found perjurious was the 
same as her testimony at the trial of the criminal case.16 

     Defendant did not make this argument below, thus limiting 
our review to plain error.  See Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b).17  
Indeed, at sentencing she took the opposite position:  McCoy 
told the court that she had made "precisely the same state-
ment" in both proceedings.  Def.'s Supp. Sentencing Mem. at 
5 (App. 211);  see also Sentencing Hr'g Tr. at 68 ("Ms. McCoy 
was convicted of false statements and she was convicted of 
perjury for the same testimony that she gave in her bank-
ruptcy proceeding." (statement of defense counsel)).  McCoy 
made this claim in support of a double jeopardy attack on the 
proposed perjury enhancement:  She argued that since she 
had been "convicted of perjury for statements that she made 
during a bankruptcy proceeding," and since she had made 
"precisely the same statement" during her criminal trial, "[t]o 
convict her of perjury and then to enhance her sentence on 
essentially the same conduct is unconstitutional [under] the 
Double Jeopardy Clause of the Constitution."  Def.'s Supp. 
Sentencing Mem. at 5 (App. 211).  Although defendant does 
not pursue her double jeopardy argument on appeal, she is 
nonetheless hoisted by her own petard.  Since McCoy told 
the sentencing judge that she was convicted of perjury for 
making "precisely the same statement" at the 1995 bankrupt-
cy proceeding as she made at her 1998 criminal trial, it was 
hardly plain error for the judge to conclude that she commit-
ted perjury at the latter, just as she had at the former.

__________
     16 Although we do not find McCoy's efforts to distinguish the 
two testimonies convincing, the discussion that follows makes it 
unnecessary to address the distinctions she claims.

     17 The government, by contrast, did seek to rely on the jury's 
finding of perjury.  Government's Mem. in Aid of Sentencing at 12-
13.

                                D

     Fourth, McCoy challenges the district court's failure to 
group her perjury conviction with her two false statement 
convictions.  See U.S.S.G. s 3D1.2.  That decision increased 
McCoy's offense level by one.  See U.S.S.G. s 3D1.4;  PSR 
pp 54-58.

     Guideline s 3D1.2 states:

     All counts involving substantially the same harm shall be 
     grouped together into a single Group.  Counts involve 
     substantially the same harm within the meaning of this 
     rule:
     
     ...
     
     (b) When counts involve the same victim and two or 
     more acts or transactions connected by a common crimi-
     nal objective or constituting part of a common scheme or 
     plan.
     
McCoy asserts that, under s 3D1.2(b), the court should have 
grouped her perjury count with the other two because all 
three crimes involved the "same victims"--namely, Adams 
National and the SBA.18  The government, on the other hand, 
contends that while Adams National and the SBA were the 
victims of the false statement counts, society at large was the 
victim of McCoy's perjury in the bankruptcy proceeding.  We 
believe the government has the better of the argument.

     The Guidelines state that the "victim" of an offense gener-
ally is the "one person who is directly and most seriously 
affected by the offense."  U.S.S.G. s 3D1.2, comment., n.2.  
There is no doubt that Adams National and the SBA were the 
victims of McCoy's false statements in connection with the 
__________
     18 At oral argument, the government appeared to accept 
McCoy's claim that Adams National and the SBA (rather than each 
individually) should together be deemed "the victim" of the false 
statements.  Moreover, neither party has addressed whether this 
case satisfies the second requirement of s 3D1.2(b), namely, that 
the counts also involve "two or more acts or transactions connected 
by a common criminal objective or constituting part of a common 
scheme or plan."  Accordingly, we do not address these issues here.

loan application, but there is no evidence that they were 
affected by McCoy's perjury in the 1995 bankruptcy proceed-
ing--much less that they were "directly and most seriously 
affected."  McCoy does not contend that either institution 
relied upon that false testimony.  Indeed, the SBA does not 
appear to have participated in the bankruptcy proceeding at 
all, while Adams National won every significant issue contest-
ed therein.  See McCoy's Waste Indus. & Mfg., Inc. v. Adams 
Nat'l Bank, Adv. No. 94-0096, slip op. at 1, 50-52 (Bankr. 
D.C. Oct. 5, 1995).  It is therefore difficult to discern how 
either entity could have been adversely affected by McCoy's 
perjury.  Cf. United States v. Norris, 217 F.3d 262, 272 (5th 
Cir. 2000) (holding that, for purposes of 18 U.S.C. s 3663, 
creditors in bankruptcy proceeding were not "victims" of 
perjury when they neither relied on the false testimony nor 
incurred any losses as a consequence thereof).

     The Guidelines further provide that "[f]or offenses in which 
there are no identifiable victims ... the 'victim' for purposes 
of subsections (a) and (b) is the societal interest that is 
harmed."  U.S.S.G. s 3D1.2, comment., n.2.  It is well-
recognized that the societal interest harmed by perjury is the 
integrity of the legal system.19  Since the perjury count 
therefore involved a different victim from the false statement 
counts, the one-level increase under s 3D1.2(b) was warrant-
ed in this case.  Cf. United States v. Napoli, 179 F.3d 1, 7-8 
(2d Cir. 1999) (declaring that, under s 3D1.2(b), victims of 
fraud are those who lose money thereby, while victim of 
money laundering is society as a whole).

__________
     19 See, e.g., United States v. Kiszewski, 877 F.2d 210, 214 (2d 
Cir. 1989) ("[P]erjury strikes at the heart of the integrity of the 
judicial system....");  cf. Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford- 
Empire Co., 322 U.S. 238, 246 (1944) ("[T]ampering with the 
administration of justice involves far more than an injury to a single 
litigant.  It is a wrong against the institutions set up to protect and 
safeguard the public, institutions in which fraud cannot complacent-
ly be tolerated consistently with the good order of society."), 
overruled on other grounds by Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 
429 U.S. 17, 18 & n.2 (1976).

                                E

     Finally, McCoy argues that the district court wrongly 
imposed a two-level enhancement based on her role as "an 
organizer, leader, manager, or supervisor" of a criminal activ-
ity.  U.S.S.G. s 3B1.1(c).  "To qualify for an adjustment 
under this section, the defendant must have been the organiz-
er, leader, manager, or supervisor of one or more other 
participants."  Id., comment., n.2 (emphasis added).

     The presentence report explained its recommendation of 
the enhancement as follows:

     The defendant was the President of McCoy's Waste.  As 
     such, she held a leadership and managerial role over the 
     employees of McCoy's Waste, who were unwitting par-
     ticipants in the fraud.  Specifically, the defendant direct-
     ed the activities of Kim Turner, secretary at McCoy's 
     Waste.  Pursuant to U.S.S.G. s 3B1.1(c), two levels are 
     added.
     
PSR p 45 (emphasis added).  As McCoy correctly notes, 
however, supervision of an unwitting individual cannot justify 
an enhancement under U.S.S.G. s 3B1.1(c).  The guideline 
commentary requires supervision of one or more "partici-
pants," and a "participant" is defined as a person who, 
although not necessarily convicted, "is criminally responsible 
for the commission of the offense."  U.S.S.G. s 3B1.1, com-
ment., n.1.  Because an individual cannot be criminally re-
sponsible for making a false statement unless she is witting, 
see 18 U.S.C. s 1014 (requiring that false statement be made 
"knowingly"), the fact that McCoy's employees were unwit-
ting would appear to render this enhancement inapplicable.  
See United States v. Bapack, 129 F.3d 1320, 1325 (D.C. Cir. 
1997) (holding that a person is "criminally responsible" under 
s 3B1.1 only if "he commit[s] all of the elements of a statuto-
ry crime with the requisite mens rea" (internal quotations 
omitted) (emphasis added)).

     The government does not dispute this reading of the guide-
line, suggesting instead that the word "unwitting" was merely 
a typographical error in the presentence report, and that the 

probation officer who wrote it must have intended to indicate 
that Turner was an "unwilling" participant.  As the govern-
ment points out, the probation officer twice rejected McCoy's 
argument that Turner was not a criminally responsible partic-
ipant, writing that "Turner was criminally responsible for the 
offense as she altered the letter, at the instruction of the 
defendant."  PSR Addendum at 29;  see Sentencing Hr'g Tr. 
at 82.  On the other hand, as McCoy correctly notes, altering 
the letter "at the instruction of the defendant" is still not the 
same as being "witting," unless Turner knew that Warmus 
had not authorized the alteration.  In rebuttal, the govern-
ment contends that there was sufficient evidence from which 
the sentencing court could have found Turner criminally 
responsible under a correct legal standard, noting that Tur-
ner testified that she "knew" that altering the letter "was 
wrong to do."  9/17/98 Tr. at 12.

     Whatever the sentencing court intended to find or could 
have found, on the record before us we cannot conclude with 
confidence that it employed the correct legal standard in 
applying the s 3B1.1(c) enhancement.  Accordingly, the en-
hancement cannot stand, and we remand the case for resen-
tencing with instructions to resolve the ambiguities in the 
court's application of U.S.S.G. s 3B1.1.  See 18 U.S.C. 
s 3742(f)(1) (requiring remand where sentence is imposed in 
violation of law or as result of incorrect guideline application);  
Dozier, 162 F.3d at 128 (noting that remand is appropriate 
where reasonable likelihood exists that trial court based 
decision on impermissible factor and where issue cannot be 
resolved without more complete statement of court's reason-
ing);  see also United States v. Saro, 24 F.3d 283, 288-89 
(D.C. Cir. 1994).

                                IV

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm McCoy's conviction of 
perjury, reject four of her five sentencing challenges, and 
remand for further proceedings with respect to the fifth.

                                               