                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 6, 2001   Decided October 26, 2001 

                           No. 00-1387

                Citizens Against Rails-To-Trails, 
             an unincorporated association, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

   Surface Transportation Board and United States of America, 
                           Respondents

             Union Pacific Railroad Company, et al., 
                           Intervenors

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                   Surface Transportation Board

     James R. Baarda argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
him on the briefs was Nels J. Ackerson.

     Evelyn G. Kitay, Attorney, Surface Transportation Board, 
argued the cause for respondents.  With her on the brief 

were Ellen D. Hanson, Deputy General Counsel, and David 
J. Lazerwitz, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Curt A. Fransen, Deputy Attorney General, State of Idaho, 
and Howard A. Funke argued the cause for intervenors.  
With them on the joint brief were Richard A. Allen, Andrea 
Ferster, Allan G. Lance, Attorney General, State of Idaho, 
Clive J. Strong, Division Chief, J. Michael Hemmer, Carolyn 
F. Corwin, James V. Dolan and Lawrence E. Wzorek.  
Charles H. Montange entered an appearance.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  A coalition of Idaho land owners 
denominated Citizens Against Rails-to-Trails ("CART") peti-
tion for review of the decision of the Surface Transportation 
Board in Union Pacific Railroad Company--Abandon-
ment--Wallace Branch, ID, STB Docket No. AB-33 (June 
26, 2000).  In that decision the Board authorized Union 
Pacific to salvage 71.5 miles of its Wallace Branch rail line in 
Idaho, subject to four environmental conditions, and also 
authorized the right-of-way to be used as a trail pursuant to 
the National Trails System Act, 16 U.S.C. s 1247(d) (2000) 
("Trails Act").  CART challenges only the authorization of 
interim trail use.1  It contends that the Board was required 
to assess the environmental impacts of trail use and erred in 
not disallowing trail use because the right-of-way is contami-
nated.  The Board determined that the National Environ-
mental Policy Act ("NEPA"), 42 U.S.C. ss 4321-4343 (1982), 
does not apply to the Trails Act, and that the Trails Act does 
not otherwise require an environmental assessment prior to 
issuance of a certificate for interim trail use.  Because CART 
fails to show that these determinations were contrary to law 
or unreasonable, we deny the petition.

__________
     1  Because CART is challenging only the Board's issuance of a 
certificate of interim trail use, the court, for reasons discussed 
below, has no occasion to address CART's contentions regarding 
the environmental conditions attached to the Board's authorization 
of abandonment of the Wallace Line.

                                I.

     This case is before the court following the Surface Trans-
portation Board's decision on remand from this court in State 
of Idaho By and Through Idaho Pub. Utilities Comm'n v. 
I.C.C., 35 F.3d 585, 599 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  In that case, this 
court affirmed the Interstate Commerce Commission's deci-
sion to permit immediate discontinuance of rail operations on 
the Wallace Branch rail line, but remanded the Commission's 
conditional authorization of salvage.  Id. at 599.  After fur-
ther proceedings, the Surface Transportation Board, as suc-
cessor to the Commission,2 through its Section of Environ-
mental Analysis, issued for public review and comment a 
draft supplemental environmental assessment.  Upon review 
of the Section's final assessment, the Board concluded that if 
salvage is conducted according to the plans worked out by the 
railroad and other federal agencies, and if four new environ-
mental mitigation conditions were implemented, then the 
railroad's salvage proposal would not have significant adverse 
environmental impacts.

     The Board also issued a certificate of interim trail use 
("CITU") permitting interim trail use and rail banking of the 
right-of-way because the State of Idaho and the Coeur d'Al-
ene Tribe had submitted the requisite statement of willing-
ness to assume full responsibility for the property and the 
railroad had indicated its willingness to negotiate with them.  
The Board rejected CART's argument that the issuance of a 
Trails Act authorization required the preparation of environ-
mental documentation under NEPA.  The Board took the 
position that questions relating to how and whether the right-
of-way should be used as a trail were not questions for the 
Board to decide. Viewing its role under the Trails Act as 
ministerial, the Board concluded that issuance of a CITU is 
not a federal action under NEPA.  The Board further ob-
served that the environmental implications of trail use on the 
right-of-way had been thoroughly addressed in the detailed 

__________
     2  See I.C.C. Termination Act of 1995, Pub. L. No. 104-88, 109 
Stat. 803 (1995).  Hereinafter, we generally refer to the Surface 
Transportation Board ("the Board").

studies performed in connection with civil proceedings that 
led to a consent decree in 1999.3

                               II.

     CART contends that the Trails Act requires the Board to 
implement that Act in a manner to effect its public recreation-
al purposes.4  Consequently, in CART's view, the Board's 

__________
     3  In 1991, the Coeur d'Alene Tribe sued Union Pacific pursuant 
to s 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compen-
sation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. s 9607 (1995) ("CERCLA"), for 
damages as a result of injuries to natural resources in areas that 
include the property at issue in the instant case.  A final Consent 
Decree, lodged at the end of 1999, was approved the following 
summer.  See United States & State of Idaho v. Union Pacific, No. 
CV 99-0606-N-EJL, and Coeur d'Alene Tribe v. Union Pacific, No. 
CV 91-0342-N-EJL (D. Idaho Aug. 25, 2000).  The Consent Decree 
obligates Union Pacific to remediate all environmental damage 
under oversight by the United States, the State of Idaho, and the 
Coeur d'Alene Tribe.  Union Pacific also remains liable for cleanup 
if new information arises indicating that the response actions will 
not protect human health and the environment.  Finally, Union 
Pacific agreed to be responsible into perpetuity for the operation 
and maintenance of the various barriers that will be used in 
implementing the response actions.  Id.

     4  CART states in its brief that its members own land that 
adjoins the railroad right-of-way and that some members also own 
fee simple title to land over which the right of way runs.  See 
Petitioners' Main Brief at 4.  This claim is unchallenged by the 
Board.  The Tribe, as intervenor, states in its brief that the rail line 
runs through the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation for 14 miles 
and through the Tribe's "ceded area" for the remainder of its full 
71.5 mile length, and thus the Tribe is a reversionary interest 
holder of the right of way.  See Intervenor's Brief at 5 citing Idaho 
v. U.S., 121 S. Ct. 2135 (June 18, 2001).  As the State of Idaho 
explained at oral argument, "ceded area" refers to land the Tribe 
originally held but ceded to the United States during initial western 
expansion through various treaties.  Because the land of CART's 
members will be directly affected by the conversion of the right-of-
way to a trail, CART has a sufficient stake in the outcome of the 
instant case to give it Article III standing.  See State of Idaho By 

refusal to consider any environmental, contamination, or hu-
man hazard facts relating to the implementation and conse-
quences of trail use, was contrary to NEPA requirements and 
was arbitrary and capricious.  Because, CART continues, the 
requirements and policies of the Trails Act mandate that a 
CITU permit a recreational trail only if the purposes of the 
Trails Act, set forth at 16 U.S.C. s 1241 (2000), are satisfied, 
the CITU should be revoked, and the rail line declared 
abandoned, in view of record evidence that the contamination 
in the right-of-way is a human health hazard.  Essentially, 
then, the court must review the Board's determinations that 
(1) NEPA is inapplicable to CITU issuance under the Trails 
Act, and (2) the Trails Act itself does not require an environ-
mental assessment before issuance of the CITU.

     The Trails Act, as amended by the National Trails System 
Act Amendments of 1983, Pub. L. 98-11, 97 Stat. 42, "is the 
culmination of congressional efforts to preserve shrinking rail 
trackage by converting unused rights-of-way to recreational 
trails."  Preseault v. I.C.C., 494 U.S. 1, 5 (1990).  Under the 
Trails Act, the Board must "preserve established railroad 
rights-of-way for future reactivation of rail service" by pro-
hibiting abandonment where, if the railroad is willing to enter 
into an agreement for trail use, a trail sponsor offers to 
assume responsibility for management, payment of taxes, and 
legal liability for the right-of-way and agrees to return the 
right-of-way should there ever be a proposal to reactivate the 
line for rail service.  See 16 U.S.C. s 1247(d) (2000).  If the 
parties reach agreement, the land may be transferred to the 
trail operator for interim trail use, subject to Board-imposed 
terms and conditions;  if no agreement is reached, the rail-
road may abandon the line entirely and liquidate its interests.  
See Preseault, 494 U.S. at 7.  By deeming interim trail use to 
be like discontinuance rather than abandonment, Congress 
sought to prevent property interests from reverting to the 
landowners under state law.  See id. at 8.

__________
and Through Idaho Pub. Utilities Comm'n v. I.C.C., 35 F.3d 585, 
590 (D.C. Cir. 1994);  Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 
589 (1992).

     The provisions of the Trails Act are straightforward.  Sec-
tion 8(d) of the amended Trails Act provides:

     If a State, political subdivision, or qualified private orga-
     nization is prepared to assume full responsibility for 
     management of such rights-of-way and for any legal 
     liability arising out of such transfer or use, and for the 
     payment of any and all taxes that may be levied or 
     assessed against such rights-of-way, then the Board shall 
     impose such terms and conditions as a requirement of 
     any transfer or conveyance for interim use in a manner 
     consistent with this chapter, and shall not permit aban-
     donment or discontinuance inconsistent or disruptive of 
     such use.
     
16 U.S.C. s 1247(d).  The Board has promulgated regulations 
requiring sponsors to submit certain documentation describ-
ing the site and indicating the user's willingness to assume 
full responsibility for management, legal liability, and taxes, 
as well as an acknowledgment of the user's continuing obli-
gation to meet its responsibilities subject to future reactiva-
tion of the right-of-way for rail service.  See 49 C.F.R. 
s 1152.29.  Upon receipt of such documentation, the Board 
applies a rebuttable presumption of fitness of a sponsor.  See 
Jost v. Surface Transp. Bd., 194 F.3d 79, 89 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  
Thus, where the railroad is willing to enter negotiations with 
the sponsor, the abandonment is deferred and if the parties 
reach agreement within a certain time, no abandonment can 
occur until the user terminates trail use in an administrative 
proceeding;  absent an agreement the CITU converts to a 
notice of abandonment.  See Jost, 194 F.3d at 82;  Goos v. 
I.C.C., 911 F.2d 1283, 1286 (8th Cir. 1990).

     NEPA generally requires federal agencies to examine the 
environmental effects of proposed federal actions and to 
inform the public of the environmental concerns that were 
considered in the agency's decisionmaking.  See Baltimore 
Gas v. Natural Res. Defense Council, 462 U.S. 87, 97 (1983).  
Specifically, NEPA requires agencies to prepare an environ-
mental evaluation for all proposals for "major Federal actions 
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment."  

42 U.S.C. s 4332(2)(C) (1994).  NEPA applies to the Board's 
decisions to allow rail line abandonments.  See Idaho, 35 F.3d 
at 595;  49 C.F.R. s 1105.6(b)(2).  On the other hand, the 
Board has determined that NEPA does not require analysis 
of the environmental effects of possible interim trail use 
because the issuance of a CITU is only a ministerial act.  See 
Iowa Southern Railroad Co.-Exemption-Abandonment in 
Pottawattamie, Mills, Fremont and Page Counties, IA, 5 
I.C.C. 2d 496, 502-03 (June 7, 1989).  The Board adhered to 
this position in rejecting CART's arguments.

                               III.

     Because NEPA's mandate is addressed to all federal agen-
cies, the Board's determination that NEPA is inapplicable to 
the Trails Act is not entitled to the deference that courts 
must accord to an agency's interpretation of its governing 
statute.  See Chevron v. Natural Res. Defense Council, 467 
U.S. 837, 842 (1984);  People Against Nuclear Energy v. U.S. 
Nuclear Regulatory Comm'n, 678 F.2d 222, 227 n.6 (D.C. Cir. 
1982).5  Consequently, the issue of whether the Board erred 
in determining that its decision to issue a CITU under Trails 
Act is not subject to NEPA is a question of law, subject to de 
novo review.  See 5 U.S.C. s 706.6  We find no error in the 

__________
     5  Marsh v. Natural Res. Council, 490 U.S. 360 (1989), estab-
lished that when a court reviews an agency's factual determination 
that a major federal action will not "significantly" affect the envi-
ronment, review is governed by the arbitrary and capricious stan-
dard of 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).  Thus, Marsh did not resolve the 
precise question of what review is appropriate in challenges to 
agency actions that raise the threshold legal question whether an 
action falls within NEPA in the first place.

     6  Section 706 of the APA provides in relevant part:

          To the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the 
     reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law, 
     interpret constitutional and statutory provisions, and determine 
     the meaning or applicability of the terms of an agency action. 
     The reviewing court shall--
     
          ... 
          
Board's determination.7

     The touchstone of whether NEPA applies is discretion.  
The twofold purpose of NEPA is "to inject environmental 
considerations into the federal agency's decisionmaking pro-
cess and to inform the public that the federal agency has 
considered environmental concerns in its decisionmaking pro-
cess."  Macht v. Skinner, 916 F.2d 13, 18 (D.C. Cir. 1990) 
(quoting Weinberger v. Catholic Action of Hawaii/Peace 
Educ. Project, 454 U.S. 139, 143 (1981)).  Such information 
may cause the agency to modify its proposed action. See, e.g., 
Natural Res. Defense Council v. Morton, 458 F.2d 827, 831 
(D.C. Cir. 1972).  If, however, the agency does not have 
sufficient discretion to affect the outcome of its actions, and 
its role is merely ministerial, the information that NEPA 
provides can have no affect on the agency's actions, and 
therefore NEPA is inapplicable.  Thus, in Macht v. Skinner, 
the court affirmed the denial of federal action status to a 
project where the government had discretion only over a 
negligible portion of it.  916 F.2d at 19.  Likewise, in Atlanta 
Coalition on the Transp. Crisis, Inc. v. Atlanta Regional 
Comm'n, 599 F.2d 1333 (5th Cir. 1979), the Fifth Circuit 
Court of Appeals held that the Federal Highway Administra-
tion's funding and certification of a regional planning process 
was not subject to NEPA because "[t]he federal decisions 
involv[ing] whether to certify and whether to fund do not 
entail the exercise of significant discretion."  Id. at 1344-45.  
Other circuit courts of appeal have adopted similar analyses.  
See, e.g., Sac & Fox Nation of Missouri v. Norton, 240 F.3d 
1250, 1262 (10th Cir. 2001);  Sierra Club v. Babbitt, 65 F.3d 

__________
          (2) hold unlawful and set aside agency action, findings, and 
     conclusions found to be-
     
                (A) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or other-
          wise not in accordance with law;  ... 
          
     7  Several circuits to confront the same question have adopted a 
"reasonableness" standard of review.  See Northcoast Envtl. Ctr. v. 
Glickman, 136 F.3d 660, 667 (9th Cir. 1998);  Sugarloaf Citizens 
Ass'n v. F.E.R.C., 959 F.2d 508, 511 (4th Cir. 1992);  Goos, 911 F.2d 
at 1291.  We understand this to mean that the courts conducted de 
novo review.

1502, 1513 (9th Cir. 1995);  Sugarloaf, 959 F.2d at 513;  Milo 
Cmty. Hosp. v. Weinberger, 525 F.2d 144, 147 (1st Cir. 1975).

     To date, only the Eighth Circuit has addressed the precise 
issue raised by CART.  In Goos, that court reasoned that 
because the I.C.C. was required by the Trails Act to issue a 
Notice of Interim Trail Use ("NITU") or a CITU whenever a 
private party files the statement of willingness to assume 
financial responsibility and the railroad agrees to negotiate, 
the role of the I.C.C. in the conversion proceedings "is 
essentially ministerial."  911 F.2d at 1395-96.  The I.C.C. 
argued that the issuance of the NITU or CITU was incidental 
to the abandonment proceeding pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 
s 10903, was not a guarantee of eventual trail use, and that 
only the abandonment proceeding was subject to NEPA.  Id. 
at 1293.  The Eighth Circuit agreed.  Relying on its prece-
dent,8 the Eighth Circuit focused on the fact that the I.C.C. 
has no legal or factual control over the outcome of the 
negotiations between the railroad and the trail sponsors;  it 
can neither compel a trail conversion between unwilling par-
ties nor does it have discretion to refuse one if voluntarily 
negotiated.  Id. at 1295.  The court noted that the I.C.C. had 
interpreted s 1247(d) to give it no power to compel a conver-
sion by condemnation of the right-of-way, because Congress 
had determined that trail use is desirable for a particular line 
only when certain commitments are voluntarily made.  Id.  
The court concluded that:

     Because the I.C.C. has not been granted any discretion 
     under section 1247(d) to base its issuance of an NITU or 
     CITU on environmental consequences, ... it would make 
     little sense to force the I.C.C. to consider factors which 
     cannot affect its decision to issue an NITU or CITU.
     
__________
     8  In Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska v. Ray, 621 F.2d 269 (8th 
Cir.), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 836 (1980), the court held that issuance 
of a federal permit for part of a non-federal construction project did 
not make the entire project subject to NEPA because there was no 
grant of legal control over the entire project.  See id. at 272.  See 
also Ringsred v. Duluth, 828 F.2d 1305, 1308 (8th Cir. 1987).

Id. at 1296.  In addition, the court concluded that the I.C.C. 
lacked sufficient factual control for NEPA to apply because 
the federal government does not fund the conversion and 
"there is otherwise no federal involvement sufficient to turn 
what is essentially a private, voluntary action into federal 
action."  Id.

     We agree with the Eighth Circuit in Goos that the absence 
of significant discretion in the Board regarding issuance of a 
CITU removes that issuance from the reach of NEPA.  
Heretofore this court has held that the I.C.C. reasonably 
interpreted the Trails Act to accord it no power to force 
transfers of the rights-of-way when the railroad is unwilling.  
See Nat'l Wildlife Fed'n v. I.C.C., 850 F.2d 694 (D.C. Cir. 
1988).  Further, the court has held that the I.C.C. could 
reasonably establish a rebuttable presumption of fitness of a 
private sponsor who filed the required documentation.  See 
Jost, 194 F.3d at 89.  In neither case did the court view the 
I.C.C.'s role as involving significant discretion with regard to 
issuance of a CITU.  To the contrary, in Jost the court cited 
Goos with approval in observing that the Trails Act requires 
that the Board " 'shall' impose a trail condition ... whenever 
a railroad is prepared to convey the right-of-way to an 
organization that is 'prepared to assume full responsibility' 
for management of the line, for liability, and for taxes owed."  
Id. at 89 (quoting 16 U.S.C. s 1247(d)).

     CART nonetheless contends that the Board has substantial 
discretion in deciding to issue a CITU because, in its view, 
the Trails Act imposes six decisions on the Board before it 
can issue a CITU.9  An examination of the decisions that 

__________
     9  CART identifies the six decisions to be:  "(1) The corridor 
must be suitable for use as a public recreational trail as part of the 
national trails system, (2) trail use and conditions must be consis-
tent with the National Trails System Act, (3) the corridor must be 
preserved for future restoration or reconstruction for railroad pur-
poses, (4) a trail sponsor must be prepared to assume full responsi-
bility for management of rights-of-way as trails, (5) a trail sponsor 
must be prepared to assume full responsibility for any liability 
arising out of the transfer or use, and (6) once the above conditions 
are met, the STB is to impose terms and conditions on a transfer or 

CART identifies indicates, however, that they relate either to 
the statutory conditions for sponsorship or to decisions that 
Congress has determined shall be made by the railroad and 
trail sponsor in their voluntary agreement, if any.  For 
example, the decision whether a corridor is suitable for use as 
a public recreational trail as part of the national trails system 
has been made by Congress.  In the Trails Act, Congress 
determined that all rail lines that are to be abandoned are 
potentially suitable for trail use and left the precise configura-
tion of the trail use to the parties' voluntary agreement.  See 
Iowa Southern Railroad Co.-Exemption-Abandonment in 
Pottawattamie, Mills, Fremont and Page Counties, IA, 5 
I.C.C. 2d 496, 502-03 (June 7, 1989).  Although CART might 
prefer that the suitability determination be made by the 
Board, Congress did not impose that responsibility on the 
Board.  The Board thus could reasonably interpret its re-
sponsibilities under the Trails Act to be largely ministerial 
without, as CART suggests, abdicating its statutory responsi-
bility under NEPA.  On the other hand, the decision whether 
a trail sponsor is prepared to assume full responsibility for 
management of the trail, as well as legal and tax liabilities, is 
addressed by the Board through a rebuttable presumption;  
no more is required.  See Jost, 194 F.3d at 89.  For these 
reasons, we are unpersuaded that these "six decisions" pro-
vide the Board with sufficient discretion to render NEPA 
applicable to issuance of a CITU under the Trails Act.

                               IV.

     CART's alternative contention that the Trails Act itself 
requires a separate environmental analysis prior to issuance 
of a CITU also fails.  In reaching this conclusion, we apply 
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 844, to determine whether the Board's 
determination that a separate environmental analysis is not 
required by s 1247(d) is "a permissible construction of the 
statute."  Id. at 843.

__________
conveyance for trail use in a manner consistent with the National 
Trails System Act."

     Section 1247(d) directs the Board to issue a CITU subject 
to terms and conditions imposed by the Board.  It does not 
expressly refer to environmental considerations, and the leg-
islative history does not indicate that environmental unfitness 
would bar trails conversion and mandate abandonment.  See 
H.R. Rep. 28, 98th Cong., 1st Sess., p. 8 (1983).  As interpret-
ed by the Board, the terms and conditions referred to in 
s 1247(d) relate to the requirement that a sponsor assume 
the financial and legal obligations associated with the right-of-
way and that use of the land is subject to future restoration of 
rail service.  See 49 C.F.R. s 1152.29(c)(2) (2000).  Thus, if a 
qualified trail sponsor submits the required statement of 
willingness, and the railroad is willing to negotiate a trail use 
agreement, and the Board has approved abandonment of the 
rail line, the Board must issue a CITU.  See id. at 
s 1152.29(c)(1).  Official Board policy establishes a presump-
tion of fitness of such a trail sponsor.  See Jost, 194 F.3d at 
89.  Under the Board's interpretation, then, its discretion is 
substantially restrained.

     Congress' stated purposes in enacting the Trails Act were 
twofold:  to preserve rail corridors for future railroad use and 
to permit public recreational use of trails.  See Preseault, 494 
U.S. at 10.  Accordingly, Congress used language that fo-
cused on those purposes, implicitly leaving environmental 
considerations either to environmental assessments accompa-
nying the abandonment proceeding, the parties' agreement, 
or other federal or state and local law.  Nothing in the text or 
the legislative history suggests a contrary Congressional in-
tent.  Indeed, because the trails conversion arises after an 
abandonment determination in which environmental consider-
ations have been addressed, the scheme Congress envisioned 
for trail conversion recognized that the railroad would be 
aware of some of its environmental remediation responsibili-
ties before agreeing to discuss an agreement with trail spon-
sors.  Because the Board's interpretation of its role in CITU 
issuance is consistent with Congress' intention that the par-
ties voluntarily reach agreement on public trail use, we hold 
that the Board could reasonably conclude that Congress did 

not intend for the Board to conduct a separate environmental 
assessment for a CITU.

     Finally, it bears noting that the particular concerns CART 
raises about the environmental suitability of the railroad's 
right-of-way for a public trail are not without remedy.  As the 
Board noted, the consent decree entered into by the State 
and the Tribe with the railroad provides for the environmen-
tal remediation that CART asserts is required.  See supra 
note 3.  This became clear at oral argument when counsel for 
CART was unable to identify any further environmental 
remediation that would likely result from an environmental 
assessment under NEPA.  In light of the consent decree, the 
additional environmental assessment under NEPA during the 
remand in the abandonment proceeding, and the four condi-
tions imposed by the Board, CART fails to show that their 
environmental concerns have not been addressed.

     Accordingly, we deny the petition.

                                                                     