                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 17, 2001       Decided June 29, 2001 

                           No. 00-1388

           Pennsylvania Transformer Technology, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

                 United Steelworkers of America, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Clare M. Gallagher argued the cause for the petitioner.  
Patrick L. Abramowich and Brian Seth Roman were on brief 
for the petitioner.

     Eric D. Duryea, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for the respondent.  Leonard R. 
Page, General Counsel, John H. Ferguson, Associate General 
Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General 
Counsel, and Charles P. Donnelly, Attorney, National Labor 
Relations Board, were on brief.

     David R. Jury argued the cause for the intervenor.  David 
I. Goldman entered an appearance.

     Before:  Henderson, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  The petitioner, 
Pennsylvania Transformer Technology, Inc. (PTTI), petitions 
the court for review of a decision and order of respondent 
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB or Board), reported 
at 331 N.L.R.B. No. 151 (Aug. 25, 2000).  In that decision, the 
Board affirmed and adopted, with modifications, the decision 
of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), who held that PTTI 
violated section 8(a)(1) and 8(a)(5) of the National Labor 
Relations Act (NLRA or Act), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1) & (5), by 
refusing to recognize the United Steel Workers of America, 
AFL-CIO (Union) as the collective-bargaining representative 
of PTTI's production and maintenance employees pursuant to 
a recognition request made on March 30, 1998.  PTTI main-
tains that the Board erred in determining that it was a 
successor to Cooper Industries, Inc. (Cooper) and that it had 
hired a substantial and representative complement of employ-
ees as of April 1, 1998.  The Board cross-applies for enforce-
ment.  For the reasons set forth below, we deny PTTI's 
petition for review and grant the Board's application for 
enforcement.

                          I. Background

     Beginning in 1985, Cooper owned and operated a plant in 
Canonsburg, Pennsylvania where it produced core electric 
transformers and shell form transformers.  Cooper also sold 
spare parts to customers.  In 1994 Cooper employed between 
750 and 880 employees.  Its employees were represented by 

different locals of the Union in three separate collective-
bargaining units.  In April 1994 Cooper announced to the 
Union that it planned to close the facility unless a purchaser 
could be found by the end of 1994.  Although the Union and 
its three locals formed a committee to find a buyer, none was 
found and on November 22, 1994 the plant closed.  Cooper 
and the Union entered into a "closing agreement" that pro-
vided for recognition of the Union in the event Cooper 
reopened within two years.  Cooper retained a skeleton crew 
to maintain the facility and to provide spare parts to its utility 
customers.  Several former union presidents, state and local 
officials and members of the local Chamber of Commerce 
formed a new search committee to find a buyer.  Ultimately 
the committee helped to bring about the sale of the plant to 
Ravindra Nahl Rahangdale.

     In 1995 Rahangdale began negotiations to acquire Cooper's 
plant and equipment.  On August 9, 1996 he acquired all of 
the assets of the Canonsburg plant, which he combined with 
another company he owned to form PTTI.  PTTI commenced 
operations in August 1996 and hired its first employees on 
September 1, 1996.  In January 1997 the company produced 
its first transformers, utilizing about one-half of the plant 
space previously used by Cooper and most of the same 
equipment.  PTTI obtained its employees from Bedway Tem-
porary Services (Bedway), which had also assisted Cooper 
with staffing.  Applicants for employment were interviewed 
by PTTI personnel but hired by Bedway.  Employees worked 
under the supervision of PTTI as probationary employees for 
three to six months, at which time they were eligible to 
become permanent employees of PTTI.

     In a letter dated March 30, 1998, the Union requested 
PTTI to recognize and bargain with it as the exclusive 
bargaining representative of the company's employee units.  
As of that time, approximately 82 production employees 
worked at the plant, 58 of whom, or 72 per cent, were former 
Cooper employees.  Of the 68 production workers on the 
company's payroll, 54 were former Cooper employees.  PTTI 
refused to recognize the Union, prompting the Union to file 
an unfair labor practice charge.  The Board subsequently 

issued a complaint alleging that, beginning April 1, 1998, 
PTTI had unlawfully refused to recognize and bargain with 
the Union in violation of sections 8(a)(1) and 8(a)(5) of the 
Act.  By the time of the hearing, which was held on July 7, 
1998, PTTI had hired approximately 100 production and 
maintenance employees, a majority of whom were former 
Cooper employees.

     On September 30, 1998 the ALJ issued his findings of fact 
and conclusions of law, finding, in pertinent part, that PTTI 
was a successor employer under the Act.  The ALJ ordered 
PTTI to recognize the Union, to bargain collectively with the 
Union and to post an appropriate notice.  PTTI filed timely 
exceptions to the ALJ's decision.  On December 10, 1998 
PTTI also filed a motion to reopen the record to introduce 
evidence that it had 130 production and maintenance employ-
ees, only 62 of whom were former Cooper employees and that 
former members of the Cooper production and maintenance 
unit became a minority of PTTI's production workers as of 
October 29, 1998.  JA 409.  The Board's General Counsel 
filed limited cross exceptions challenging the ALJ's failure to 
find specifically that as of April 1, 1998 PTTI had hired a 
substantial and representative complement of employees.  
The Board denied PTTI's exceptions and its motion to reopen 
the record, adopted the ALJ's findings, rulings and order 
with slight modifications and corrections and granted the 
General Counsel's cross-exceptions.  The Board held that (1) 
PTTI was a successor to Cooper, (2) PTTI had hired a 
substantial and representative complement of employees as of 
April 1, 1998 and (3) PTTI violated the Act by refusing to 
recognize and bargain with the Union.  PTTI challenges all 
three determinations.

                           II. Analysis

     A new employer is a successor to a former employer if 
there is "substantial continuity" between the enterprises.  
Fall River Dyeing & Finishing Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 
43 (1987).  "Substantial continuity exists when the new com-
pany has 'acquired substantial assets of its predecessor and 

continued, without interruption or substantial change, the 
predecessor's business operations.' "  CitiSteel USA, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 53 F.3d 350, 353 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (quoting Golden 
State Bottling Co., Inc. v. NLRB, 414 U.S. 168, 184 (1973)).  
"The essential inquiry is whether operations, as they impinge 
on union members, remain essentially the same after the 
transfer of ownership."  International Union of Elec., Radio 
& Mach. Workers (IUEW) v. NLRB, 604 F.2d 689, 694 (D.C. 
Cir. 1979).  The analysis is undertaken with an "emphasis on 
the employees' perspective."  Fall River, 482 U.S. at 43.  The 
implied statutory goal is to promote "industrial peace."  "If 
the employees find themselves in essentially the same jobs 
after the employer transition and if their legitimate expecta-
tions in continued representation by their union are thwarted, 
their dissatisfaction may lead to labor unrest."  Id. at 43-44.  
Thus the union certified as the collective bargaining represen-
tative of the predecessor employer's employees presumptively 
retains its certification if the majority of employees after the 
change of ownership worked for the predecessor employer.  
See NLRB v. Burns Int'l Sec. Servs., Inc., 406 U.S. 272, 279 
(1972).

     We will uphold the Board's "successorship determination 
unless it is not supported by substantial evidence or the 
Board acted arbitrarily or otherwise erred in applying estab-
lished law to the facts of the case."  CitiSteel, 53 F.3d at 354.  
To determine whether a "substantial continuity" exists, courts 
and the Board consider

     whether the business of both employers is essentially the 
     same;  whether the employees of the new company are 
     doing the same jobs in the same working conditions 
     under the same supervisors;  and whether the new entity 
     has the same production process, produces the same 
     products, and basically has the same body of customers.
     
Fall River, 482 U.S. at 43 (citations omitted).  While the 
Board does not afford controlling weight to any single factor, 
"[t]he ultimate question is this:  Will the employees 'under-
standably view their job situations as essentially unaltered?' "  

Harter Tomato Prods. Co. v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 934, 937 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998) (quotation omitted).

     When a new employer is a successor, it has an obligation to 
bargain with the certified union so long as "the majority of its 
employees were employed by its predecessor."  Fall River, 
482 U.S. at 41.  The Board has adopted the "substantial and 
representative complement" rule for fixing the moment that 
the determination as to the composition of the successor's 
work force is to be made.  Id. at 47.  In deciding when a 
"substantial and representative complement" exists after a 
change in employer, the Board examines a number of factors:

     It studies "whether the job classifications designated for 
     the operation were filled or substantially filled and 
     whether the operation was in normal or substantially 
     normal production."  See Premium Foods, Inc. v. 
     NLRB, 709 F.2d 623, 628 (9th Cir. 1983). In addition, it 
     takes into consideration "the size of the complement on 
     that date and the time expected to elapse before a 
     substantially larger complement would be at work ... as 
     well as the relative certainty of the employer's expected 
     expansion."  Id.
     
Fall River, 482 U.S. at 49;  see Sullivan Indus. v. NLRB, 957 
F.2d 890, 896 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (separating out five factors set 
forth in Fall River).

     PTTI complains that the Board erred in determining that it 
was a successor to Cooper and in fixing the date of April 1, 
1998 as the moment at which it had hired a "substantial and 
representative complement" of employees.  It alleges numer-
ous factual discrepancies in the Board's findings and charges 
that the Board failed to consider evidence that would have led 
it to reach a different result.  We now examine these claims.

     Successorship analysis is "primarily factual in nature and is 
based upon the totality of the circumstances of a given 
situation."  Fall River, 482 U.S. at 43.  Accordingly, we 
"must examine in detail the facts found by the Administrative 
Law Judge (ALJ) and adopted by the Board."  CitiSteel, 53 
F.3d at 351.  Applying the successorship factors enunciated 

in Fall River, we conclude that substantial evidence supports 
the Board's determination that PTTI was a successor to 
Cooper.  First, the business of both employers is essentially 
the same.  In August 1996 PTTI purchased all of Cooper's 
facilities and assets used in the manufacture of electrical 
transformers and began production using most of the equip-
ment in January 1997.  Although PTTI's workforce is much 
smaller than Cooper's, it is in the same line of business 
(transformer production).  Like Cooper, PTTI also supplies 
spare parts for its customers.  See Pennsylvania Transform-
er Tech., Inc., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 151, slip op. at 3 (filed Aug. 
25, 2000).

     Second, although working conditions are somewhat differ-
ent at PTTI--significantly fewer job classifications and in-
creased employee responsibility and flexibility--employees 
continue to do the same work.  They use the same skills and 
expertise they used at Cooper and use the same process and 
equipment, often under the same supervisors (although there 
are fewer supervisors).  Significantly, PTTI did not train 
workers but instead relied on the experienced workforce left 
by Cooper.  Id. at 4.

     Third, PTTI has a similar production process, produces 
similar products and retains many of the same customers.  
Although PTTI uses only 45 per cent of Cooper's floor space 
and although it sold or removed two ovens, two winding 
machines and one or two drill presses used by Cooper, it uses 
the same transformer production process to make transform-
ers.  Id. at 4.  It made few improvements to the physical 
plant, which nowhere near approached the $25 million spent 
by the alleged successor in CitiSteel (a case on which PTTI 
relies) to refurbish and modernize the CitiSteel plant, trans-
forming it from a steel mill to a "minimill."  53 F.3d at 352.  
While at the time of the hearing PTTI had not yet begun 
production of shell transformers and had produced few large 
core transformers (the bread and butter of Cooper's produc-
tion), PTTI affirmed that it planned to aggressively pursue 
both product lines.  And although PTTI did not acquire 
Cooper's customer or vendor lists, a majority of PTTI's 
customers are former Cooper patrons.  See Pennsylvania 

Transformer Tech., Inc., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 151, slip op. at 4.  
As the Board found, the company "[had] filled a vacuum in a 
market left by Cooper and [was] in the process of rapidly 
expanding in the manufacture and sale of the same products."  
Id. at 1.

     Most of the differences noted by PTTI--differences in size, 
facilities, work force, managerial philosophy, customer base--
were rejected by this court in Harter, which decision ex-
plained that "[p]ointing to differences in size, wages, benefits, 
training, customer base, managerial philosophy, and supplier 
contracts, among others, ... is unresponsive to the question 
we face.  We ask not whether [the petitioner's] view of the 
facts supports its version of what happened, but rather 
whether the Board's interpretation of the facts is 'reasonably 
defensible.' "  133 F.3d at 938 (quotation & citation omitted).  
Although the differences PTTI points to may support its view 
on successorship, we conclude that substantial evidence sup-
ports the Board's successorship determination.  We arrive at 
this conclusion notwithstanding the two-year hiatus between 
the time Cooper ceased manufacturing transformers and 
PTTI began production.1  A hiatus in operations is "relevant 
only when there are other indicia of discontinuity."  Fall 
River, 482 U.S. at 45;  see United Food & Commercial 
Workers Int'l Union (UFCW) v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 1463, 1472 
(D.C. Cir. 1985).  In CitiSteel we found "abundant other 
indicia of discontinuity to make the impact of the hiatus on 
the workers' expectation of rehire relevant."  53 F.3d at 356.  
We do not find such abundant indicia here.2  Unlike in 

__________
     1 During the hiatus, however, a skeleton crew made the necessary 
repairs and supplied parts to former customers.  Id. at 4.

     2 The facts here are more similar to those in UFCW than those in 
CitiSteel. In UFCW, there was an eighteen-month hiatus after 
which the successor employer invested $1.3 million in capital im-
provements, purged most of the former upper management, made 
changes to the production process, attracted new customers and lost 
others, contracted with new suppliers, and down-sized its operation, 
using only a portion of the former facility.  Nonetheless we held 
that the new employer was a successor because "[t]he focus of the 
analysis ... is not on the continuity of the business structure in 

CitiSteel, there were no "significant changes" to the facility 
and, although PTTI's production process and customer bases 
have differences, they are not as significant as the total 
reformation (e.g., extensive plant renovation, formal job train-
ing, changed production process and new customer base) that 
occurred in CitiSteel.  Most importantly, unlike the union in 
CitiSteel, which closed its union hall and foresaw "dim possi-
bilities at best for the plant's reopening," id. at 355-56, here 
the union actively participated in finding a purchaser to 
reopen the facility.3  Based on all the evidence, we conclude 
that the Board reasonably determined that, despite the 
lengthy hiatus, employees had "legitimate expectations in 
continued representation by their union."  Fall River, 482 
U.S. at 43.

     Having concluded that substantial evidence supports the 
Board's successorship determination, we now review the 
Board's application of the "substantial and representative 
complement" rule.  Substantial evidence also supports the 
Board's finding that PTTI had hired a substantial and repre-
sentative complement of employees as of April 1, 1998.  PTTI 
had hired workers for both of its job classifications--trans-
former technician and apprentice--as of the date of the 
recognition demand.  See Pennsylvania Transformer Tech., 

__________
general, but rather on the particular operations of the business as 
they affect the members of the relevant bargaining unit."  UFCW, 
768 F.2d at 1470. There, employees used the same skills and worked 
under essentially the same conditions.  Id. at 1474.  We reach the 
same conclusion here.

     3 PTTI points to a Union press release urging its members to 
seek other employment or remain in school while the Union contin-
ued its efforts to find a purchaser for the plant. While the press 
release shed light on whether the Union thought the plant would 
reopen, it also recognized the Union's efforts to recruit prospective 
purchasers, lobby representatives of the Commonwealth of Pennsyl-
vania for assistance, persuade Cooper to sell the facility to a 
purchaser that would resume operations, assist PTTI in obtaining 
financing and encourage its members to apply for employment 
while at the same time it kept the community and news media 
informed about its campaign.  See JA 24-33, 376-79.

Inc., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 151, slip op. at 2.  PTTI had also 
begun "substantially normal production" as of April 1, 1998.  
It had produced its first transformer in late April 1997 and 
between August 1997 and June 1998 PTTI's monthly sales 
figures showed signs of relative stability.  JA 382.  Although 
PTTI predicted significant growth between 1999 and 2001,4 
the August 1997-June 1998 sales figures indicate that the size 
of workforce was sufficiently large to enable the company to 
begin normal production of electric transformers.  As the 
court acknowledged in Fall River in rejecting a "full" comple-
ment standard, the expansionist dreams of many entrepre-
neurs necessitate that the court fix the moment in time when 
a business has begun its normal production.  482 U.S. at 51.  
Accordingly, we affirm the Board's finding that PTTI had 
hired a substantial and representational complement of em-
ployees by April 1, 1998.  Because as of that date a majority 
of PTTI's employees were former Cooper employees, PTTI 
had an obligation to recognize the Union as the collective 
bargaining representative of its employees.  By not doing so, 
it violated section 8(a)(1) and (a)(5) of the NLRA.

                         III. Conclusion

     In sum, substantial evidence supports the Board's determi-
nation that PTTI was a successor to Cooper and that PTTI 
had hired a substantial and representational complement of 
employees by April 1, 1998.  Accordingly, we deny PTTI's 
petition for review and grant the Board's cross-petition for 
enforcement.

                                                                 So ordered.

__________
     4 PTTI refers to non-record material throughout the portion of it 
brief, see, e.g., Pet. Br. 15 & n.4, 16-18, yet it did not challenge the 
Board's denial of its motion to reopen the record.  We also deny 
PTTI's motion to supplement the record with a Union pamphlet;  
assuming arguendo its materiality, PTTI failed to adduce the 
evidence before the Board.

     