                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 6, 2001   Decided December 21, 2001 

                           No. 00-1480

                    Michael J. Markowski and 
                        Joseph F. Riccio, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

               Securities and Exchange Commission, 
                            Respondent

              Petition for Review of Orders of the 
                Securities and Exchange Commission

     William VanDercreek argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioners.

     Susan S. McDonald, Senior Litigation Counsel, Securities 
& Exchange Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  
With her on the brief were David M. Becker, General Coun-
sel, Meyer Eisenberg, Deputy General Counsel, Jacob H. 
Stillman, Solicitor, and Susan K. Straus, Attorney.

     Before:  Randolph and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  Petitioners Michael J. 
Markowski and Joseph F. Riccio seek review of a Securities 
and Exchange Commission order sustaining a disciplinary 
action taken by the National Association of Securities Dealers 
("NASD").  The order imposed liability under Rule 10b-5 for 
manipulating the stock market and under certain NASD 
Conduct Rules for causing the publication of "non-bona fide" 
bid quotations.  The SEC also found against Markowski but 
not Riccio for violations of a restriction agreement governing 
his firm's inventory holdings and for failure to cooperate with 
an NASD investigation.  In re Markowski, Exchange Act 
Release No. 43,259 (SEC Decision Sept. 7, 2000) ("SEC 
Decision").  We affirm the Commission's order.

                             *  *  *

     Markowski was the chairman, CEO, and majority share-
holder of Global America, Inc., then an NASD-member firm 
that specialized in emerging growth companies.  Riccio was 
Global's trader.  In June 1990 Global underwrote an initial 
public offering of Mountaintop Corporation, an Alaskan vodka 
producer.  The Mountaintop securities included common 
stock, warrants and "units" (each of which could be ex-
changed for two shares of common stock and two warrants).  
Because the SEC does not rest its conclusions on data as to 
quantities involved, the relationships among these securities 
need not detain us.  In "aftermarket" trading (i.e., after the 
IPO), Global dominated the market for Mountaintop securi-
ties, accounting for an overwhelming majority of both pur-
chase and sale volume.

     From the IPO in June 1990 until Global's closing in Janu-
ary 1991, Global supported the price of Mountaintop securi-
ties.  The SEC said that this support took two forms:  Global 
(1) maintained high bid prices for Mountaintop securities, and 
(2) absorbed all unwanted securities into inventory, thereby 

preventing sales from depressing market prices.  In re Mar-
kowski, Exchange Act Release No. 43,503, at 2 (SEC Decision 
Nov. 1, 2000) ("SEC Denial of Reconsideration").  In the end 
these efforts proved unsustainable.  Global closed its doors in 
January 1991, and Mountaintop's price dropped precipitous-
ly--about 75% in one day.  Id.

     In July 1998 the NASD's National Adjudicatory Council 
("NAC") held Markowski and Riccio in violation of s 10(b) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 15 U.S.C. s 78j(b), Rule 
10b-5 thereunder, 17 C.F.R. s 240.10b-5, and NASD Con-
duct Rules 2110, 2120, 3310 for their activities in Mountain-
top.  Specifically, the NAC found that Markowski and Riccio 
had engaged in manipulative, deceptive, and fraudulent con-
duct, and had published non-bona fide quotations.  The NAC 
also found that Markowski had violated the terms of Global's 
Restriction Agreement and had refused to submit to an 
NASD investigative interview.

     By way of remedy, the NAC ordered that Markowski and 
Riccio be censured and barred in all capacities from associa-
tion with any member of the NASD, and that they be fined 
$300,000 and $250,000, respectively.  See Final Order of the 
National Adjudicatory Council, NASD Regulation, Inc., No. 
CMS920091, at 1-2 (July 13, 1998).

     On appeal, the SEC sustained the NAC's findings and 
sanctions.  SEC Decision at 1.  The SEC later denied peti-
tioners' motion for reconsideration.  SEC Denial of Reconsid-
eration at 3.  Markowski and Riccio now seek review.

                             *  *  *

     We note at the outset that the charge of publishing non-
bona fide quotations flowed fairly ineluctably from the finding 
of manipulation:  Rule 3310 bars publishing, or causing to be 
published, reports of a transaction as a purchase or sale of 
securities unless the NASD member believes that "such 
transaction was a bona fide purchase or sale";  an interpreta-
tion of Rule 3310 by the NASD Board of Governors, IM-3310, 
reads the rule as embracing the case of a member who causes 
a quotation to be published "without having reasonable cause 

to believe that such quotation ... is not published for any 
fraudulent, deceptive or manipulative purpose."  If the find-
ing of manipulation is supportable, then the second violation 
follows handily.

     Petitioners first seem to argue that because Global's bids 
and trades in this case were "real"--they involved real cus-
tomers, real transactions, and real money--the trades cannot 
be classified as an unlawful manipulation.  Indeed, Global's 
activities were unlike classic schemes using fraudulent devices 
such as "wash sales" or "matched sales" in which the targeted 
securities are "traded" back to the sellers themselves or 
among known parties to give a false appearance of sales and 
market interest.  See, e.g., SEC v. U.S. Environmental, Inc., 
155 F.3d 107, 109 (2d Cir. 1998);  see also Louis Loss & Joel 
Seligman, Fundamentals of Securities Regulation 1045-46 
(4th ed. 2001) (describing the typical manipulative scheme).  
On the basis of this distinction, petitioners argue--rather 
summarily--that their conduct must have been lawful.

     Liability for manipulation wholly independent of fictitious 
transactions in fact raises interesting questions.  Without 
such transactions, the core of the offense can be obscure.  It 
may be hard to separate a "manipulative" investor from one 
who is simply overenthusiastic, a true believer in the object of 
investment.  Both may amass huge inventories and place 
high bids, even though there are scant objective data support-
ing the implicit estimate of the stock's value.  Legality would 
thus depend entirely on whether the investor's intent was "an 
investment purpose" or "solely to affect the price of [the] 
security."  United States v. Mulheren, 938 F.2d 364, 368 (2d 
Cir. 1991).  Given the typical ambiguity of intent, commenta-
tors have suggested that imposing liability may chill investors 
from transactions that actually contribute to the efficiency of 
securities markets.  Daniel R. Fischel & David J. Ross, 
"Should the Law Prohibit 'Manipulation' in Financial Mar-
kets?," 105 Harv. L. Rev. 503, 523 (1991) (expressing concerns 
about the manipulation doctrine's overdeterrence effects);  see 
also Mulheren, 938 F.2d at 368 (expressing misgivings about 
basing 10b-5 violations purely on whether or not a "transac-
tion is effected for an investment purpose").

     Commentators have also suggested that where manipu-
lative behavior is solely defined in terms of the actor's 
purpose, it may well be self-deterring as a general matter, so 
that any need for an external sanction is slight.  Purely 
"trade-based" manipulation schemes, in which the manipu-
lator simply buys a security in order to induce higher prices 
and then sells to take advantage of the price change, are 
likely to fail.  First, it is difficult unilaterally to cause price to 
rise.  Second, it is even more difficult to sell subsequently at 
a price high enough to cover both purchase costs and transac-
tion costs.  For one thing, if the actor's purchases are such as 
to give the market a material upward thrust, his later sales 
may equivalently drive it down.  See Fischel & Ross, supra, 
at 512-19.  But see Steve Thel, "$850,000 in Six Minutes--
The Mechanics of Securities Manipulation," 79 Cornell L. 
Rev. 219 (1994) (suggesting that manipulators may profit 
from very small, short-lived price changes).

     These arguments, however, are of little use to Markowski 
and Riccio.  Whatever the practical concerns, we cannot find 
the Commission's interpretation to be unreasonable in light of 
what appears to be Congress's determination that "manipu-
lation" can be illegal solely because of the actor's purpose.  
See Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense 
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 843-44 (1984).  Section 9(a)(2) of 
the Securities Exchange Act, 15 U.S.C. s 78i(a)(2), manifests 
this idea by declaring it unlawful

     [t]o effect ... a series of transactions in any security 
     registered on a national securities exchange creating 
     actual or apparent active trading in such security or 
     raising or depressing the price of such security, for the 
     purpose of inducing the purchase or sale of such security 
     by others.
     
Id.1  This provision is quite separate from the subsections of 
s 9 prohibiting manipulation through fraudulent devices such 
as wash sales, 15 U.S.C. s 78i(a)(1)(A), matched sales, id. at 

__________
     1  15 U.S.C. s 78i has been slightly altered since Global's closure 
in 1991, but those amendments are irrelevant in this proceeding.

s 78i(a)(1)(B)-(C), and false statements, id. at s 78i(a)(4).  
Given Congress's clear endorsement for sanctions against this 
sort of manipulation, the Commission's inclusion of it within 
the phrase "manipulative ... device" in s 10(b), id. at 
s 78j(b), cannot have been unreasonable.

     The Commission's interpretation is also consistent with its 
rules governing an issuer's purchases of its own securities.  
See Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Rule 10b-18, 17 C.F.R. 
s 240.10b-18.  Issuer repurchases are perfectly real transac-
tions.  But the Commission has created a safe harbor mea-
sured in terms of timing, volume, and price;  purchases 
outside the safe harbor are subject to possible enforcement 
action as manipulations.  See Purchases of Certain Equity 
Securities by the Issuer and Others;  Adoption of Safe Har-
bor, 47 Fed. Reg. 53,333 (1982).

     Further, to the extent that the case against liability for 
"trade-based" manipulation depends on its inherently self-
deterring character, petitioners' situation may be distinguish-
able.  The activity in Mountaintop furthered an external 
purpose.  At least in the short term, Global supported Moun-
taintop's price not to profit from later sales of Mountaintop, 
but to maintain customer interest in Global generally and to 
sustain confidence in its other securities.  As James Shanley, 
Global's chief operating officer, testified, petitioner Riccio 
explained his refusal to lower his bid price:  "If we do that on 
one stock, they [presumably, holders of Global's stocks] will 
hit us on all the stocks."  Thus, the prospects of losing some 
money on Mountaintop in the short run would not deter 
Global from manipulating--if that cost was worth the benefit 
of keeping its customers and preserving confidence in its 
other stocks.

     Apart from their conceptual attack on liability for manipu-
lation where the trades are "real," petitioners argue that 
Global's $1,400,000 net loss on Mountaintop precludes any 
finding of scienter.  In the alternative, they say that these 
losses in Mountaintop at least cut against a finding of manipu-
lation.  Neither variation is persuasive.  Just because a ma-
nipulator loses money doesn't mean he wasn't trying.  In-

deed, as suggested above, attempts to support a price for an 
ulterior purpose seem unlikely to prevail if success will take a 
long time--protracted struggle against market fundamentals 
will exhaust the manipulator's resources.

     Petitioners' third claim asserts that some of the evidence 
before the Commission was so defective that the Commis-
sion's findings lack substantial evidence.  They point to possi-
ble infirmities in the NASD's Chronological Transaction Anal-
ysis ("CTA"), which the NASD used to support its findings 
that Global's bid prices were higher than needed to acquire 
the stock, and that its inventories of Mountaintop securities 
were larger than could be explained by a genuine investment 
intent.  However compelling the criticisms may be, they are 
inapposite.  The Commission made clear that its findings of 
manipulation rested not on the CTA, but on the statements 
from the firm's own personnel.  SEC Denial of Reconsidera-
tion at 2.  That testimony, which the Commission was entitled 
to credit, substantially supports the Commission's key find-
ing:  that the firm bought Mountaintop securities in order to 
maintain their apparent market price.

     For example, Shanley testified that Mountaintop securities 
opened "too high" and remained at high levels only because 
Global was "always supporting the stock."  He further re-
counted conversations with Markowski in which he argued 
that supporting a stock against the market was impossible--
as the event seemed to prove.  And Gary Boccio, Global's 
compliance officer, testified that Markowski explained his 
refusal to reduce Global's inventory by saying that "he didn't 
want to show we had any weakness in the stocks."  Indeed, 
Riccio himself admitted that although there was no demand in 
the open market, Global made the sole high bid for days, even 
months, on end.  (Global evidently was able to offload much 
of the Mountaintop stock that it acquired on special "clients" 
of Markowski, whose role--victims?  coconspirators?  some 
other class?--neither side in this litigation has seen fit to 
explain.)  Riccio said that he maintained Global's bids be-
cause he feared a drop in price and the customer complaints 
it would generate.

     Finally, Markowski challenges the SEC's findings that he 
violated Global's restriction agreement by maintaining inven-
tory positions exceeding 200% of Global's excess net capital, 
and that he refused to submit to an NASD investigative 
interview.  Markowski acknowledges the ancillary character 
of these issues, however, and asks for relief regarding them 
only if we find no basis for the principal manipulation charge.  
Since we find that sufficient grounds support the manipu-
lation charge, we need not reach these issues.

     In any event, the arguments are unconvincing.  Substantial 
evidence, including testimony from Shanley and a memoran-
dum from Boccio, support the SEC's finding that Markowski 
knew about Global's continuing violations of the restriction 
agreement.  See, e.g., Patrick v. SEC, 19 F.3d 66, 69 (2d Cir. 
1994).  Similarly, the SEC reasonably found that Markow-
ski's eventual acquiescence in an NASD request for an inter-
view two months after his scheduled interview and four 
months after NASD's initial request neither qualified as "full 
and prompt cooperation" nor was sufficient to cancel his prior 
recalcitrance.  In re Borth, 51 S.E.C. 178, 180-81 (1992) 
(discussing the importance of timely cooperation with NASD 
investigations);  In re Williams, 50 S.E.C. 1070, 1072 (1992) 
(holding that litigation concerns did not excuse delays in 
cooperation).

                             *  *  *

     The order of the SEC is

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                            