                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 26, 2000   Decided December 29, 2000 

                           No. 00-1067

                     Deferiet Paper Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Daniel G. Rosenthal argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Donn C. Meindertsma and D. Scott 
Poley.

     Deirdre C. Fitzpatrick, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Aileen A. 

Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and David 
Habenstreit, Supervisory Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Randolph, and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  In June 1999, Deferiet Paper 
Company purchased the assets of a paper mill in Deferiet, 
New York, from Champion International.  Champion had 
collective-bargaining agreements with two unions represent-
ing maintenance employees in the mill.  Paper, Allied-Indus-
trial, Chemical and Energy Workers, Locals 45 & 56, 
AFL-CIO ("PACE") represented production workers and 
those maintenance department workers classified as welders, 
masons, oilers, tinsmiths, electricians and instrument mechan-
ics.  Local Lodge 1009, District Lodge 65 of the International 
Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, AFL-CIO 
("IAM") represented maintenance employees classified as 
millwrights, pipefitters, machinists and shift mechanics.  Pri-
or to the sale of the mill, there were 102 employees in 
Champion's maintenance department.  IAM represented 60 
of these employees;  PACE represented 42.  Of the 82 main-
tenance workers who remained at the mill after the sale to 
Deferiet, 46 had been represented by IAM and 36 had been 
represented by PACE.  Approximately 300 production em-
ployees, who work in the same area of the plant, are repre-
sented by PACE.

     After Deferiet acquired the mill, each union requested 
recognition to bargain on behalf of those maintenance em-
ployees it had represented in the past.  Deferiet declined to 
recognize IAM, claiming that the division between IAM and 
PACE maintenance employees was no longer appropriate.  
Instead Deferiet recognized PACE as the exclusive collective 
bargaining agent for all production and maintenance person-
nel.

     In the resulting unit clarification proceeding, Deferiet ar-
gued that the IAM unit should be accreted to the PACE unit 
because changes in the work duties of plant employees meant 
that the IAM employees no longer had a separate community 

of interest.  At Champion, maintenance employees were di-
vided by craft classifications that corresponded to their indi-
vidual skills (e.g., millwrights, pipefitters).  According to De-
feriet they did little, if any, crossover work between their 
respective areas of expertise.  Deferiet canceled the tradi-
tional craft-titled classifications and replaced them with cate-
gories for craftspersons called "A," "B," "AB" or "AA."  
Deferiet also developed a new employee handbook, alerting 
employees that they might be required to work in areas other 
than their traditional craft assignments.  Based largely on 
these changes, and on the allegation that the PACE/IAM 
distinction was solely the result of an historical accident, 
Deferiet sought a determination that the separate units were 
no longer appropriate.

     The Board's Regional Director determined that Deferiet 
had made insufficient changes to the operation of the facility 
to render the existing IAM unit inappropriate.  She viewed 
the reclassification of workers as craftspersons A and B as 
largely meaningless, since the only basis for assignment to 
one of these positions was the historical craft skill of the 
employees.  All of the IAM-represented workers became 
craftspersons A, and all of the PACE-represented workers 
became craftspersons B.  She found that employees "perform 
various maintenance duties in essentially the same manner as 
before the sale," and concluded that Deferiet "did not make 
significant changes in the structure and operation of the mill."

     The Board denied Deferiet's request for review.  When the 
company thereafter declined to bargain with IAM, the Gener-
al Counsel filed a complaint and moved for summary judg-
ment.  The Board granted this and issued an order requiring 
Deferiet to bargain with the IAM upon request.  The compa-
ny petitioned for review and the Board cross-petitioned for 
enforcement of its order.

     Board precedent in successor-employer cases favors the 
retention of historical bargaining units.  "A successor em-
ployer is required to recognize and negotiate with the bar-
gaining agent of a predecessor's employees if the bargaining 
unit remains appropriate and the successor does not have a 

good faith doubt of the union's continuing majority support."1  
Trident Seafoods, Inc. v. NLRB, 101 F.3d 111, 114 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  Deferiet tells us that this precedent, which the Board 
invoked here, conflicts with a dictum in NLRB v. Burns 
International Security Services, Inc., 406 U.S. 272, 281 
(1972).2  The trouble is that Deferiet never made any such 
argument during the Board proceedings.  We therefore can-
not decide whether the Board should have followed the Burns 
dictum.  See 29 U.S.C. s 160(e) ("No objection that has not 
been urged before the Board, its member, agent, or agency, 
shall be considered by the court, unless the failure or neglect 
to urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordi-
nary circumstances.");  Exxel/Atmos, Inc. v. NLRB, 147 F.3d 
972, 978 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

     Deferiet's fall-back position is that the old IAM unit is not 
an appropriate unit despite the presumption in favor of 
historical bargaining units.  Why?  Because creation of the 
IAM unit at the mill was an "historical accident";  because 
Deferiet substantially restructured the operations of the mill 
after its acquisition;  and because under the Board's "tradi-
tional standards," a separate IAM unit for some maintenance 
workers in the newly-acquired mill would be inappropriate.  
The Regional Director rejected the company's claims after 

__________
     1 Deferiet concedes that it is a successor employer.  It does not 
contest the majority support of IAM within a unit comprised of 
employees in the crafts this union previously represented, but the 
company denies that majority support exists for IAM within the 
larger unit of all production and maintenance workers.

     2 Burns held that a successor employer has an obligation to 
bargain with the union if the bargaining unit remained unchanged 
and a majority of the employees hired by the new employer are 
represented by "a recently certified bargaining agent," id.  To this 
the Supreme Court added:  "It would be a wholly different case if 
the Board had determined that because [the successor's] operation-
al structure and practices differed from those of [the predecessor 
employer] and the ... bargaining unit was no longer an appropriate 
one."  Id. at 280.  This sentence, according to Deferiet, precludes 
the Board from adopting a presumption in favor of historical 
bargaining units.

examining each of its alleged post-acquisition changes, and 
asking whether the change significantly altered the former 
IAM unit.  But the proper inquiry was not simply whether 
the evidence showed "significant changes in the operation of 
the mill since [Deferiet] has assumed control."  Neither the 
decisions of this court nor those of the Board sanction a 
purely comparative inquiry.  See Trident Seafoods, 101 F.3d 
at 118 (collecting standards);  Indianapolis Mack Sales & 
Serv., 288 N.L.R.B. 1123, 1126 (1988);  Crown Zellerbach 
Corp., 246 N.L.R.B. 202, 203 (1979).  Although "the Board 
places a heavy evidentiary burden on a party attempting to 
show that historical units are no longer appropriate," this 
burden can be met if "historical units no longer conform 
reasonably well to other standards of appropriateness."  Tri-
dent Seafoods, 101 F.3d at 118 (internal quotations and 
citations omitted).

     In determining whether a unit is appropriate, the Board 
exercises wide discretion.  Packard Motor Car Co. v. NLRB, 
330 U.S. 485, 491 (1947).  Determinations of this sort take 
into account a variety of factors, and often focus on whether 
the unit represents a "community of interest."  See Robert A. 
Gorman, Basic Text on Labor Law 68-74 (1976);  Theodore 
Kheel, Labor Law s 14.03 (2000) (listing various factors 
taken into account by the Board).  In the context of a 
successor employer, the appropriateness inquiry is not the 
same inquiry the Board would conduct when certifying a unit 
for the first time.  Trident Seafoods, 101 F.3d at 118.  We 
wrote in Trident Seafoods:  "In most cases, a historical unit 
will be found appropriate if the predecessor employer recog-
nized it, even if the unit would not be appropriate under 
Board standards if it were being organized for the first 
time,"3 id.--by which we meant that the Board will sustain 
the historical unit even if it is not the most appropriate one.

__________
     3 We do not believe the court in Trident Seafoods meant to say 
that in successorship cases, the Board approves improper bargain-
ing units.  In support of the sentence quoted in the text, the court 
cited the Board's decision in Indianapolis Mack. The Board there 
ruled that a change in ownership of a facility will not automatically 
uproot historical units, "as long as they remain appropriate."  288 

     This is not to say that a historical unit will always be 
upheld in the face of "compelling evidence" of inappropriate-
ness.  Crown Zellerbach Corp., 246 N.L.R.B. at 204;  Met 
Elec. Testing Co., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 106, 2000 WL 1058928, at 
*1 (July 27, 2000).  The most common way for a successor to 
meet its burden is to show that it has made significant 
revisions in plant operations and employee duties.  See Fire-
stone Synthetic Fibers Co., 171 N.L.R.B. 1121, 1123 (1968) 
(finding that similarities in working conditions outweighed the 
historic unit).  Even if the successor implements no signifi-
cant changes, we held in Trident Seafoods that an historical 
unit may still be found inappropriate if it fails to "conform 
reasonably well to other standards of appropriateness."  101 
F.3d at 119-20.  On occasion, both pre-acquisition factors and 
post-acquisition changes in plant operation will combine to 
render an historical unit inappropriate.  Rock-Tenn Co., 274 
N.L.R.B. 772 (1985);  see also Banknote Corp. of Am. v. 
NLRB, 84 F.3d 637, 649 (2d Cir. 1996) (presumption in favor 
of historical units inappropriate when there is evidence that 
units had been rendered obsolete by industry shifts or 
changes in the operation of the predecessor).  A unit might, 
for instance, be only marginally appropriate prior to the 
transaction, in which event relatively small changes following 
the transfer of ownership could push it into the category of an 
inappropriate unit.  Whether this describes the situation in 
the Deferiet paper mill is for the Board, not us, to say.  The 
question is--does the IAM unit "conform reasonably well to 
other standards of appropriateness"?  Indianapolis Mack 
Sales & Serv., 288 N.L.R.B. at 1123 n.5.  The Board never 
answered this question.  Its Regional Director failed to con-
sider the appropriateness of the unit as such.  Her review 
was purely comparative--were Deferiet's changes so signifi-
cant, or so major, or so fundamental that the old unit had 
been replaced by a new and different one.  She did not go 
further and determine whether Deferiet had shown by "com-

__________
N.L.R.B. at 1126.  Properly viewed, the sentence in Trident Sea-
foods conveys the idea that because the burden falls upon the 
employer to demonstrate inappropriateness, the Board may wind up 
certifying a less-than-ideal unit.

pelling evidence" that the old unit no longer conformed to the 
Board's contemporaneous standards of appropriateness.

     We therefore deny enforcement of the Board's order, set 
aside its decision that Deferiet committed unfair labor prac-
tices when it refused to recognize the IAM, and remand the 
case to the Board for further proceedings.

                                                                 So ordered.

                        