                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 8, 2002     Decided July 26, 2002 

                           No. 01-1118

                 Darrell Andrews Trucking, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

          Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
           Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration

     Henry E. Seaton, III argued the cause for petitioner.  
With him on the briefs were James E. Scapellato and John T. 
Husk.

     Robert Digges, Jr. and Erika Z. Jones were on the brief for 
amicus curiae American Trucking Associations, Inc. in sup-
port of petitioner.

     H. Thomas Byron, III, Attorney, U.S. Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for respondent.  On the brief were 
Robert S. Greenspan and August E. Flentje, Attorneys.  Ed-
ward R. Cohen, Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Darrell Andrews Trucking, Inc., a 
commercial motor carrier, petitions for review of an order of 
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) 
assigning Andrews a "conditional" safety rating.  The agency 
gave Andrews that rating because it violated a regulation 
requiring carriers to maintain all documents that support its 
drivers' records of duty status.  The FMCSA found that 
Andrews removed its drivers' toll receipts from driver-specific 
files, where they could be used to verify the number of hours 
a driver was on the road, and commingled them with the 
receipts of all other drivers so that the tolls could not be used 
for verification.  Andrews challenges the FMCSA's decision 
on a number of grounds, including a claim that the agency 
improperly changed its original interpretation of the record-
keeping regulation.  We reject that challenge and all of the 
others but one.  We remand the case to the agency for 
consideration of the sole issue that it failed to address below.

                                I

     Congress has directed the Secretary of Transportation to 
prescribe regulations establishing a procedure for determin-
ing the safety fitness of the owners and operators of commer-
cial motor vehicles.  49 U.S.C. s 31144(b);  see MST Express 
v. Department of Transp., 108 F.3d 401, 402 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  
The Secretary has delegated that responsibility to the 
FMCSA.  49 C.F.R. s 1.73.1  Pursuant to Part 385 of its 

__________
     1 Motor carriers were initially regulated by the Interstate Com-
merce Commission.  Motor Carrier Act, Pub. L. No. 74-255, 49 
Stat. 543 (1935).  In 1966, Congress transferred regulatory authori-
ty to the Department of Transportation, which delegated it to the 

regulations, the FMCSA assigns motor carriers one of three 
possible safety ratings:  "satisfactory," "conditional," or "un-
satisfactory."  49 C.F.R. s 385.3;  see id. s 385.7 (listing 
factors considered in determining safety ratings, including the 
frequency of accidents and the frequency and severity of 
regulatory violations);  see generally MST Express, 108 F.3d 
at 402-03.2  The agency conducts compliance reviews, "on-site 
examination[s] of motor carrier operations," in order "to 
determine whether a motor carrier meets the safety fitness 
standard" and which rating it should be assigned.  49 C.F.R. 
s 385.3;  see id. s 385.9.

     To ensure that truck drivers are awake and alert on the 
road, Congress has also directed the Secretary of Transporta-
tion to prescribe the maximum number of hours they may 
operate their vehicles in a given time period.  See 49 U.S.C. 
s 31502(b).  To implement that directive, the FMCSA has 
promulgated regulations that fix maximum driving times, 49 
C.F.R. s 395.3, and require each driver to keep a record of 
duty status (RODS)3 that records his or her driving times for 
each 24-hour period, id. s 395.8.  In order to permit the 
FMCSA to ensure compliance with the maximum-hours limi-
tations, the regulations further require each motor carrier to 
"maintain records of duty status and all supporting docu-

__________
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), which, in turn, promul-
gated the regulations discussed below.  The FMCSA, which has 
now taken over those responsibilities, was created by the Motor 
Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-159, 113 
Stat. 1748.  See 49 C.F.R. s 1.73.  For the sake of convenience, we 
will refer to both the FMCSA and its predecessor agencies as the 
FMCSA.

     2 Although "a carrier that receives a conditional rating is permit-
ted to continue its normal operations," insurance companies use the 
ratings and shippers consult them when selecting carriers.  MST 
Express, 108 F.3d at 403.  A carrier that receives an unsatisfactory 
rating may not transport certain hazardous materials or more than 
15 passengers.  Id. at 403-04 (citing 49 C.F.R. s 385.13).

     3 For convenience, we will use the abbreviation RODS to refer to 
both "record of duty status" and "records of duty status."

ments for each driver it employs for a period of six months 
from the date of receipt."  49 C.F.R. s 395.8(k)(1).

     On November 9, 2000, during an on-site compliance review, 
FMCSA investigators determined that Andrews had violated 
agency regulations.  The investigators found maximum-hours 
violations as well as false RODS.  Compliance Review, J.A. at 
48-49, 55, 57-58.  In addition, they cited Andrews for failing 
to properly maintain supporting documents for the RODS.  
Specifically, the investigators noted that, although Andrews 
"receives [an] envelope containing each driver's expenses (toll 
receipts, fuel receipts, CAT scale receipts, ...)," it separates 
out the toll receipts and files them "all together" with those of 
the other drivers.  J.A. at 51.  The result, the investigators 
said, is that the "carrier is not able to cross reference toll 
receipts back to the driver's RODS."  Id.  Moreover, if the 
toll receipts had been maintained as received, the investiga-
tors believed that "more falsification would have been discov-
ered."  J.A. at 55.  Based on Andrews' treatment of the toll 
receipts, the investigators cited the carrier for violating 
s 395.8(k)(1), the recordkeeping regulation.  As a conse-
quence of that violation, together with an unrelated citation 
for an excessively high accident rate, the compliance review 
assigned Andrews the lowest of the three possible safety 
ratings:  "unsatisfactory."  J.A. at 49.

     Andrews sought administrative review before the FMCSA.  
The carrier conceded that it maintained the toll receipts in 
the ordinary course of its business.  In re Darrell Andrews 
Trucking, Inc., No. 2001-8686, slip op. at 8 (FMCSA Jan. 19, 
2001).  Andrews argued, however, that the receipts were not 
"supporting documents" within the meaning of s 395.8(k)(1), 
because it did not use them to verify the information in its 
drivers' RODS.  It further contended that, even if the toll 
receipts were supporting documents, the regulation did not 
require that such documents be kept in a manner that 
permitted their correlation with the driver to whom they 
corresponded.

     The FMCSA disagreed.  First, it concluded that, under 
s 395.8(k)(1), "supporting documents" include documents that 

"can be used to verify information on the driver's records of 
duty status"--not only those that the carrier actually does 
use.  Andrews Trucking, FMCSA slip op. at 9-10 (emphasis 
added) (citing Regulatory Guidance for the Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations, 62 Fed. Reg. 16,370, 16,425 (Apr. 
4, 1997)).  Second, the FMCSA thought it reasonable to 
construe the maintenance requirement as requiring carriers 
to maintain the documents in a usable condition.  Id. at 10.  
As did the investigators, the agency noted that although each 
Andrews driver turns in a "trip envelope" that contains his or 
her toll and other receipts, thereafter "the toll receipts are 
removed and all filed together in one central location."  Id. at 
8.  This " 'salad shooter' approach," the FMCSA held, "does 
not comply with the spirit of the law and frustrates proper 
enforcement."  Id. at 11 (quoting In re A.D. Transport 
Express, Inc., No. 00-05-296052, slip op. at 5 (FMCSA May 
22, 2000), aff'd, A.D. Transport Express, Inc. v. United 
States, 290 F.3d 761 (6th Cir. 2002)).  In particular, it "frus-
trates an investigator[']s ability to connect the supporting 
document (toll receipt) and the RODS," and leaves the inves-
tigator "unable to use the toll receipt to check for hours-of-
service or falsification violations of the driver."  Id. at 8.  
Finally, the agency concluded that prior compliance reviews 
had put Andrews "on notice that [its] method of retention of 
supporting documents (including toll receipts) does not con-
form to the regulatory requirements."  Id. at 9.

     Although the FMCSA upheld Andrews' s 395.8(k)(1) viola-
tion, it raised the carrier's overall safety rating to "condition-
al" because it found that one of the accidents on its record 
had been non-preventable.  Id. at 11-13.  Andrews now 
petitions for review of the determination that it violated 
s 395.8(k)(1).  See 28 U.S.C. s 2344.

                                II

     This court must uphold a decision of the FMCSA unless it 
is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise 
not in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A);  El Conejo 
Americano of Texas, Inc. v. Department of Transp., 278 F.3d 

17, 19-20 (D.C. Cir. 2002).  We accord "substantial deference 
to [an] agency's interpretation of its own regulations," Thom-
as Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala, 512 U.S. 504, 512 (1994), and 
will affirm the FMCSA's interpretation of one of its regula-
tions unless "it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the 
regulation itself."  Corridor H Alternatives, Inc. v. Slater, 
166 F.3d 368, 372 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (internal quotation marks 
omitted);  see Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S. 452, 461 (1997).

     Andrews raises five main challenges to the FMCSA's deci-
sion.  According to Andrews, the requirement that it main-
tain each driver's toll receipts, and that it refrain from 
combining them with the receipts of all other drivers:  (i) 
constitutes a change in the original regulation, promulgated 
without the required notice and opportunity for comment;  (ii) 
even if not a change, was applied to Andrews without fair 
notice;  (iii) imposes increased and unapproved recordkeeping 
burdens, in violation of the Paperwork Reduction Act, 44 
U.S.C. ss 3501-3520;  (iv) was applied to Andrews without 
adherence to proper adjudicatory procedures;  and (v) was 
imposed without consideration of a substantial countervailing 
consideration.  We consider Andrews' five challenges below.4

                               III

     Andrews' first argument is that the interpretation of 
s 395.8(k)(1) upon which the FMCSA based its decision con-
stitutes a substantial change in the agency's construction of 
that regulation, and that it was unlawful for the agency to 
make such a change without promulgating a new regulation 
pursuant to the notice and comment provisions of the Admin-
istrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. s 553(c).  See Appa-
lachian Power Co. v. EPA, 208 F.3d 1015, 1024 (D.C. Cir. 
2000) ("It is well-established that an agency may not escape 
the notice and comment requirements ... by labeling a major 
substantive legal addition to a rule a mere interpretation.");  
Paralyzed Veterans of Am. v. D.C. Arena L.P., 117 F.3d 579, 

__________
     4 Andrews raises a number of additional arguments, or variants 
on the above arguments, which we have considered and rejected but 
which are too insubstantial for extended discussion.

586 (D.C. Cir. 1997) ("Once an agency gives its regulation an 
interpretation, it can only change that interpretation as it 
would formally modify the regulation itself:  through the 
process of notice and comment rulemaking.").  To succeed 
with this argument, Andrews must show that the "agency has 
given its regulation a definitive interpretation, and later sig-
nificantly revise[d] that interpretation."  Alaska Prof'l Hunt-
ers Ass'n v. FAA, 177 F.3d 1030, 1034 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     Andrews contends that two elements of the FMCSA's 
decision represent significant changes from the agency's pri-
or, definitive position.  Those are the agency's determinations 
that:  (a) toll receipts that the carrier does not itself use for 
verification of RODS are "supporting documents" that the 
carrier must maintain;  and (b) the carrier must not only 
preserve the toll receipts but also must refrain from removing 
them from individually identifiable files and combining them 
in a fashion that makes correlation with individual drivers 
impossible.  We consider each of these determinations below.

                                A

     The FMCSA concluded that Andrews' toll receipts are 
"supporting documents" because they could be used by the 
carrier and the agency to check the accuracy of the drivers' 
RODS.  Andrews contends that the term applies only to 
documents that a carrier actually uses to verify the RODS.  
Because Andrews does not use toll receipts in its verification 
process, the carrier contends that it is not required to main-
tain them.

     Section 395.8(k) states:

     Retention of driver's record of duty status.  (1) Each 
     motor carrier shall maintain records of duty status and 
     all supporting documents for each driver it employs for a 
     period of six months from the date of receipt.
     
49 C.F.R. s 395.8(k).  The regulation does not define "sup-
porting documents" and, as a consequence, we are bound to 
defer to a reasonable agency interpretation.  The agency 
interprets the term as encompassing any document that could 

be used to support the RODS, and notes that a toll receipt 
(because it is normally date- and time-stamped) is such a 
document.  Although this may not be the only plausible 
interpretation of "supporting document," it is hardly unrea-
sonable.  The agency further contends that to adopt An-
drews' interpretation--which would permit each carrier to 
exclude from the coverage of s 395.8(k)(1) any document it 
chose simply by not using it for verification--would eviscerate 
enforcement of the maximum-hours regulations.  While that 
may be an overstatement of the consequence of adopting 
Andrews' view, the agency is nonetheless correct in arguing 
that its own view is consistent with the regulatory purpose 
and facilitates the agency's ability to ensure the veracity of 
the RODS and the enforcement of the limits on driving time.

     We thus conclude that the FMCSA's current interpretation 
of s 395.8(k)(1) is a reasonable construction of its regulation.  
Nonetheless, that interpretation might still trigger the re-
quirements of notice and comment if it represents a signifi-
cant change from a previous, definitive interpretation.  We 
are unable, however, to discern such a change.

     In support of its contention that the FMCSA previously 
interpreted "supporting documents" as limited to those actu-
ally "used by" a carrier, Andrews points to a passage from a 
regulatory guidance that the agency issued in 1993 and 
repeated verbatim in 1997:

     Supporting documents are the records of the motor 
     carrier which are maintained in the ordinary course of 
     business and used by the motor carrier to verify the 
     information recorded on the driver's record of duty sta-
     tus.  Examples are:  Bills of lading ..., weight/scale 
     tickets, fuel receipts, fuel billing statements, [and] toll 
     receipts....
     
Regulatory Guidance for the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations, 58 Fed. Reg. 60,734, 60,761 (Nov. 17, 1993), 
repeated in 62 Fed. Reg. 16,370, 16,425 (Apr. 4, 1997) (empha-
sis added).  In focusing on this passage, however, Andrews 
neglects the two sentences that immediately follow, and that 

appear to adopt a "can be used" (or "could be used") interpre-
tation:

     Supporting documents may include other documents 
     which the motor carrier maintains and can be used to 
     verify information on the driver's records of duty status.
     
Id. (emphasis added).  The regulatory guidance thus offers 
some support for the positions of both Andrews and the 
FMCSA, and can only be described as--at best--ambiguous.  
It cannot be said to mark a definitive interpretation from 
which the agency's current construction is a substantial de-
parture.

     In further support of its argument, Andrews points to a 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) that the FMCSA 
issued in 1998 but never finalized in a promulgated rule.  The 
NPRM was issued in response to Congress' directive, in the 
Hazardous Materials Transportation Authorization Act of 
1994, Pub. L. No. 103-311, s 113, 108 Stat. 1673, that the 
FMCSA clarify the meaning of "supporting document" and 
list those supporting documents that a carrier is required to 
maintain.  The statute directed the FMCSA to "prescribe 
regulations amending part 395 of [C.F.R.] title 49," and to 
include "[a] provision specifying the number, type, and fre-
quency of supporting documents that must be retained by a 
motor carrier."  Id. s 113(a)(1), (b)(2).  For purposes of those 
new regulations, the legislation defined a supporting docu-
ment as "any document that is generated or received by a 
motor carrier or commercial motor vehicle driver in the 
normal course of business that could be used, as produced or 
with additional identifying information, to verify the accuracy 
of a driver's record of duty status."  Id. s 113(c) (emphasis 
added).  The congressional directive was not self-executing 
(and did not indicate whether it was restating or changing the 
agency's existing interpretation).  Hence, because the 
FMCSA never promulgated the contemplated regulation, the 
statutory definition does not govern this case.  It does, 
however, provide support for the proposition that the agen-
cy's interpretation of "supporting document," as a document 

that "could be used" to verify the accuracy of a RODS, is 
reasonable.

     Needless to say, this is not the aspect of the NPRM to 
which Andrews draws our attention.  Instead, it contends 
that statements in the notice show that the FMCSA under-
stood its original 1982 interpretation of supporting documents 
as limited to documents actually used by the carrier.  But the 
1998 NPRM is no less ambiguous (or, perhaps better put, no 
less self-contradictory) than the guidances that preceded it.  
The NPRM does state, as Andrews notes, that:

     The FMCSA intended that the term "supporting docu-
     ment" refer to those specific documents, and only those 
     specific documents, that a motor carrier used in its 
     internally-developed system or program to verify the 
     accuracy of the driver's duty activities.  It was not meant 
     to encompass all records, but only those that were, 
     indeed, used by the motor carrier, to verify the dates, 
     times, and locations the driver recorded.
     
Hours of Service of Drivers;  Supporting Documents, 63 Fed. 
Reg. 19,457, 19,459 (Apr. 20, 1998) (emphasis added).  But 
two sentences later, the NPRM destroys this clarity by 
stating:

     The regulatory guidance stated that supporting docu-
     ments are the records of the motor carrier maintained in 
     the ordinary course of business that are used, or could be 
     used, by the motor carrier to verify the information 
     recorded on a driver's record of duty status.
     
Id. (emphasis added).  Moreover, the NPRM then goes on to 
state that it is "proposing to use the statutory definition of 
supporting documents as provided by Congress in the Act," 
id.--i.e., the "could be used" definition--and declares that, 
because "since 1982, [the FMCSA] has required that all 
supporting documents must be collected and kept for six 
months[,] [t]his collection of documents ... is not a new 
paperwork burden."  Id. at 19,464.  In short, although "am-
biguous" may be too charitable a word to describe these 
conflicting passages in the NPRM, the one thing that is clear 
is that the document cannot be regarded as a definitive 
acknowledgment that the agency had previously regarded 

"used by" rather than "could be used" as the appropriate 
interpretation of "supporting documents."

     Finally, we note that, while its Federal Register notices are 
less than clear, the agency's prior informal adjudication on 
this issue is quite clear and completely in accord with the 
view of "supporting documents" relied upon by the FMCSA 
below.  In In re National Retail Transportation, Inc., No. 
R1-92-03 (FMCSA Sept. 12, 1996), the FMCSA rejected a 
carrier's claim, identical to that of Andrews, that the term 
"supporting documents" should be limited to "those that the 
motor carrier uses--instead of could have been used--for log 
verification."  Id., FMCSA slip op. at 6.  If supporting docu-
ments were defined as the carrier urged, the FMCSA contin-
ued, "motor carriers could always escape responsibility for 
retaining them merely by saying that they do not use them."  
Id.  Instead, the agency said, s 395.8(k)(1) "provided [the 
carrier] with reasonable notice of a duty to keep ordinary 
business documents so that the record of duty status of its 
drivers could be verified"--specifically including documents 
containing "information such as mileage, origin, destination, 
stops, expenses, [and] tolls."  Id. at 5 (emphasis added).5

     In sum, in the midst of the period in which the FMCSA 
issued the ambiguous guidances relied upon by Andrews, it 
issued a clear decision that confirms the interpretation ap-
plied by the agency in this case.  Andrews is therefore unable 

__________
     5 Another FMCSA decision cited by Andrews, In re Ace Doran 
Hauling & Rigging Co. (FMCSA Feb. 24, 2000), is inapposite.  
That case involved the question of whether a motor carrier was 
required to obtain and retain the toll receipts of drivers who, unlike 
Andrews' drivers, were owner-operators rather than employees.  
The agency concluded that "the supporting documents rule is not 
applicable to toll receipts received by [Ace Doran's] owner operator 
drivers since [Doran] does not reimburse them for highway tolls ... 
and therefore does not, in the normal course of business, require 
these drivers to submit toll receipts."  Id., FMCSA slip op. at 2.  
Here, by contrast, there is no dispute that Andrews does reimburse 
its drivers, and does require them to submit toll receipts in the 
ordinary course of its business.

to show that the decision below represents a substantial 
change in the agency's construction of s 395.8(k)(1).

                                B

     Andrews further contends that, even if toll receipts are 
supporting documents and therefore must be maintained, 
s 395.8(k)(1) does not require motor carriers to maintain 
them in a way that permits the FMCSA to match them with 
their corresponding drivers.  Andrews argues that the 
phrase, "shall maintain ... all supporting documents for each 
driver," requires maintenance only and does not specify the 
manner in which the documents must be maintained.  The 
agency, by contrast, argues that "maintain" is reasonably 
construed to mean maintain in a usable condition:  here, that 
the carrier may not take documents that it receives in a 
format that permits identification of individual drivers, and 
then merge them so that the individual identifications are 
lost.  Once again, we find the agency's interpretation reason-
able.

     Although s 395.8(k)(1) does not define "maintain," it is 
hardly arbitrary to construe the regulation in light of its 
purpose--which is to ensure "the enforceability of the hours 
of service regulations and ... the protection to the public 
which these regulations provide."  Driver's Logs, 47 Fed. 
Reg. 7702, 7702 (Feb. 22, 1982).  If the carrier maintains the 
toll receipts (which usually do not have the individual driver's 
name on them) in the manner in which they arrive at its 
office--i.e., in the individual driver's trip envelope--it is possi-
ble for both the carrier and the FMCSA to enforce those 
regulations.  If, instead, Andrews removes the receipts and, 
without copying or otherwise marking them, combines them 
with the receipts of all other drivers, correlation with individ-
ual drivers becomes impossible and the purpose of the regula-
tion is frustrated.  It is thus not unreasonable for the agency 
to read "maintain" in a way that bars the latter practice.

     Andrews seeks support for its position in the following 
passage from the 1993 and 1997 guidances cited above:

     Supporting documents may include other documents 
     which the motor carrier maintains and can be used to 
     
     verify information on the driver's records of duty status.  
     If these records are maintained at locations other than 
     the principal place of business but are not used by the 
     motor carrier for verification purposes, they must be 
     forwarded to the principal place of business upon a 
     request by an authorized representative of [the FMCSA] 
     or State official within 2 business days.
     
58 Fed. Reg. at 60,761, repeated in 62 Fed. Reg. at 16,425 
(emphasis added).  Andrews contends that the italicized 
clause recognizes that a carrier may keep records that it does 
not use for verification, like the toll receipts in this case, at a 
location remote from the place at which it keeps the driver's 
RODS.  But while Andrews is correct in concluding that 
supporting documents may be removed from their original 
location, the passage also makes clear that the documents 
must quickly be returned upon the request of an FMCSA 
investigator.  And since the investigator's purpose in request-
ing return is to permit verification of the information in the 
driver's RODS, it is not unreasonable for the agency to insist 
that, if the documents are removed, they must be handled in 
a fashion that permits them to be matched with their original 
driver.

     Andrews also contends that the FMCSA's decision in this 
case amounts to the de facto adoption of a recordkeeping 
requirement considered but rejected in the 1998 NPRM.  
Like that requirement, Andrews asserts, the FMCSA deci-
sion requires the carrier to "toe tag" (label by driver) every 
supporting document, create a system of cross-indexing, and 
then file each document accordingly.  But that is not an 
accurate description of the decision below.  This case involves 
a document (a toll receipt) that Andrews concedes it receives 
in the ordinary course of business, and that it receives in a 
manner (inside the driver's trip envelope) that permits identi-
fication of the driver who submitted it.  All the FMCSA's 
decision requires is that Andrews retain such documents (for 
six months) and refrain from destroying the agency's ability 
to match them with their associated drivers by taking them 
out of their original envelopes and tossing them into a com-
mon pile.  In short, the FMCSA's decision does not require 

Andrews to index these documents;  it merely bars the carrier 
from de-indexing them (at least without copying or labeling 
them first).6

     Our conclusion, that the FMCSA has reasonably interpret-
ed s 395.8(k)(1) as barring Andrews from irretrievably com-
mingling its drivers' toll receipts, is in accord with the views 
of the only other circuit to have considered the question.  In 
A.D. Transport Express, Inc. v. United States, the Sixth 
Circuit considered the FMCSA's conditional rating of a motor 
carrier that, like Andrews, treated its drivers' toll receipts in 
a fashion that prevented their comparison with the associated 
driver's RODS.  290 F.3d 761 (6th Cir. 2002), aff'g In re A.D. 
Transport Express, Inc., No. 00-05-296052 (FMCSA May 22, 
2000).  A.D. Transport received a driver's packet from each 
driver, containing (inter alia) the driver's toll receipts, bills of 
lading, fuel receipts, and logs.  When the payroll department 
finished with the toll receipts, it "lumped" the receipts for all 
its drivers "into one large envelope" for each month of the 
year--making correlation of receipts and drivers impossible.  
The FMCSA found A.D. Transport to have violated 
s 395.8(k)(1), holding that "supporting documents must be 
maintained by the carrier in a manner that will allow an 
agency investigator to compare those documents to the 
RODS."  In re A.D. Transport, FMCSA slip op. at 5, quoted 
in A.D. Transport, 290 F.3d at 766.

     The Sixth Circuit affirmed, concluding that "the FMCSA's 
interpretation of 49 C.F.R. s 395.8(k) is reasonable and con-
sistent with the language of the regulations."  A.D. Trans-
port, 290 F.3d at 766.  It found that A.D. Transport's practice 
"rendered the toll receipts nearly useless in verifying a 
driver's RODS," and that while it was semantically possible to 

__________
     6 Similarly, in A.D. Transport, discussed below, the FMCSA 
emphasized that the toll receipts at issue there were "already 
grouped nicely together by driver" when the carrier received them.  
In re A.D. Transport, FMCSA slip op. at 6.  It was only the 
"carrier[']s own overt action that resulted in the separation of the 
supporting documents from the RODS without first taking proper 
steps to cross reference the documents back to the driver's RODS."  
Id.

construe "maintain" as requiring nothing more than what 
A.D. Transport did, the FMCSA's interpretation better 
served the statutory purpose of promoting the safe operation 
of commercial motor vehicles.  Id. at 767.  Finally, the court 
also held that, because the FMCSA's decision "did nothing 
more than interpret an existing regulation" and "did not 
change any existing law or policy," it "was an interpretative 
rule exempt from the notice and comment requirements of 
the Administrative Procedure Act."  Id. at 768.  We are in 
accord with the views of the Sixth Circuit, and therefore 
reject the claim of the petitioner here.7

                                IV

     Andrews' next argument is that, even if the FMCSA's 
interpretation of s 395.8(k)(1) is reasonable and unchanged, 
"Andrews had no fair notice that its satisfactory safety rating 
was in jeopardy" for failing to maintain its drivers' toll 
receipts in an identifiable fashion.  Andrews Br. at 18.  In 
General Electric Co. v. EPA, we held that "[i]n the absence of 
notice--for example, when the regulation is not sufficiently 
clear to warn a party about what is expected of it--an agency 
may not deprive a party of property by imposing civil or 
criminal liability."  53 F.3d 1324, 1328-29 (D.C. Cir. 1995).8  
As the discussion in Part III.A suggests, there is something 
to Andrews' argument that the agency has been less than 
clear as to whether the term "supporting documents" extends 

__________
     7 Andrews correctly notes that, although the Sixth Circuit opinion 
does not mention it, the carrier in A.D. Transport, unlike Andrews, 
used the toll receipts to verify the accuracy of its drivers' RODS.  
See In re A.D. Transport, FMCSA slip op. at 2, 3.  That fact, 
however, goes only to the question of whether the toll receipts 
should be characterized as "supporting documents," not to the 
manner of their retention.  As we have concluded that Andrews' toll 
receipts are supporting documents regardless of whether they are 
actually used for RODS verification, the Sixth Circuit's decision is 
directly on point regarding how such documents must be main-
tained.

     8 General Electric applies where the a party is deprived of 
"property," or where "sanctions are drastic."  Id. at 1328-29.  

to records, like Andrews' toll receipts, that could be but are 
not actually used by a carrier to verify its drivers' RODS.  
Although the regulatory language may not itself be so unclear 
as to implicate the General Electric rule, the self-
contradictory "clarifying" utterances of the agency could have 
left a carrier confused about what was required of it.  For 
that, the agency has no one but itself to blame.  Despite 
Congress' 1994 direction that the FMCSA issue a regulation 
elucidating the term's coverage, the agency has still inexplica-
bly failed to act.

     Notwithstanding the ambiguity of the regulatory guidances, 
however, the FMCSA's 1996 opinion in National Retail 
Transportation was crystal clear on this point.  It expressly 
rejected the claim that supporting documents are only those a 
motor carrier actually uses, and specifically listed tolls as the 
kind of information included within the realm of "supporting 
documents."9  Moreover, Andrews' early reaction to its 2000 
citation strongly suggests that the employer was not in doubt 
that s 395.8(k)(1) requires it to maintain toll receipts.  The 
carrier's petition for administrative review did not dispute 
that toll receipts are supporting documents, but claimed only 
that the regulation did not require that "all supporting docu-
ments [be] filed by each driver."  J.A. at 7 (emphasis omit-
ted).  Similarly, the affidavit of Andrews' safety director 
acknowledged that "I retain toll receipts for at least six 
months to comply with 49 C.F.R. 395.8(k)."  Jones Aff. at 2 
(J.A. at 14).10  Indeed, despite the legal arguments Andrews 

__________
Because we conclude that Andrews received fair notice, we need not 
decide whether the issuance of a "conditional" rating meets those 
prerequisites.

     9 Although Andrews contends that the FMCSA's decisions are not 
widely available, it concedes that they are available on the FMCSA 
website.  Andrews Br. at 17 n.7.  That is sufficient notice for a well-
represented regulated entity as intensely interested in the issue as 
is Andrews.

     10 Andrews did dispute that toll receipts are supporting docu-
ments in the brief it filed in support of its administrative appeal.  
J.A. at 38.

raises here, the fact is that Andrews does retain its toll 
receipts:  the carrier was not downgraded for not having toll 
receipts, but for refiling them in a manner that left them 
useless.

     The only remaining question, therefore, is whether An-
drews had sufficient notice that the FMCSA regarded An-
drews' practice of combining drivers' toll receipts as a viola-
tion of s 395.8(k)(1).  On that point, this court has no doubt.  
Under General Electric, an "agency's pre-enforcement efforts 
to bring about compliance will provide adequate notice."  53 
F.3d at 1329.  And as the agency points out, Andrews was the 
subject of many such efforts.

     In response to the fair notice argument below, the FMCSA 
held that Andrews "has previously been put on notice that 
[its] method of retention of supporting documents (including 
toll receipts) does not conform to the regulatory require-
ments," specifically citing Andrews' March 1997 compliance 
review.  Andrews Trucking, FMCSA slip op. at 9.  In that 
review, Andrews was cited for violating s 395.8(k)(1), because 
its drivers had submitted "[f]alse reports of record of duty 
status" and because "supporting documents are not identifi-
able to the driver[']s corresponding record of duty status."  
J.A. at 62.  The review went on to advise Andrews to "ensure 
all documents supporting records of duty status (such as toll, 
fuel[,] repair and other on-the-road expense receipts ...) ... 
are identified to the corresponding drivers' record of duty 
status."  J.A. at 63 (emphasis added).11

     Nor was March 1997 the first or last time Andrews was 
warned prior to the instant citation.  In Andrews' July 1991 
compliance review, the FMCSA discovered ten instances in 

__________
     11 Andrews contends that it was entitled to regard this advice as 
optional because it was listed in a part of the compliance review 
sheet labeled "Recommendations."  In light of the other instruc-
tions listed under the same heading, that was not a reasonable 
reading.  See J.A. at 63 (requiring Andrews, inter alia, to "ensure 
all drivers are fully and properly qualified," "maintain all required 
controlled substance testing records," and "ensure all drivers' rec-
ords of duty status are accurate").

which drivers had falsified their RODS.  Administrative Rec-
ord (A.R.) doc. 12, at 2.  Andrews was cited for not having "a 
system to effectively control the drivers' hours of service."  
Id. at 6.  The investigators specifically noted:  "Carrier has 
change[d] his method of filing documents since the last prose-
cution.  Toll records are thrown in a box."  Id. at 7.  There-
after, in a September 1993 compliance review, Andrews was 
again cited for allowing drivers to submit "[f]alse reports of 
records of duty status," and for allowing drivers to drive in 
excess of the maximum-hour limitations.  A.R. doc. 14, at 2.  
The FMCSA specifically noted that Andrews had "reduce[d] 
the probability of identifying a false record of duty status by 
mainta[in]ing toll receipts by payroll period, not by driver."  
Id. at 5.  Finally, in a December 1997 compliance review, the 
investigators once again noted that Andrews had "taken the 
toll tickets from the driver's expense envelope and placed 
these documents in a box with other driver[s'] toll tickets."  
A.R. doc. 18, at 6.  This meant, the investigators said, that 
the toll receipts could not "be used to check the driver's logs 
for accuracy."  It "appear[ed]," they continued, that "the 
carrier has taken steps to make it difficult to determine if the 
drivers are in a specific location at a certain time."  Id.12

     Nor were these citations Andrews' only notice of the 
FMCSA's interpretation of the recordkeeping requirements.  
As we have discussed above, six months before it issued the 
citation to Andrews, the FMCSA held in A.D. Transport that 
a carrier's practice of removing toll receipts from its individu-
al drivers' packets and combining them in large envelopes 

__________
     12 Andrews urges us not to consider these prior compliance 
reviews, on the ground that they were not relied upon by the 
FMCSA below and were outside the administrative record.  An-
drews is wrong on both counts.  In the FMCSA opinion, the 
associate director for motor carriers stated:  "I have reviewed the 
prior CRs [compliance reviews] conducted on this carrier and 
conclude that Darrell Andrews Trucking has previously been put on 
notice...."  Andrews Trucking, FMCSA slip op. at 9.  Moreover, 
the certified index to the administrative record makes clear that the 
compliance reviews of July 1991, September 1993, March 1997, and 
December 1997 were all part of that record.  See J.A. at 3-4.

violated s 395.8(k)(1) and warranted a conditional safety rat-
ing.  In re A.D. Transport, FMCSA slip op. at 6.  Thus, even 
if nothing else did, A.D. Transport put Andrews squarely on 
notice that it should cease the filing practices against which it 
had been repeatedly warned throughout the 1990s.  This is 
not a case in which a regulated entity required "extraordinary 
intuition or ... the aid of a psychic" to anticipate being found 
in violation of a regulation.  United States v. Chrysler Corp., 
158 F.3d 1350, 1357 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  Rather, it is a case in 
which the carrier persisted in its ways despite clear and 
repeated warnings from the relevant government agency.  
Andrews, therefore, can find no refuge in the doctrine of fair 
notice.

                                V

     Andrews also argues that the requirement that toll receipts 
be retained, and retained in a way that permits the FMCSA 
to match them to its drivers' RODS, violates the Paperwork 
Reduction Act, 44 U.S.C. ss 3501-3520.  That statute bars 
the enforcement of a recordkeeping requirement unless it is 
first approved by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB).  Id. ss 3507, 3512.  The FMCSA does not dispute 
the application of the Act to the recordkeeping requirements 
of s 395.8(k)(1), but argues that the statute has been satisfied 
because OMB approved the regulation when it was promul-
gated in 1982.  See Driver's Logs, 47 Fed. Reg. 53,383, 53,383 
(Nov. 26, 1982);  see also 63 Fed. Reg. at 19,464 (referring to 
past OMB approvals of s 395.8(k)(1) recordkeeping require-
ments).

     Andrews contends that the original approval by OMB is 
insufficient because the FMCSA has materially changed the 
meaning of the regulation, and that the new meaning amounts 
to a new recordkeeping burden regardless of whether the 
agency acknowledges the point by promulgating a new rule.  
See 44 U.S.C. s 3507(h)(3) (providing that "an agency may 
not make a substantive or material modification to a collection 
of information after such collection has been approved by 
[OMB], unless the modification has been submitted to [OMB] 

for review and approval").  This argument has little traction, 
however, as we have already accepted the agency's position 
that its current interpretation does not depart from the 
original.  Andrews might nonetheless prevail if it could dem-
onstrate that, whatever the FMCSA thought in 1982, OMB 
understood the regulation differently.  But this Andrews 
cannot do either, as the 1982 announcement of OMB approval 
did not describe what documents either agency thought were 
within the scope of the regulation.  See 47 Fed. Reg. at 
53,383.

     In a related vein, Andrews argues that the FMCSA's latest 
estimate of the burden posed by its current interpretation is 
substantially higher than its estimate of the burden of the 
original rule.  If true, this could suggest that the agency is 
indeed requiring more than it did when the rule was first 
promulgated.13  The cited estimates, however, do not support 
Andrews' argument.

     Once again, the document Andrews points to is the 1998 
NPRM.  There, the FMCSA stated that it believed the 
burden imposed by fully implementing the Hazardous Materi-
als Transportation Authorization Act of 1994 "would be more 
than is currently expected" and "at least 219,095,423 hours."  
63 Fed. Reg. at 19,465.  Although the NPRM did not state 
the "currently expected" burden, Andrews points to a roughly 
contemporaneous submission by the Department of Transpor-
tation that put the figure at 14,284,339 hours.14  Andrews 
contends that the difference results from the Hazardous 
Materials Act's requirement that all documents that "could be 
used" to verify RODS must be retained and indexed, while 

__________
     13 However, because the paperwork burden of a regulation is 
measured by computing the total number of "burden hours" it 
imposes on a nationwide basis, an increased burden may only 
indicate that there are now more carriers, more drivers, and more 
documents of the same kind than there were in 1982.  See, e.g., 
FHWA, Paperwork Reduction Act Submission, Supporting State-
ment at 6 (July 30, 1998).

     14 FHWA, Paperwork Reduction Act Submission, Supporting 
Statement at 6.

the original regulation required nothing more than retention 
of those documents that actually are used to verify RODS.

     The 1998 NPRM, however, does not corroborate Andrews' 
argument.  The estimated 219,095,423-hour burden was not 
for maintaining, in the manner in which they were received 
by the carrier, all documents that could be used to verify a 
driver's RODS.  To the contrary, the agency indicated that 
merely defining supporting documents as the 1994 Act de-
fined them (i.e., as those that "could be" used) "is not a new 
paperwork burden."  Id. at 19,464.  The "collection of docu-
ments" under that definition, the FMCSA said, "has been 
calculated into past paperwork burden approvals of the Office 
of Management and Budget."  Id.  Rather, the 219-million-
hour burden was for a new rule the agency considered but did 
not propose:  a rule that would have required carriers to 
"audit each one" of 23 supporting documents for a minimum 
of five items, "compare the documents to the RODS," and 
"fil[e] and stor[e] the 23 records."  Id. at 19,465.  That was 
the task the agency said was "more than is currently expect-
ed" and that it rejected as too burdensome.  Id.  And as we 
have explained in Part III.B above, that is not the task 
required by the decision below.

     In sum, because the FMCSA's decision in this case relies 
upon a reasonable interpretation of a regulation previously 
cleared by OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act, and 
does not represent the imposition of a new rule or record-
keeping burden, the Act does not bar enforcement of the 
interpretation against Andrews.15

                                VI

     Andrews further contends that, in reaching its decision to 
downgrade the carrier's safety rating, the FMCSA violated 
the procedural requirements of both the APA and the Consti-
tution.  In particular, it contends that the FMCSA improper-

__________
     15 For the same reason, we reject Andrews' assertion that the 
FMCSA violated the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. ss 601-
612, by effectively issuing a new rule without undertaking a cost-
benefit analysis to determine the rule's impact on small business.

ly denied its request for an oral hearing and discovery.  
These arguments require only brief mention.

     Andrews argues that it was entitled to an oral hearing and 
discovery by the provisions of 49 C.F.R. ss 386.35 and 386.43.  
The FMCSA, however, held that those provisions do not 
apply to the downgrading of a safety rating under Part 385, 
but only to three specific types of proceedings under Part 
386, none of which is at issue here.  Andrews Trucking, 
FMCSA slip op. at 3.  This court has previously reached the 
same conclusion.  See MST Express, 108 F.3d at 405 (holding 
that the procedures of Part 386 do not apply to a proceeding 
to determine a carrier's safety rating, and that "a carrier that 
disputes its safety rating is not entitled to an administrative 
hearing").  Nor is there anything in the APA or any relevant 
statute that requires these procedural incidents for informal 
adjudications like this one.  Accordingly, we are powerless to 
order the agency to do more.  See Vermont Yankee Nuclear 
Power Corp. v. NRDC, 435 U.S. 519, 524 (1978);  Hi-Tech 
Furnace Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 224 F.3d 781, 789-90 (D.C. Cir. 
2000);  see also Trailways Lines, Inc. v. ICC, 766 F.2d 1537, 
1546 (D.C. Cir. 1985) ("The conduct and extent of discovery in 
agency proceedings is a matter ordinarily entrusted to the 
expert agency in the first instance and will not, barring the 
most extraordinary circumstances, warrant the Draconian 
sanction of overturning a reasoned agency decision.").

     Andrews' additional contention, that not providing an oral 
hearing and discovery (principally regarding the unreliability 
of toll records) violates the Due Process Clause of the Consti-
tution, is also groundless.  Without deciding whether the 
conditional safety rating at issue deprives Andrews of the 
kind of protected interest that triggers application of the 
clause, see Lepelletier v. FDIC, 164 F.3d 37, 45 (D.C. Cir. 
1999), it is clear that Andrews did receive due process here.  
The FMCSA citation put Andrews on notice of the charges, 
Andrews had an opportunity to present its arguments 
through written briefs, and the carrier similarly had an 
opportunity to present evidence of the unreliability of toll 
receipts by affidavit.  Procedural due process requires no 
more in this kind of administrative setting.  See Lomak 

Petroleum, Inc. v. FERC, 206 F.3d 1193, 1199-200 (D.C. Cir. 
2000).

                               VII

     Finally, we consider Andrews' argument that it was arbi-
trary and capricious for the FMCSA to downgrade the carri-
er's safety rating, based on its treatment of toll receipts, 
when evidence shows that such receipts are unreliable.  In 
support, Andrews submitted an affidavit from its safety di-
rector, stating:  "Toll receipts are not used to verify logs 
because they have proven to be unreliable.  On many occa-
sions authorities mass produce toll receipts in order to handle 
peak traffic volumes.  Consequently, drivers often have re-
ceipts that do not reflect the actual time the driver is at that 
location."  Jones Aff. at 2 (J.A. at 14).  The FMCSA's 
decision did not address Andrews' contention regarding the 
reliability of toll receipts.

     Andrews' argument is a substantial one, and requires an 
answer from the agency.  See Frizelle v. Slater, 111 F.3d 172, 
177 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (concluding that an agency decision was 
arbitrary because it did not respond to non-frivolous argu-
ments that could affect the agency's ultimate disposition).  If 
Andrews is correct, and toll receipts are in fact unreliable 
(and misleading) records of the time drivers are actually on 
the road, then it might well be arbitrary and capricious for 
the agency to regard such worthless records as "supporting 
documents" and to downgrade a carrier for failing to retain 
them.  Of course, we have no idea whether Andrews is 
correct on this point.  In National Retail Transportation, for 
example, the agency rejected a similar argument on the 
ground that there were serious flaws in the evidence of 
unreliability offered by the motor carrier.  National Retail 
Transportation, FMCSA slip op. at 5-6.  Perhaps that is the 
case here as well.  But without any explanation at all by the 
agency, we cannot use that as a ground for affirming its 
decision.  See American Mun. Power--Ohio, Inc. v. FERC, 
863 F.2d 70, 73 (D.C. Cir. 1988) ("[W]e cannot uphold the 
agency's decision 'on the same basis articulated' where the 

agency's decision articulates none." (quoting Burlington 
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 169 (1962))).  
We must therefore remand the case so that the FMCSA may 
answer this argument.  See Iowa v. FCC, 218 F.3d 756, 759 
(D.C. Cir. 2000) (remanding where agency failed to address 
substantial argument).

                               VIII

     We conclude that the FMCSA reasonably interpreted the 
relevant regulation, provided Andrews with fair notice of that 
interpretation, complied with the requirements of the Paper-
work Reduction Act, and afforded the carrier appropriate 
process before downgrading its safety rating.  However, be-
cause the agency failed to address a significant challenge to 
the rationality of its decision in this case, we remand the case 
to the agency for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.

                                                                 Remanded.

