                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 17, 2000   Decided December 22, 2000 

                           No. 00-1029

                      Montgomery KONE, Inc. 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                       Secretary of Labor, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
         Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission

     W. Scott Railton argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Paul J. Waters.

     Jill M. Lashay was on the brief for amicus curiae National 
Elevator Industry, Inc.

     Lee Grabel, Attorney, U.S. Department of Labor, argued 
the cause for respondent.  With him on the briefs were 

Joseph M. Woodward, Associate Solicitor, and Bruce Justh, 
Counsel.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Following an explosion in an eleva-
tor pit, the Secretary of Labor fined petitioner for failing to 
provide special training required by OSHA regulations for 
workers who must enter "confined spaces."  Finding the 
agency's interpretation of its own regulations reasonable and 
its decision supported by substantial evidence, we affirm.

                                I

     Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations 
governing safety training in the construction industry provide 
that workers required to enter "confined or enclosed spaces" 
must receive special training "as to the nature of the hazards 
involved, the necessary precautions to be taken, and in the 
use of protective and emergency equipment."  29 C.F.R. 
s 1926.21(b)(6)(i).  In language central to this case, the regu-
lations define a confined space as "any space having limited 
means of egress, which is subject to the accumulation of toxic 
or flammable contaminants or has an oxygen deficient atmo-
sphere."  29 C.F.R. s 1926.21(b)(6)(ii).

     The space involved in this case is a pit at the base of an 
elevator in a United States Post Office truck terminal in 
Philadelphia.  Located beneath the elevator's floor line, the 
pit is about four feet, ten inches deep and measures twelve 
feet by sixteen to eighteen feet across.  During the period of 
time involved in this case, the floor of the pit could only be 
reached with ladders:  a permanent metal ladder was at-
tached to one wall;  an orange extension ladder and a six-foot 
fiberglass ladder leaned against two other walls;  and a 
wooden A-frame ladder stood in the center.  Sec'y of Labor v. 
Montgomery KONE, Inc., 1999 OSHRC No. 37 at 3.

     Petitioner Montgomery KONE had a contract to modernize 
the terminal's elevators.  To accommodate the piston that 
powered the hydraulic mechanism of one of the elevators, a 
seventy-two foot shaft was drilled into the pit's base.  To 

protect the piston from corrosion, the shaft had to be lined 
with polyvinyl chloride ("PVC") plastic pipe, which came in 
several sections.  Using PVC primer and liquid cement, both 
of which contain flammable solvents that produce vapors 2.5 
times heavier than air, Montgomery KONE employees work-
ing in the pit glued the sections together and then lowered 
the assembled pipe into the shaft. Not long thereafter, when a 
worker in the pit smelled fumes, a supervisor directed the 
workers to insert a compressed air hose into the shaft to 
expel the fumes.

     Approximately a week to ten days after the PVC liner was 
installed, while a Montgomery KONE worker assembling the 
hydraulic mechanism was using a welding torch, an explosion 
blew the PVC pipe out of the shaft.  The force of the 
explosion threw the worker against the pit's wall, causing 
multiple leg injuries.  Another worker, also thrown against 
the wall, temporarily lost hearing in his left ear.  The two 
workers escaped by climbing the extension ladder, the only 
remaining way out--the explosion had cut the wooden ladder 
at the back of the shaft in two, access to the iron ladder was 
blocked, and the fiberglass ladder was not in the pit.

     Following an inspection by OSHA Compliance Officers the 
next day, the Secretary of Labor cited Montgomery KONE 
for violating the confined space training regulations and 
proposed a $3500 fine.  Montgomery KONE contested the 
citation, triggering an evidentiary hearing before an Adminis-
trative Law Judge.  The ALJ vacated the citation, finding 
that even though the pit satisfied one of section 
1926.21(b)(6)(ii)'s requirements--it was subject to the accu-
mulation of flammable contaminants--it did not qualify as a 
confined space because it failed the other requirement:  due 
to the presence of ladders, the means of egress was not 
"limited."  See Sec'y of Labor v. Parsons Brinckerhoff 
Constr. Services, Inc., ALJ Decision and Order at 6-7. Re-
versing the ALJ, the Occupational Safety and Health Review 
Commission found that "conditions encountered in the eleva-
tor pit constituted a limited means of egress" both because 
escape required climbing a ladder and because "[w]hen the 
explosion occurred and the lights went out, the two employees 

had to feel their way around in the dark until they found each 
other, then found the ladder and helped each other get out of 
the pit."  1999 OSHRC No. 37 at 9.  Finding that Montgom-
ery KONE failed to provide confined space training, the 
Commission imposed the $3500 fine.  See id. at 11.  Mont-
gomery KONE appeals, arguing (1) that because of the 
presence of ladders, egress from the pit was not limited, and 
(2) that evidence demonstrates that the pit was not subject to 
the accumulation of flammable contaminants.

                                II

     As usual in cases of this kind, the outcome turns largely on 
the standard of review.  Unlike in most administrative cases, 
however, here we review the actions of two different entities, 
each of which has a different function in the statute's enforce-
ment scheme.  See Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970, 29 U.S.C. ss 651-78.  The Secretary promulgates and 
enforces regulations;  the Commission has fact-finding and 
adjudicatory powers.  See S.G. Loewendick & Sons, Inc. v. 
Reich, 70 F.3d 1291, 1294 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  As a result, we 
defer to the Secretary's interpretation of OSHA regulations 
and to the Commission's fact-finding.  See id. at 1294.

     In this case, the bifurcated standard of review has no 
practical consequence.  Not only does Montgomery KONE 
make nothing of it, but in her brief, the Secretary expressly 
adopts the Commission's interpretation of section 
1926.21(b)(6)(ii) as well as its factual conclusions.  Notwith-
standing the involvement of two agencies, moreover, our 
review is guided by traditional principles of administrative 
law.  Of particular importance to this case, an agency's 
interpretation of its own regulations "merits even greater 
deference than its interpretation of the statute that it admin-
isters."  Buffalo Crushed Stone, Inc. v. Surface Transp. Bd., 
194 F.3d 125, 128 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  We will defer to the 
Secretary's interpretation so long as it "sensibly conforms to 
the purpose and wording of the regulations."  Id. at 128.  We 
will accept the Commission's findings of fact if they are 

supported by "substantial evidence" and the Commission's 
other findings and conclusions "if they are not arbitrary, 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or contrary to law."  Loew-
endick, 70 F.3d at 1294.

     With this highly deferential standard in mind, we turn to 
Montgomery KONE's arguments that the Commission's in-
terpretation of the two elements of the confined space regula-
tion--"limited ... egress" and "subject to the accumulation of 
... flammable contaminants"--is unreasonable, and that its 
findings with respect to each are unsupported by substantial 
evidence.

                          Limited Egress

     To elucidate the meaning of "limited," the Commission 
looked to Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, which defines 
the word to mean "restricted."  See 1999 OSHRC No. 37 at 8.  
The Commission then found that both physical and testimoni-
al evidence demonstrated that egress from the pit was re-
stricted.  Not only did photographic and video evidence show 
that the only way out of the pit was through the use of 
ladders, but both workers testified that in order to escape 
from the pit after the explosion, they had to maneuver around 
obstacles and then find and climb a ladder.  One of the 
workers testified that confused and disoriented he felt his 
way in the dark until he found his co-worker, who in turn 
testified that he could neither hear nor see.  Both testified 
that they helped each other escape from the pit.  Based on 
such testimony, the Commission concluded that "[t]he em-
ployees may have been able to climb out of the elevator pit 
without further problems, but the fact that they had to assist 
one another supports our conclusion that their means of 
egress was limited."  Id. at 9.  The Secretary agrees, explain-
ing in her brief that "any means of egress is 'limited' for the 
purposes of this standard unless it allows unimpeded egress 
even under emergency conditions."

     On appeal, Montgomery KONE points out--as it did before 
the Commission--that a different OSHA regulation, one that 
regulates the safety of trench excavations, expressly provides 
that ladders are a "safe means of egress."  29 C.F.R. 

s 1926.651(c)(2).  The Commission rejected this argument:  
"The fact that ladders are a 'safe' means of egress from a 
trench for purposes of compliance with the excavation stan-
dard does not mean that they are not a 'limited' means of 
egress for purposes of defining a confined space."  See 1999 
OSHRC No. 37 at 8.  Indeed, in a previous decision involving 
the excavation regulations, the Commission found that egress 
that may not be "entirely free of difficulty" may still be 
"safe."  Sec'y of Labor v. C.J. Hughes Constr., Inc., 17 O.S.H. 
Cas. (BNA) 1753, 1754-56 (1996).  In view of this, and 
because the excavation and confined space regulations deal 
with different situations, the Commission's position in this 
case seems eminently reasonable.

     Equally without merit is Montgomery KONE's argument 
that "egress" was not limited because the workers in fact had 
no difficulty escaping from the pit.  To be sure, one worker 
did so testify.  But the question we face is not whether 
Montgomery KONE can unearth evidence to support its view 
of what happened, but whether substantial evidence in the 
record supports the Commission's version of events.  See 
Harter Tomato Prods. Co. v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 934, 938 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).  Here, the question is not even close.  Not only do 
photographic and video evidence demonstrate that ladders 
provided the only means of egress from the pit, but workers 
testified that after the explosion, they had trouble getting out.  
One worker testified:

     I fell down into that area and I just sat there stunned 
     and I heard Lou who was on the ladder on his way out.  
     There was maybe two more rungs that he had to climb to 
     get out so he had maybe a foot to a foot and a half.  He's 
     still on the ladder and he says I....  I can't see.  I can't 
     hear....  So we held each other, went up the other two 
     rungs, got to the front of the pit and we let go of each 
     other.
     
According to the other worker:

     I was just pushed against the wall from the blast....  
     The lights went out.  I lost the hearing in my left 
     ear....  I couldn't hear....  As I said the lights did go 
     
     out and I started calling for Dan and I couldn't see Dan 
     because of the darkness.  Seconds later I felt Dan's hand 
     on my shoulder saying let's get out and we both got up 
     the ladder and climbed out of the pit.
     
Given this evidence and our deferential standard of review, 
we cannot imagine a basis for setting aside the Commission's 
determination that in precisely the kind of circumstances 
contemplated by these regulations--an explosion resulting 
from the use of flammable materials--an almost five-foot 
deep pit from which workers escaped only with the aid of a 
single ladder satisfied the "limited egress" prong of the 
confined space regulation.

              Subject to the Accumulation of Toxic 
                         or Flammable Contaminants

     The Commission concluded that "[t]he record clearly shows 
that the elevator pit became subject to the accumulation of 
heavier-than-air flammable vapors once Montgomery KONE 
introduced the PVC primer and cement into the pit." 1999 
OSHRC No. 37 at 6.  In reaching this conclusion, the Com-
mission rejected Montgomery KONE's argument that the 
confined space regulations did not apply because the compa-
ny, having attempted to purge the vapors from the shaft, 
could not have known they might remain over a week later.  
According to the Commission, "[w]here, as here ... an em-
ployer is responsible for introducing chemicals into the work-
place, it also has a duty to learn about the characteristics of 
those chemicals and to determine any dangerous conditions to 
which the employees may be exposed as a result."  Id. at 6.  
The Commission explained:

     The material safety data sheets for both the PVC primer 
     and the PVC cement indicate that the vapor density is 
     2.49 times that of air.  That information should have 
     informed Montgomery KONE's employees that they 
     were dealing with vapors that would not all be blown out 
     
     of the seventy-foot-deep PVC liner with the compressed 
     air they were using.
     
Id. at 7.  And in response to Montgomery KONE's evidence 
that air samples taken from the pit both before and after the 
explosion revealed no abnormalities, the Commission ex-
plained that whether the pit's atmosphere was actually con-
taminated at the time of the explosion had nothing to do with 
whether the pit qualified as a confined space.  Rather, "the 
presence of the flammable vapors in the PVC cylinder demon-
strates that the elevator pit was subject to the accumulation 
of flammable contaminants."  1999 OSHRC No. 37 at 8.

     Montgomery KONE now reiterates its argument that tests 
conducted before and after the explosion detected no vapors 
in the pit.  It also points out that for three days prior to the 
explosion, workers operated welding equipment in the pit 
without incident.  Finally, the company claims that the explo-
sion occurred in the shaft, not the pit, and that because the 
shaft and the pit were separate spaces, the pit was not 
subject to the accumulation of flammable contaminants.

     All these arguments rest on a misunderstanding of the 
Commission's reason for finding that the elevator pit was 
subject to the accumulation of flammable contaminants.  To 
the Commission, it made no difference that vapors had not 
been detected either before or after the explosion, that no 
explosion occurred during previous welding activity, or that 
the explosion may have occurred in the shaft, not the pit.  
Instead, the Commission found--and the Secretary agrees--
that the presence in the shaft of flammable contaminants 2.5 
times heavier than air effectively made the pit "subject to the 
accumulation of ... flammable contaminants."  The Secre-
tary cites the ALJ's finding approvingly:

     "The statement that there is no relationship between the 
     explosion and the elevator pit blinks at reality....  
     [T]he effects of the explosion were felt in the pit....  To 
     hold that this pit does not fall within the definition set 
     out in s 1926.21(b)(6)(ii) because a flammable gas accu-
     mulated and exploded in a cylinder placed in a hole in the 
     
     pit's floor, rather than in the pit itself, elevates technical 
     distinctions to an unwarranted level of importance."
     
ALJ Decision and Order at 5-6.  Given the deference we owe 
an agency regarding the interpretation of its own regulations, 
and given the evidence in the record of heavier-than-air 
vapors in the shaft, we see no basis for overturning the 
Commission's conclusion that the pit met the second prong of 
the confined space standard.

                               III

     In light of the fact that the pit qualified as a confined space 
within the meaning of section 1926.21(b)(6)(ii), Montgomery 
KONE had an obligation to provide confined space training 
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. s 1926.21(b)(6)(i):  "[a]ll employees 
required to enter into confined or enclosed spaces shall be 
instructed as to the nature of the hazards involved, the 
necessary precautions to be taken, and in the use of protec-
tive and emergency equipment required."  Reviewing the 
record, the Commission concluded that Montgomery KONE 
failed to provide confined space training to workers required 
to enter the elevator pit.  See 1999 OSHRC No. 37 at 6.  
Indeed, according to the Commission, the workers' immediate 
supervisor expressly testified that "the company did not 
provide confined space training because it did not work in any 
confined spaces."  Id. at 6 n.3.

     Montgomery KONE argues that it had no reason to believe 
that the precautions it took to guard against the accumulation 
of flammable vapors were insufficient to prevent the explo-
sion.  As the Secretary points out, however, this has nothing 
to do with Montgomery KONE's obligations under the con-
fined space training regulation.  Given the supervisor's con-
cession that the company provided no confined space training, 
we affirm the Commission's order and citation.

                                                        So ordered.

                                                