                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 17, 2000      Decided July 11, 2000 

                           No. 99-5270

       National Rifle Association of America, Inc. et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

       Janet Reno, Attorney General of the United States, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02916)

     Stephen P. Halbrook argued the cause for appellants. With 
him on the briefs was Richard E. Gardiner.

     Michael S. Raab, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellee.  On the brief were David W. 
Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Mark B. Stern, 
and Susan L. Pacholski, Attorneys, and Wilma A. Lewis, 
U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The National Rifle Association chal-
lenges a Justice Department regulation providing for tempo-
rary retention of data generated during background checks of 
prospective firearms purchasers, as required by the Brady 
Handgun Violence Prevention Act.  According to the NRA, 
the Brady Act requires immediate destruction of personal 
information relating to lawful firearm transactions.  The At-
torney General interprets the statute differently, arguing that 
temporary retention of data for at most six months is neces-
sary to audit the background check system to ensure both its 
accuracy and privacy.  Finding nothing in the Brady Act that 
unambiguously prohibits temporary retention of information 
about lawful transactions, and finding that the Attorney Gen-
eral has reasonably interpreted the Act to permit retention of 
such information for audit purposes, we affirm the district 
court's dismissal of the complaint.

                                I.

     The Gun Control Act of 1968 makes it unlawful for certain 
individuals, including convicted felons, fugitives from justice, 
and illegal aliens, to possess firearms.  See 18 U.S.C. 
ss 922(g).  The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 
1993 required the Attorney General to establish a "national 
instant criminal background check system," known as the 
NICS, to search the backgrounds of prospective gun purchas-
ers for criminal or other information that would disqualify 
them from possessing firearms.  See s 103(b), Pub. L. No. 
103-159, 107 Stat. 1536.  A computerized system operated by 
the FBI, the NICS searches for disqualifying information in 
three separate databases:  (1) the "NICS Index," containing 
records on persons known to be disqualified from possessing 
firearms under federal law;  (2) the "National Crime Informa-
tion Center," containing records on protective orders, deport-
ed felons, and fugitives from justice;  and (3) the "Interstate 

Identification Index," containing criminal history records.  28 
C.F.R. s 25.6(c)(1)(iii).

     Before selling a weapon, firearm dealers must submit the 
prospective purchaser's name, sex, race, date of birth, and 
state of residence to the NICS operations center at the FBI.  
Id. s 25.7(a).  If the firearm dealer is in a state that has 
elected to serve as a "point of contact" for NICS queries, the 
dealer must submit the inquiry to the relevant state agency.  
Id. s 25.6(d).  Upon receiving such an inquiry, the FBI or 
state agency must immediately provide the gun dealer with 
one of three responses:  (1) "proceed," if no information in the 
system indicates that a firearm transfer would be unlawful;  
(2) "denied," if the prospective purchaser may not legally 
possess a firearm;  or (3) "delayed," if further research is 
necessary.  Id. s 25.6(c)(1)(iv);  Brady Act s 103(b), 107 Stat. 
at 1541.

     A Justice Department regulation requires the FBI to retain 
records of all NICS background searches--including names 
and other identifying information about prospective gun pur-
chasers--in an automated "Audit Log."  28 C.F.R. s 25.9(b).  
According to the regulation, the Audit Log is "a chronological 
record of system (computer) activities that enables the recon-
struction and examination of the sequence of events and/or 
changes in an event."  Id. s 25.2.  The regulation's preamble 
describes the purpose of the Audit Log:

     By auditing the system, the FBI can identify instances in 
     which the NICS is used for unauthorized purposes, such 
     as running checks of people other than actual gun trans-
     ferees, and protect against the invasions of privacy that 
     would result from such misuse.  Audits can also deter-
     mine whether potential handgun purchasers or [gun deal-
     ers] have stolen the identity of innocent and unsuspecting 
     individuals or otherwise submitted false identification 
     information, in order to thwart the name check system.  
     The Audit Log will also allow the FBI to perform quality 
     control checks on the system's operation by reviewing 
     
     the accuracy of the responses given by the NICS record 
     examiners to gun dealers.
     
National Instant Criminal Background Check System Regu-
lation, 63 Fed. Reg. 58303, 58303-04 (1998) (hereinafter, 
NICS Regulation);  see also 28 C.F.R. s 25.9(b)(2).

     The regulation restricts use of the Audit Log.  Information 
"pertaining to allowed transfers may only be used by the FBI 
for the purpose of conducting audits of the use and perfor-
mance of the NICS."  28 C.F.R. s 25.9(b)(2).  The Audit Log 
"may not be used by any department, agency, officer, or 
employee of the United States to establish any system for the 
registration of firearms, firearm owners, or firearm transac-
tions or dispositions.  The Audit Log will be monitored and 
reviewed on a regular basis to detect any possible misuse of 
the NICS data."  Id.

     The Notice of Proposed Rulemaking had called for retain-
ing information relating to allowed transfers in the Audit Log 
for eighteen months.  National Instant Criminal Back-
ground Check System Regulations, 63 Fed. Reg. 30430, 30432 
(proposed June 4, 1998).  Declaring that "the general reten-
tion period for records ... in the NICS Audit Log should be 
the minimum reasonable period for performing audits on the 
system," the final regulation reduced the retention period to 
"in no event more than six months."  NICS Regulation, 63 
Fed. Reg. at 58304.  The regulation's preamble states that 
"the FBI shall work toward reducing the retention period to 
the shortest practicable period of time less than six months 
that will allow basic security audits of the NICS."  Id.  The 
Attorney General has since published a proposed rule that 
would shorten the retention period for records of allowed 
transfers to ninety days.  National Instant Criminal Back-
ground Check System Regulation, 64 Fed. Reg. 10262, 10264 
(proposed March 3, 1999).

     When removed from the Audit Log, personal information 
relating to allowed transfers is destroyed.  28 C.F.R. 
s 25.9(b)(1).  NICS records relating to denied firearm trans-
fers are kept in the Audit Log for ten years, then transferred 
to a Federal Records Center for storage.  Id.  State agencies 

performing background checks in lieu of the FBI may retain 
information on allowed transfers if the records are "part of a 
record system created and maintained pursuant to indepen-
dent state law regarding firearms transactions."  Id. 
s 25.9(d)(1), (d)(2).

     On the day the NICS regulation became effective, the 
National Rifle Association of America, joined by the Law 
Enforcement Alliance of America, Inc., and four John and 
Jane Does, filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the District 
of Columbia, arguing that temporary retention of NICS rec-
ords of allowed transfers violates three provisions of the 
Brady Act:  section 922(t)(2)(C), requiring that the system 
"destroy" records of allowed transactions;  section 103(i)(1), 
prohibiting the government from "requir[ing] that any 
[NICS] record ... be recorded at or transferred to a [govern-
ment] facility";  and section 103(i)(2), prohibiting the govern-
ment from "us[ing] the [NICS] system ... to establish any 
system for the registration of firearms."  107 Stat. at 1540, 
1542.  The complaint also alleged that the Attorney General 
has no authority to exempt NICS information retained by 
state agencies from the Brady Act's destruction requirement, 
even if that information is "part of a record system created 
and maintained pursuant to independent state law."

     The Attorney General interpreted the Act differently, argu-
ing that neither section 922(t)(2)(C) nor section 103(i)(1) pro-
hibits temporary retention of NICS records, and that the 
Audit Log is not a "system for ... registration" within the 
meaning of section 103(i)(2).  For authority to create the 
Audit Log, the Attorney General relied on her statutory 
obligations to establish a system capable of providing accu-
rate information on the lawfulness of firearm transactions, see 
Brady Act, s 103(b), 107 Stat. at 1541, and to protect the 
privacy and security of the NICS.  See Brady Act, s 103(h), 
107 Stat. at 1542.

     The district court, finding nothing in the Brady Act to 
require immediate destruction and the Attorney General's 
construction of the statute reasonable, dismissed the com-
plaint pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6).  

Renewing the arguments it made in the district court, the 
NRA appeals.  Our review is de novo.  See, e.g., Brown v. 
Plaut, 131 F.3d 163, 167 (D.C. Cir. 1997).

                               II.

     Because the NRA challenges a statute administered by a 
government agency, we proceed in accordance with the famil-
iar two-part test of Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  We ask first 
"whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise ques-
tion at issue," for if it has, "that is the end of the matter;  for 
the court, as well as the agency, must give effect to the 
unambiguously expressed intent of Congress."  Id. at 842-43.  
If we find the statute silent or ambiguous with respect to the 
precise question at issue, we proceed to the second step of 
Chevron analysis, asking "whether the agency's answer is 
based on a permissible construction of the statute."  Id. at 
843.  At this point in our review, we afford substantial 
deference to the agency's interpretation of statutory lan-
guage.  See id. at 844.

     We begin with the NRA's Chevron one argument that three 
provisions of the Brady Act unambiguously prohibit the At-
torney General from retaining information about allowed 
transactions for any purpose, including auditing.  In evaluat-
ing these arguments, we must not "confine [ourselves] to 
examining a particular statutory provision in isolation.  The 
meaning--or ambiguity--of certain words or phrases may 
only become evident when placed in context."  FDA v. Brown 
& Williamson Tobacco Corp., 120 S. Ct. 1291, 1300 (2000).  
We must also "exhaust the traditional tools of statutory 
construction," Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. 
Browner, 57 F.3d 1122, 1125 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (internal quota-
tion marks omitted), and may examine the statute's legislative 
history in order to "shed new light on congressional intent, 
notwithstanding statutory language that appears superficially 
clear."  Id. at 1127 (internal quotation marks omitted).  Fi-
nally, "we must be guided to a degree by common sense as to 
the manner in which Congress is likely to delegate a policy 

decision ... to an administrative agency."  Brown & Wil-
liamson, 120 S. Ct. at 1301.

     The first Brady Act provision the NRA relies on is section 
922(t)(2):

     If receipt of a firearm would not [be unlawful], the 
     system shall--
     
          (A) assign a unique identification number to the trans-
          fer; 
          (B) provide the [firearms dealer] with the number;  
          and 
          (C) destroy all records of the system with respect to 
          the call (other than the identifying number and the 
          date the number was assigned) and all records of the 
          system relating to the person or the transfer.
          
18 U.S.C. s 922(t)(2).  According to the NRA, when the 
statute says "destroy all records" it means "destroy all rec-
ords immediately," not within six months.  That is certainly 
one possible interpretation of section 922(t)(2)(C).  At Chev-
ron step one, however, the question is whether the statute 
unambiguously requires immediate destruction.  We think 
the answer is no.

     To begin with, section 922(t)(2)(C) does not say "destroy 
immediately";  it says only "destroy."  When Congress wants 
to instruct an agency not only to take certain action, but to 
take it immediately, it knows how to do so.  For example, 
once an administrative agency determines whether a person 
requesting administrative records is entitled to receive them, 
Congress requires the agency to "immediately notify the 
person making such request of such determination."  5 U.S.C. 
s 552(a)(6)(A)(i).  Similarly, the Equal Employment Opportu-
nity Commission must "immediately refer" to the Merits 
System Protection Board any decision finding that the Board 
incorrectly interpreted governing law or issued a decision 
unsupported by record evidence.  Id. s 7702(b)(5)(B).  Con-
gress even used the word "immediately" elsewhere in the 
Brady Act.  Describing the NICS and the Attorney General's 
obligation to make information available to firearms dealers, 
Congress referred to a system of information "to be supplied 

immediately."  Brady Act s 103(b), 107 Stat. at 1541.  Yet 
when in section 922(t)(2)(C) Congress directed the Attorney 
General to "destroy" the information, it did not specify "im-
mediately."  The word's absence indicates to us that Con-
gress has not unambiguously required immediate destruction 
of NICS records.

     The NRA argues that, read in context, section 922(t)(2)(C) 
does in fact require immediate destruction of NICS records 
relating to allowed transfers.  Its argument goes like this:  (1) 
Congress intended the NICS to function as a database of 
"information, to be supplied immediately, on whether receipt 
of a firearm" would be prohibited by law.  Brady Act 
s 103(b), 107 Stat. at 1541 (emphasis added).  (2) Because 
under the statute, providing a NICS identification number 
signals a gun dealer that a transfer may proceed, see 18 
U.S.C. s 922(t)(1)(B)(i), the "assign" and "provide" mandates 
of sections 922(t)(2)(A) and (B) must be executed immediate-
ly.  (3) "The 'destroy' mandate [of section 922(t)(2)(C)] is part 
and parcel of this system, and compliance with that mandate 
must also be immediate."  Appellants' Br. at 21.

     We agree with the first two steps of the NRA's reasoning.  
The statute clearly requires NICS identification numbers to 
be both assigned and provided immediately.  See Brady Act 
s 103(b), 107 Stat. at 1541;  18 U.S.C. s 922(t)(1)(B)(i);  but cf. 
28 C.F.R. s 25.6(c)(1)(ii) (providing identification numbers 
prior to conducting background searches).  Destruction of 
NICS records, however, plays no role in either authorizing or 
rejecting firearm transfers--the action that section 103(b) 
requires to be taken immediately.  NICS record examiners 
can complete the "assign" and "provide" tasks and respond 
immediately to gun dealers without immediately destroying 
the information.  The "destroy" mandate is thus not "part 
and parcel" of "assign" and "provide."

     Our conclusion that section 922(t)(2)(C) does not unambigu-
ously require immediate destruction of NICS records finds 
support in the Act's legislative history.  As reported to the 
House by the Judiciary Committee, the Brady bill contained 
no destruction requirement at all.  See H.R. Rep. No. 

103-344 (1993), reprinted in 1993 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1984.  The 
obligation to destroy NICS records was added during floor 
debate.  As passed by the House, the bill stated that the 
system shall "immediately destroy all records" of allowed 
transactions.  See 139 Cong. Rec. H9098, 9123, 9144 (daily ed. 
Nov. 10, 1993).  The Conference Committee, however, 
adopted the Senate's version of the destruction requirement, 
which did not contain "immediately."  Compare 139 Cong. 
Rec. H9123 (daily ed. Nov. 10, 1993) (House version), with 139 
Cong. Rec. S16506 (daily ed. Nov. 19, 1993) (Senate version).  
It was this version that both houses approved and the Presi-
dent signed.

     To be sure, as the NRA points out, the Conference Report 
did not list the absence of "immediately" among the substan-
tive differences between the House and Senate bills.  See 
H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 103-412 (1993), reprinted in 1993 
U.S.C.C.A.N. 2011.  But this does not change the critical fact:  
The word "immediately," which had appeared in the House 
bill, is missing from the final Act.  Although not necessarily 
reflecting congressional intent not to require immediate de-
struction, see Hammontree v. NLRB, 925 F.2d 1486, 1492 
(D.C. Cir. 1991) (en banc), this omission supports our conclu-
sion that congressional intent on the precise question before 
us--the sole focus of Chevron one inquiry--is at least ambig-
uous.

     The parties debate the significance of subsequent legisla-
tive developments.  An appropriations rider, expressly re-
sponding to the proposed Audit Log, would have conditioned 
NICS funding on the "immediate destruction of all informa-
tion" relating to persons eligible to possess firearms.  See 144 
Cong. Rec. S8680 (daily ed. July 21, 1998) (proposed amend-
ment no. 3233).  As in the case of the Brady Act itself, the 
word "immediately" was deleted from the final act.  See 
Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appro-
priations Act of 1999 s 621(2), Pub. L. No. 105-277;  see also 
An Act Making Consolidated Appropriations For the Fiscal 
Year Ending September 30, 2000, and For Other Purposes 
s 619(2), Pub. L. No. 106-113 (using the same language).  
Also, two bills that would have imposed criminal penalties on 

government employees who retain NICS records for more 
than twenty-four hours were introduced but never passed.  
See No Gun Tax Act of 1998, H.R. 3949, 105th Cong.;  Fire-
arms Owner Privacy Act of 1998, S. 2175, 105th Cong. s 2.  
Heeding the Supreme Court's recent warning, "[w]e do not 
rely on Congress' failure to act" as dispositive evidence of 
congressional intent.  Brown & Williamson, 120 S. Ct. at 
1312.  At the same time, this post-Brady Act legislative 
activity reflects no unambiguous congressional intent to re-
quire immediate destruction of NICS records.  Indeed, the 
effort to require immediate destruction goes on:  A bill now 
pending in the Senate once again calls for records of allowed 
transfers to be destroyed immediately.  See Right to Bear 
Arms Privacy and Protection Act of 2000, S. 2270, 106th Cong. 
s 5(b).

     Our dissenting colleague finds the absence of "immediate-
ly" in section 922(t)(2)(C) of no consequence because "[i]n no 
case has a court held that power has been granted to a 
federal agency by Congress's failure to enact a limitation to a 
directly contradictory statutory command."  Slip Op. at 7 
(Sentelle, J., dissenting).  But the Attorney General does not 
claim authority for the Audit Log regulation from the absence 
of "immediately," nor from any other congressional failure to 
prohibit temporary retention of NICS records.  Instead, the 
Attorney General relies on two separate grants of affirmative 
authority, i.e., sections 103(b) and 103(h) of the Brady Act.  
Before we can evaluate the reasonableness of the Attorney 
General's interpretation of those two sections, however, we 
must consider the NRA's remaining Chevron one arguments, 
i.e., that two other provisions of the Brady Act unambiguous-
ly prevent temporary retention of NICS information, for if 
the NRA is correct, "that is the end of the matter."  Chevron, 
467 U.S. at 842.  The two provisions appear in section 103(i):

     Prohibition Relating to Establishment of Registration 
     Systems with Respect to Firearms.
     
     No department, agency, officer, or employee of the Unit-
     ed States may--
     
          (1) require that any record or portion thereof generat-
          ed by the [NICS] be recorded at or transferred to a 
          facility owned, managed, or controlled by the United 
          States or any State or political subdivision thereof;  or 
          (2) use the [NICS] to establish any system for the 
          registration of firearms, firearm owners, or firearm 
          transactions or dispositions, except with respect to 
          persons, prohibited [by law], from receiving a firearm. 
          
Brady Act s 103(i), 107 Stat. at 1542.

     The NRA contends that the Audit Log represents a "clear 
violation" of subsection (1) because the Log "constitutes 'any 
record or portion thereof generated by' NICS, and it is 
'recorded at or transferred to' a federal facility."  Appellants' 
Br. at 11-12.  Several considerations persuade us that sub-
section (1) is not so clear.  To begin with, the statute's 
prohibition against "record[ing]" a "record" is inherently am-
biguous.  What is a "record," when has it been "recorded," 
and what kind of "record" cannot be "recorded?"  When a 
NICS operator enters the name of a prospective purchaser 
into the system, is that a "record?"  Has it been "recorded?"  
If not, when does it become a "record" that cannot be 
"recorded?"

     In addition to the inherent ambiguity of these words, 
section 922(t)(2)(C) speaks of "destroy[ing] all records" relat-
ing to allowed transfers, apparently assuming that records 
may be created.  Asked about this at oral argument, NRA 
counsel conceded that records could lawfully be kept for three 
business days while research is undertaken following a "de-
layed" response.  See 18 U.S.C. s 922(t)(ii);  28 C.F.R. 
s 25.6(c)(1)(iv)(B).  If the NRA's answer is correct--we think 
it is--then subsection (1) cannot categorically prohibit the 
government from making records of NICS information.

     Moreover, if subsection (1) forbade the government from 
recording NICS information, it would directly conflict with 
other provisions of the Brady Act.  Subsection (1) reaches 
"any [NICS] record or portion thereof," yet the Brady Act 
expressly authorizes the government to retain certain records 
of NICS transactions.  For example, it permits retention of 

records relating to denied firearm transfers.  See Brady Act 
s 103(i)(2), 107 Stat. at 1542 (forbidding use of the NICS to 
establish a firearm registry "except with respect to persons 
prohibited [by law] from receiving a firearm");  18 U.S.C. 
s 922(t)(2) (requiring destruction of NICS records only if 
"receipt of a firearm would not [be unlawful]").  Even with 
respect to allowed transfers, section 922(t)(2)(C) permits re-
tention of certain portions of NICS records.  18 U.S.C. 
s 922(t)(2)(C) (allowing permanent retention of NICS identifi-
cation numbers and the dates those numbers were assigned).  
These limitations on the obligation to destroy NICS records 
would have no meaning if subsection (1) barred recording of 
any information generated by the NICS.

     To avoid the first of these inconsistencies, the NRA urges 
us to read into subsection (1) the clause "except with respect 
to persons, prohibited [by law], from receiving a firearm," 
which appears at the end of subsection (2) (the no firearm 
registry provision).  " 'The short answer [to this argument] is 
that Congress did not write the statute that way.' "  Russello 
v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23 (1983) (quoting United 
States v. Naftalin, 441 U.S. 768, 773 (1979)).  The language 
applicable to both subsections (1) and (2)--"No department, 
agency, officer, or employee of the United States may"--
appears in the introductory text, not in the text of the 
subsections.  Had Congress intended the language excepting 
denied transfers to apply to both subsections, it would have 
included that language in the introductory text as well.  So 
written, the statute would have read:  "If a firearm transfer 
would not be unlawful, no department, agency, officer, or 
employee of the United States may...."  Indeed, that is just 
how Congress wrote section 922(t)(2), in which the phrase, "If 
receipt of a firearm would not [be unlawful]," precedes the 
separately enumerated requirements to "assign," "provide," 
and "destroy."  Because similarly qualifying language ap-
pears neither in section 103(i)'s introductory text nor in 
subsection (1), we can only conclude that subsection (1) 
reaches, as its plain text indicates, "any record ... generated 
by the [NICS]."

     Claiming its interpretation of subsection (1) does not con-
flict with section 922(t)(2)(C)'s requirement that transaction 
numbers be retained, the NRA argues that Congress can 
always "establish a general rule" and then "make exceptions."  
Appellants' Reply Br. at 9.  Of course Congress may carve 
out particular exceptions to a general mandate.  Indeed, 
section 922(t)(2)(C) does precisely that, requiring destruction 
of all records of allowed transfers "other than the identifying 
number and the date the number was assigned."  18 U.S.C. 
s 922(t)(2)(C).  Subsection (1), however, contains no similar 
qualification.  "[W]here Congress includes particular lan-
guage in one section of a statute but omits it in another 
section of the same Act, it is generally presumed that Con-
gress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclu-
sion or exclusion."  Russello, 464 U.S. at 23 (quoting United 
States v. Wong Kim Bo, 472 F.2d 720, 722 (5th Cir. 1972) 
(alteration in original)).  Accordingly, we presume that when 
Congress excluded qualifying language from subsection (1), it 
did so intentionally.

     Our conclusion that subsection (1) does not unambiguously 
prohibit the government from recording NICS information is 
reinforced by the fact that the Attorney General has ad-
vanced an alternative plausible interpretation.  Emphasizing 
the word "require," she argues that the statute only prohibits 
the government from requiring third parties, such as firearm 
dealers, from recording information at a government facility.  
Had Congress intended subsection (1) to have the meaning 
the NRA gives it, the Attorney General argues, the statute 
presumably would have read:  "No department, agency, offi-
cer, or employee of the United States may--(1) record any 
record or portion thereof generated by the [NICS] ... at a 
[government] facility . ..."  That is precisely how Congress 
wrote subsection (2), which, unlike subsection (1), directly 
prohibits the government from using the system as a firearm 
registry;  it does not prohibit the government from requiring 
that it be used as such.  Though we owe no deference to the 
Attorney General's interpretation of statutory language at 
this stage of Chevron analysis, the plausibility of her view 
highlights the statute's ambiguity.  See United States v. 

Nozfiger, 878 F.2d 442, 446-47 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (a statute is 
ambiguous if it can be read in more than one way).

     This brings us to subsection (2), which forbids the govern-
ment from "us[ing] the [NICS] system ... to establish any 
system for the registration of firearms, firearm owners, or 
firearm transactions or dispositions."  According to the NRA, 
the Audit Log regulation violates this subsection because the 
Audit Log is itself a "form of registration."  Appellants' Br. 
at 15.  But subsection (2) does not prohibit all forms of 
registration.  It prohibits only "system[s] for the registration 
of firearms, firearm owners, or firearm transactions or dispo-
sitions."  The Audit Log is not such a system.  As designed 
by the Attorney General, it functions as a system for protect-
ing the privacy of the NICS and for quality control.  The 
Audit Log regulation expressly provides that "[i]nformation 
in the Audit Log pertaining to allowed transfers may only be 
used by the FBI for the purpose of conducting audits of the 
use and performance of the NICS."  28 C.F.R. s 25.9(b)(2).  
To enforce this restriction, "[t]he Audit Log will be monitored 
and reviewed on a regular basis to detect any possible misuse 
of the NICS data."  Id.

     The Audit Log, moreover, contains no information about 
"firearms" or "firearm transactions or dispositions."  Nor 
does it contain a comprehensive list of "firearm owners."  To 
be sure, the Log includes names of persons approved to buy 
firearms in the past six months, but as the Attorney General 
observes, "[t]he six-month snapshot of potential firearms 
transferees in the audit log reveals virtually nothing about 
the universe of firearms owners in the United States."  Ap-
pellee's Br. at 26.

     To illustrate the difference between the Audit Log and a 
firearms registry, the Attorney General calls our attention to 
the central registry of machine guns established by the 
National Firearms Act.  See 26 U.S.C. s 5841.  The machine 
gun registry contains information on all machine guns not 
possessed by the United States, including data on the weap-
ons themselves, dates of registration, and the names and 
addresses of persons entitled to posses them.  Id. 

s 5841(a)(1)-(3).  Far less comprehensive, the Audit Log in-
cludes no addresses of persons approved to buy firearms, nor 
any information on specific weapons, nor even whether ap-
proved gun purchasers actually completed a transaction.  
And unlike the machine gun registry, information in the Audit 
Log is routinely purged after six months.  The Audit Log 
therefore represents only a tiny fraction of the universe of 
firearm owners.

     It does not follow, of course, that the Audit Log could never 
function as a firearm registry.  But the Log's deficiencies as 
a system for registering firearms make it unlikely that it 
would be used for that purpose.  Indeed, the NRA does not 
allege that the FBI has used the Audit Log for purposes 
other than "conducting audits of the use and performance of 
the NICS."  28 C.F.R. s 25.9(b)(2).  The NRA's argument 
rests entirely on the fact that the Audit Log contains the 
names of persons approved to buy firearms in the past six 
months.  This is not enough to convert the Log into a 
"system for the registration" of firearm owners.  The Audit 
Log regulation is therefore not prohibited by section 103(i)(2).

                               III.

     Having found nothing in either section 922(t)(2)(C) or sec-
tion 103(i) that unambiguously prohibits temporary retention 
of NICS records of allowed transactions for audit purposes, 
we turn to an examination of the affirmative grants of author-
ity on which the Attorney General relies.  She finds authority 
for the Audit Log regulation in two provisions of the Brady 
Act:  section 103(b), which requires the Attorney General to 
establish a system capable of immediately providing informa-
tion on whether a firearm transfer would be unlawful, and 
section 103(h), which requires the Attorney General to pre-
scribe regulations to protect the system's security and priva-
cy.  Because neither provision speaks directly to the creation 
of an Audit Log, we evaluate the Attorney General's argu-
ments pursuant to the second step of Chevron analysis, 
asking whether the Audit Log regulation reflects "a permissi-
ble construction of the statute."  Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843.  

"Such deference," the Supreme Court recently explained, "is 
justified because 'the responsibilities for assessing the wisdom 
of ... policy choices and resolving the struggle between 
competing views of the public interest are not judicial ones,' 
... and because of the agency's greater familiarity with the 
ever-changing facts and circumstances surrounding the sub-
jects regulated."  Brown & Williamson, 120 S. Ct. at 1300 
(quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 866).  And, as we have said, 
"[a]s long as the agency stays within [Congress'] delegation, it 
is free to make policy choices in interpreting the statute, and 
such interpretations are entitled to deference."  Arizona 
Public Service Co. v. EPA, 211 F.3d 1280, ___, 2000 WL 
493047,*5 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(second alteration in original).  So long as the agency's 
interpretation is reasonable, we uphold it "regardless whether 
there may be other reasonable, or even more reasonable, 
views."  Allied Local and Regional Manufacturers Caucus v. 
EPA, No. 98-1526, ___ F.3d ___, ___, 2000 WL 737750, *7 
(D.C. Cir. 2000) (internal quotation marks omitted).

     Before considering the Attorney General's interpretation of 
the Act, however, we must address the NRA's contention that 
"[n]o deference is due to the Attorney General in interpreta-
tion of statutory provisions intended to protect the privacy 
rights of private citizens from the Attorney General."  Appel-
lants' Br. at 30.  In support of this fox-guarding-the-henhouse 
argument, the NRA cites Independent Insurance Agents of 
America, Inc. v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, 838 F.2d 627, 632 (2d Cir. 1988), in which the Second 
Circuit admonished:  "Courts construing statutes enacted spe-
cifically to prohibit agency action ought to be especially 
careful not to allow dubious arguments advanced by the 
agency ... to thwart congressional intent expressed with 
reasonable clarity, under the guise of deferring to agency 
expertise...."  We do not read Independent Insurance 
Agents to have added anything new to Chevron analysis, 
much less to have abandoned customary Chevron two defer-
ence.  Courts always try not to defer to "dubious" agency 
arguments, or to "thwart" congressional intent.  Mindful that 

Congress has acted to curtail the Attorney General's authori-
ty, we proceed with ordinary Chevron two analysis.

     The first Brady Act provision on which the Attorney Gen-
eral relies is section 103(b):  "[T]he Attorney General shall 
establish a national instant criminal background check system 
that any [gun dealer] may contact ... for information, to be 
supplied immediately, on whether receipt of a firearm by a 
prospective transferee would [be unlawful]."  Brady Act 
s 103(b), 107 Stat. at 1541.  According to the Attorney Gen-
eral, "Congress would not have ordered her to establish the 
NICS without being able to ensure that the system [is] 
working," i.e., performing as Congress intended.  Appellee's 
Br. at 18.  As explained in the preamble to the NICS 
regulation:

     In order to meet her responsibility to maintain the 
     integrity of Department systems ... the Attorney Gen-
     eral must establish an adequate system of oversight and 
     review.  Consequently, the FBI has proposed to retain 
     records of approved transactions in an audit log for a 
     limited period of time solely for the purpose of satisfying 
     the statutory requirement of ensuring the privacy and 
     security of the NICS and the proper operation of the 
     system.
     
NICS Regulation, 63 Fed. Reg. at 58303.  More specifically, 
"[a]udits can ... determine whether potential handgun pur-
chasers or [gun dealers] have stolen the identity of innocent 
and unsuspecting individuals or otherwise submitted false 
identification information, in order to thwart the name check 
system.  The Audit Log will also allow the FBI to perform 
quality control checks on the system's operation by reviewing 
the accuracy of the responses given by the NICS record 
examiners to gun dealers."  Id. at 58303-04.  Reiterating this 
point, the March 1999 notice of proposed rulemaking states 
that "[a]udits of the use of the NICS are considered essential 
... to ensure that the system is operating in the manner 
required by the Brady Act."  National Instant Criminal-
Background Check System Regulation, 64 Fed. Reg. at 
10263.  The Attorney General's brief describes the function of 
the Audit Log in more detail:

     The audit log enables the FBI to monitor the use of the 
     NICS by firearms dealers, states serving as points of 
     contact, and FBI personnel.  The FBI also examines 
     whether the FBI employees and contractors are making 
     correct determinations as to whether potential transfer-
     ees are disqualified, to ensure that "proceed" responses 
     are not being supplied with regard to persons who are 
     disqualified.  Decisions to allow a firearm purchase are 
     not fully automated, and thus officials must review and 
     evaluate records before making a decision.  Review of 
     decisions made by NICS examiners is necessary to en-
     sure that responsible individuals make correct decisions 
     on whether a transfer is permissible, and to enable 
     supervisors to provide additional training where neces-
     sary.
     
Appellee's Br. at 16 (internal citations omitted).  In addition, 
the Audit Log is "vital to ensuring that the system (including 
its software) is working properly from a technical standpoint."  
Appellee's Br. at 17.

     We think the Attorney General's position represents a 
reasonable interpretation of section 103(b)'s requirement that 
the NICS provide "information" on whether firearm transfers 
would be unlawful.  The Audit Log, according to the Attorney 
General, is essential to ensuring the accuracy of that "infor-
mation."  Auditing enables the Attorney General to learn 
whether NICS operators and state points of contact are 
making accurate determinations.  In short, the Attorney Gen-
eral uses the Audit Log to accomplish the very purpose of the 
Gun Control and Brady Acts, i.e., to ensure that individuals 
not authorized to possess firearms are unable to purchase 
them.

     Disputing the need for an Audit Log, the NRA contends 
that quality control measures can be undertaken contempora-
neously with background checks.  This may be true, but we 
have no way of knowing whether contemporaneous quality 
control would ensure that the NICS operates as Congress 
required.  Nor is it our function to make that judgment.  
"[I]t is the agencies, not the courts, that have the technical 

expertise and political authority to carry out statutory man-
dates."  General Elec. Co. v. EPA, 53 F.3d 1324, 1327 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995).

     Our conclusion that the Audit Log regulation represents a 
reasonable interpretation of section 103(b) finds support from 
the fact that auditing is not unusual for computerized systems 
like the NICS.  For example, Justice Department regulations 
require audits of another computerized database, the Crimi-
nal History Record Information System, in order to "verify 
adherence" to applicable law.  28 C.F.R. s 20.21(e);  see also 
id. s 20.1 (stating the purpose of the CHRI system).  The 
regulations further require that "appropriate records ... be 
retained to facilitate such audits."  Id. s 20.21(e).  We thus 
have no reason to believe that the Attorney General main-
tains the Audit Log for some sinister purpose.

     The Attorney General also relies on section 103(h):  "[T]he 
Attorney General shall prescribe regulations to ensure the 
privacy and security of the information of the system...."  
Brady Act s 103(h), 107 Stat. at 1542.  The regulation's 
preamble explains how the Audit Log performs this function:  
"By auditing the system, the FBI can identify instances in 
which the NICS is used for unauthorized purposes, such as 
running checks of people other than actual gun transferees, 
and protect against the invasions of privacy that would result 
from such misuse."  NICS Regulation, 63 Fed. Reg. at 58303.
During the debates on the Brady bill, Senator Leahy put the
concern this way:
     I am concerned about giving every gun dealer in the
     country access to people's private lives....  My con-
     cerns are that access to the background check system 
     may be abused.... [S]omebody is a neighbor and says,
      "I really don't care too much for those people who moved 
     down the street.  Check them out for me."  I find that a 
     little bit unsettling.

139 Cong. Rec. S16326, S16327 (daily ed. Nov. 19, 1993) 
(statement of Sen. Leahy).

     The NRA offers a different interpretation of the statute's 
references to privacy and security.  As the NRA sees it, the 
statute is concerned about the privacy of only lawful firearm 
purchasers.  Appellants' Br. at 24.  This certainly represents 
one possible, indeed, quite reasonable interpretation of sec-
tion 103(h).  But because the statute nowhere identifies pre-
cisely whose privacy interests are protected, we defer to the 
Attorney General's interpretation so long as it is reasonable.  
See Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843 & n.11.  Here, the Attorney 
General, the official responsible for establishing and manag-
ing a nationwide database of personal information, has deter-
mined that auditing is necessary to ensure that the system is 
not used for unauthorized purposes.  Absent evidence that 
this concern is misplaced, we have no basis for second-
guessing the Attorney General's judgment.

     The NRA argues that the Attorney General lacks authority 
to investigate abuses involving gun dealers, pointing out that 
enforcement of the Gun Control Act (which the Brady Act 
amended) is vested in the Secretary of the Treasury.  See 
Gun Control Act of 1968 s 103, Pub. L. No. 90-618, 82 Stat. 
1213, 1226.  The Brady Act, however, requires the Attorney 
General, not the Treasury Secretary, to prescribe regulations 
to protect the system's privacy.

     The NRA next contends that use of the Audit Log to 
uncover system abuses would "necessarily require warrant-
less inspection of [gun dealers' records] not based on clear 
statutory grounds, and thus violate the Fourth Amendment."  
Appellants' Br. at 36.  Urging us not to entertain this claim, 
the Attorney General argues that the NRA lacks standing to 
assert the Fourth Amendment rights of gun dealers, that the 
NRA's argument is unripe, and that the NRA failed to plead 
a Fourth Amendment claim in its complaint.

     We think the Attorney General misconstrues the NRA's 
argument.  As we understand it, the NRA asserts no current 
Fourth Amendment violation, but urges us to adopt an inter-
pretation of the Brady Act that, according to the NRA, is 
necessary to avoid constitutional doubt.  Although courts 
certainly must construe statutes to avoid " 'grave and doubt-

ful constitutional questions,' " Jones v. United States, 526 
U.S. 227, 239 (1999) (quoting United States ex rel. Attorney 
General v. Delaware & Hudson Co., 213 U.S. 366, 408 (1909)), 
we have no basis for crediting the NRA's assertion that the 
Attorney General's interpretation of the Brady Act raises 
such questions.  To begin with, the March 1999 proposed 
rulemaking explains that audits of firearm dealers will be 
performed in conjunction with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco 
and Firearms' existing system of inspection.  National In-
stant Criminal Background Check System Regulation, 64 
Fed. Reg. at 10263.  Unless that system already violates the 
Fourth Amendment--the NRA never alleges that it does--we 
see no basis for concluding that auditing the NICS would 
suddenly produce constitutional violations.  Nor does the 
NRA identify any specific features of the auditing process 
that implicate constitutionally protected rights.  In short, the 
NRA only speculates that the government could not uncover 
abuses of privacy involving the NICS without violating the 
Fourth Amendment.

     Our conclusion that the Audit Log regulation reasonably 
implements sections 103(b) and 103(h) disposes of the NRA's 
argument that retention of NICS records for six months is 
unreasonable when compared with another section of the 
Brady Act providing for interim background checks during 
the five-year period the NICS was under development.  Per-
formed by state or local chief law enforcement officers, known 
as "CLEOs," these interim checks were to be completed 
within five business days if possible, 18 U.S.C. s 922(s)(2) 
(held unconstitutional in Printz v. United States, 521 U.S. 898 
(1997)), and records of allowed transfers destroyed within 
twenty business days.  18 U.S.C. s 922(s)(6)(B)(i).  Observ-
ing that "[t]he records generated under these [interim] provi-
sions were paper, not computer records [like the NICS] 
capable of instant destruction," the NRA asserts that "[i]t is 
impossible to comprehend Congress intending to allow ... 
federal employees who could destroy computerized records 
with the push of a button to keep them for six months."  
Appellants' Br. at 22.

     The answer to the NRA's argument is that Congress has 
given the Attorney General far more responsibility for over-
sight and implementation of the background check system 
than it had given CLEOs who performed interim checks.  
CLEOs were required to search "whatever State and local 
recordkeeping systems [were already] available and ... a 
national system designated by the Attorney General."  18 
U.S.C. s 922(s)(2).  By comparison, section 103(b) required 
the Attorney General to establish a background check system 
capable of supplying information immediately.  Brady Act 
s 103(b), 107 Stat. at 1541.  The Brady Act gave CLEOs no 
affirmative oversight responsibilities.  By comparison, section 
103(h) required the Attorney General to "prescribe regula-
tions to ensure the privacy and security of the information of 
the system."  Brady Act s 103(h), 107 Stat. at 1542.  Per-
forming these additional section 103(b) and 103(h) duties is 
precisely why the Attorney General claims a need temporarily 
to retain NICS records.  Having found the Attorney Gener-
al's interpretation of these two provisions reasonable, we 
think it not at all "impossible to comprehend" that she would 
have authority to retain information longer than CLEOs.

     The cases relied on by our dissenting colleague do not 
require a different result.  In American Petroleum Institute 
v. EPA, 52 F.3d 1113 (D.C. Cir. 1995), we invalidated a 
regulation that implemented a statutory directive to reduce 
air pollution caused by reformulated gasoline.  The regulation 
required use of "renewable oxygenates," which, though con-
serving fossil energy resources and perhaps providing global 
warming benefits, "might possibly make air quality worse."  
Id. at 1119.  For authority to require use of renewable 
oxygenates, the agency relied only on the reformulated gaso-
line statute and a general provision permitting it to "pre-
scribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out [its] 
functions."  42 U.S.C. s 7601(a)(1).

     Finding that the agency's fossil fuel and global warming 
objectives exceeded its authority, we observed that "[t]he sole 
purpose of the [reformulated gasoline] program is to reduce 
air pollution."  API, 52 F.3d at 1119.  Although, as EPA 
argued, the reformulated gasoline provision nowhere express-

ly prohibited the renewable oxygenate requirement, the dis-
positive fact was that nothing in the statute authorized it:

     In effect, EPA argues that because Congress has not 
     explicitly limited its authority to promulgate a renewable 
     oxygenate requirement, its interpretation of section 
     7545(k)(1) thus passes Chevron's first step, and this court 
     must then defer to its expansive interpretation of the 
     section under Chevron's second step.  To suggest, how-
     ever, "that Chevron step two is implicated any time a 
     statute does not expressly negate the existence of a 
     claimed administrative power (i.e. when the statute is not 
     written in 'thou shalt not' terms), is both flatly unfaithful 
     to the principles of administrative law ..., and refuted 
     by precedent."  Thus, we will not presume a delegation 
     of power based solely on the fact that there is not an 
     express withholding of such power.
     
Id. at 1120 (quoting Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n v. 
National Mediation Bd., 29 F.3d 655, 671 (D.C. Cir.1994) (en 
banc) (first alteration in original)).

     This case differs from API in two critical respects.  First, 
the Attorney General claims no authority for the Audit Log 
regulation from the absence of an explicit limitation, such as 
the fact that the word "immediately" does not appear in 
section 922(t)(2)(C).  Instead, she relies on sections 103(b) 
and 103(h), and it is her interpretation of those affirmative 
grants of authority--not the statute's failure to "expressly 
negate the existence of a claimed administrative power"--that 
implicates Chevron two.  Thus, we do not "presume a delega-
tion of power based solely on the fact that there is not an 
express withholding of such power."  API, 52 F.3d at 1120.  
Instead, we conclude that the Attorney General has reason-
ably interpreted sections 103(b) and 103(h) to authorize NICS 
auditing--a question we could not even have reached without 
first determining whether section 922(t)(2)(C) expressly pro-
hibits auditing.

     Second, the Attorney General does not rely on a general 
provision empowering her to prescribe regulations necessary 

to carry out her statutory functions.  She issued the Audit 
Log regulation to perform functions expressly authorized by 
sections 103(b) and 103(h).  Far from "tak[ing] on additional 
powers," Slip Op. at 3 (Sentelle, J., dissenting), the Attorney 
General has merely carried out the tasks that Congress 
expressly delegated to her.

     Equally distinguishable, Halverson v. Slater, 129 F.3d 180 
(D.C. Cir. 1997), involved a challenge to a Department of 
Transportation regulation delegating certain responsibilities 
under the Great Lakes Pilotage Act to the Saint Lawrence 
Seaway Development Corporation.  For authority to issue 
the regulation, the Secretary had relied on general statutory 
authority to delegate secretarial responsibilities.  The Secre-
tary argued that a different statute, one that expressly autho-
rized delegation of Pilotage Act responsibilities to Coast 
Guard officials, did not prohibit the delegation to the Corpo-
ration because nothing in that statute "expressly prohibit[ed] 
delegation of [these] powers and duties to a non-Coast Guard 
official."  Id. at 186.  Invalidating the delegation, we conclud-
ed that "the absence of an express proscription ... provides 
no green light to ignore the proscription necessarily implied 
by the limiting language of [the Coast Guard statute]."  Id. at 
187.

     Our dissenting colleague, arguing that this case also in-
volves "a statute conferring specific powers upon a cabinet 
officer,"--i.e., "assign," "provide," and "destroy"--concludes 
that the Audit Log regulation exceeds Congress' grant of 
authority.  Slip Op. at 4 (Sentelle, J., dissenting).  This case 
and Halverson, however, are quite different.  The two stat-
utes at issue in Halverson regulated precisely the same 
secretarial function--delegation of authority.  Obviously the 
more specific statute controlled.  But here, section 922(t)(2) 
and the two provisions relied on by the Attorney General 
concern entirely different functions.  We thus have no reason 
to believe that section 922(t)(2)'s "assign," "provide," and 
"destroy" directives implicitly restrict the Attorney General's 
authority to implement sections 103(b) and 103(h).

     The Supreme Court recently faced a similar situation in 
Christensen v. Harris County, No. 98-1167, Slip Op. (U.S. 

2000).  There, county employees challenged a county policy 
requiring them to schedule paid leave as compensation for 
overtime in lieu of cash compensation.  They argued that a 
provision of the Fair Labor Standards Act requiring that 
eligible employees be granted paid leave within a reasonable 
time of requesting it "provide[d] the exclusive means of 
utilizing accrued time."  Id. at 4.  In other words, because 
the FLSA did not expressly allow employers to require leave 
in lieu of cash compensation, the employees argued, the 
County could not do so.  The Supreme Court disagreed.  
Acknowledging that " '[w]hen a statute limits a thing to be 
done in a particular mode, it includes a negative of any other 
mode,' " the Court found that the "thing to be done" by the 
relevant provision was not the same task accomplished by the 
challenged policy.  Id. at 6-7 (quoting Raleigh & Gaston R. 
Co. v. Reid, 13 Wall. 269, 270 (1872) (alteration in original)).  
The statutory provision does not "se[t] forth the exclusive 
method" of implementing FLSA's compensatory leave provi-
sions;  it is instead "more properly read as a minimal guaran-
tee" that employees may receive compensatory leave upon 
request.  Id. at 7.

     So too here.  Section 922(t)(2) does not "set forth the 
exclusive method" by which the Attorney General may satisfy 
her statutory obligations;  it is "more properly read as a 
minimal guarantee" that transaction numbers will be provided 
for approved transfers and that records relating to those 
transfers will be destroyed.  Id. at 7.  This the Attorney 
General has done.  As to our dissenting colleague's discussion 
of Christensen, we do not rely on the case for the proposition 
that "legislative silence empowered a federal agency to act."  
Slip Op. at 5 n. 1 (Sentelle, J., dissenting);  see supra at 10, 
15, 23.

     To sum up, keeping in mind Chevron two's highly deferen-
tial standard, we find that the Audit Log regulation repre-
sents a "permissible construction" of sections 103(b) and 
103(h).  Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843.  We think it "common 
sense"--Brown & Williamson's Chevron one words that 
seem equally applicable at Chevron two--that Congress, hav-
ing directed the Attorney General to establish a system for 
preventing disqualified persons from purchasing firearms, 

would expect the Attorney General to ensure that the system 
produces accurate information and guards against misuse.  
Indeed, by limiting retention of NICS information to "the 
minimum reasonable period for performing audits on the 
system," the Attorney General has obeyed the "destroy" 
command of section 922(t)(2)(C) while fulfilling her section 
103(b) and 103(h) responsibilities.  NICS Regulation, 63 Fed. 
Reg. at 58304.

                               IV.

     We turn to the NRA's final argument:  that the Attorney 
General has improperly exempted state agencies from the 
Brady Act's record destruction requirement.  Because state 
and local agencies may serve as "points of contact" (POCs) 
for the purpose of processing NICS queries, see 28 C.F.R. 
s 25.2, gun dealers in POC states must submit NICS inqui-
ries to the relevant state agency, not to the FBI.  See id. 
s 25.6(d).

     The Attorney General has determined that the Brady Act's 
destruction requirement does not apply to information re-
tained by state governments that is "part of a record system 
created and maintained pursuant to independent state law."  
Id. s 25.9(d)(1), (d)(2).  The NRA argues that the Attorney 
General lacks authority to create this exemption.  But be-
cause "[t]he NRA does not contend that states may not have 
their own background check systems (with their own record 
destruction or retention requirements) or that federal law 
preempts state law on this subject," Appellants' Reply Br. at 
16, we understand the NRA to be claiming only that the 
Attorney General has no authority to exempt POCs from the 
Brady Act's destruction requirement with regard to informa-
tion not maintained pursuant to state law.

     If the regulation permitted retention of data not gathered 
pursuant to state law, we would agree with the NRA that it 
would violate the Brady Act's destruction requirement.  But 
that is not how the Attorney General interprets the regula-
tion.  As she sees it, the regulation merely clarifies that state 

record retention requirements are not preempted by federal 
law:

     The reason for this clarification is to avoid interfering 
     with state regulation of firearms.  If a state is perform-
     ing a gun eligibility check under state law, and state law 
     requires or allows the retention of the records of those 
     checks, the state's retention of records of the concurrent 
     performance of a NICS check would not add any more 
     information about gun ownership than the state already 
     retains under its own law.
     
NICS Regulation, 63 Fed. Reg. at 58304.  So long as the 
Attorney General interprets the regulation as permitting 
POCs to retain only data that would be kept pursuant to state 
law, the regulation does not conflict with the Brady Act.  See 
Buffalo Crushed Stone, Inc. v. Surface Transp. Bd., 194 F.3d 
125, 128 (D.C. Cir. 1999) ("An agency's interpretation of its 
own regulation merits even greater deference than its inter-
pretation of the statute that it administers.").

     The judgment of the district court is affirmed.

                                                       So ordered.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  In 1993, as part of 
the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, Pub. L. No. 
103-159, 107 Stat. 1536 (1993) ("Brady Act"), Congress em-
powered the Attorney General to "establish a national instant 
criminal background check system" ("NICS") for determining 
whether purchasers of firearms from federal licensees are 
lawfully entitled to make such purchases.  Id. s 103(b), 107 
Stat. at 1541.  Under the authorizing statute, with respect to 
legal transfers of firearms, the "system" initiated by the 
Attorney General is to "(A) assign a unique identification 
number to the transfer;  (B) provide the licensee with the 
number;  and (C) destroy all records of the system with 
respect to the call (other than the identifying number and the 
date the number was assigned) and all records of the system 
relating to the person or the transfer."  18 U.S.C. s 922(t)(2) 
(1994).  In purported reliance on the statutory provision, the 
Attorney General has promulgated regulations which require 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI") to maintain an 
automated audit log of all incoming and outgoing transactions 
passing through the system including records of the "type of 
transaction ..., line number, time, date of inquiry, header, 
message key, ORI [originating agency identification number], 
and inquiry/response data (including the name and other 
identifying information about the prospective transferee and 
the NTN [NICS transaction number])," inter alia.  28 C.F.R. 
s 25.9(b)(1) (1999).  In the case of lawful transfers, the 
regulations require the FBI to retain such records in the 
audit log for six months after the date of each such transfer.  
See id. The National Rifle Association, the Law Enforcement 
Alliance of America, and various John and Jane Does (collec-
tively "the NRA") sued to enjoin the operation of these 
regulations.  The District Court granted summary judgment 
in favor of the Attorney General.  Because the Attorney 
General in the promulgation of these regulations has not only 
exceeded the authority granted her under the cited section of 
the statute, but has also violated express prohibitions of other 
statutory sections, I would reverse.

     I.   Statutory Authorization
          
     The Attorney General's authority to deal with the subject 
matter of preclearance of handgun purchasers depends en-

tirely upon congressional grant.  She does not and cannot 
claim any inherent power over the subject matter from 
constitutional or other sources.  Therefore, unless the Brady 
Act empowers her to do what she has done, the regulations 
are invalid.  Cf. American Petroleum Inst. v. United States 
Envtl. Protection Agency, 52 F.3d 1113, 1119-20 (D.C. Cir. 
1995) ("API");  Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n v. National 
Mediation Bd., 29 F.3d 655, 670-71 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (en banc).  
The statute is unambiguously limited in the extent of the 
grant of authority to the Attorney General, and authority to 
be delegated to the NICS over transfers to citizens lawfully 
entitled to receive firearms.  That authority is set forth in 18 
U.S.C. s 922(t)(2) which, as expressed above, requires that 
the NICS "shall ... assign a unique identification number 
... [;]  provide the licensee with the number;  and ... 
destroy all records of the system with respect to the call 
(other than [the assigned number and the date])" along with 
"all records of the system relating to the person or the 
transfer."  18 U.S.C. s 922(t)(2) (emphasis added).  Nothing 
in the Brady Act empowers the Attorney General to do more 
than these three things with respect to lawful transfers of 
firearms:  (1) assign, (2) provide, and (3) destroy.  When she, 
or the system to which she has delegated the authority, adds 
to those three by retaining instead of destroying, she and the 
system exceed the statutory grant of authority.  The regula-
tion requiring the retention in the "audit log" is such an 
excess;  it is unlawful;  and it should be enjoined.

     The Attorney General's claimed authority for her unlawful 
accretion of power to the FBI and the NICS in the regulation 
is her "responsibility for administering the National Instant 
Criminal Background Check system."  Br. for Appellee at 11.  
This reliance on general authority to administer an area of 
statutory regulation cannot sustain a federal actor's reaching 
beyond congressionally granted authority.  We have re-
peatedly held that federal agencies cannot seize additional 
powers by substituting their own determination of the appro-
priate means for accomplishing statutory goals in place of 
that determined by the Congress.

     For example, in API, the Environmental Protection Agency 
had been empowered by Congress to promulgate regulations 
for reformulated gasoline for use in "nonattainment areas."  
See 52 F.3d at 1115 (quoting 42 U.S.C. s 7545(k)(1) (1988 & 
Supp. V 1993)).  The empowering statute provided that the 
regulations were to "require the greatest reduction in emis-
sions of ozone forming volatile organic compounds ..., taking 
into consideration the cost of achieving such emission reduc-
tions, any nonair-quality and other air-quality related health 
and environmental impacts and energy requirements."  42 
U.S.C. s 7545(k)(1).  The EPA included in its regulations the 
mandate for the inclusion of "renewable oxygenates" in the 
reformulated gasoline.  As justification for this additional 
assertion of regulatory authority EPA asserted its duty to 
achieve other goals under the Clean Air Act.  We struck 
down the challenged regulations, holding that the broad 
general grant of authority did not "authorize EPA to mandate 
the manner of compliance or the precise formula for compli-
ance without additional explicit authority."  API, 52 F.3d at 
1121.  Just so here.  Congress has explicitly authorized the 
Attorney General to regulate the activities of citizens in a 
certain fashion.  Her general authority to administer the 
statutory programs created by the Brady Act do not empow-
er her to take on additional powers over citizens not delegat-
ed to her by the legislature.

     Also, in Halverson v. Slater, 129 F.3d 180 (D.C. Cir. 1997), 
we considered the claimed authority of the Secretary of the 
Department of Transportation to delegate certain responsibil-
ities under the Great Lakes Pilotage Act of 1960, 46 U.S.C. 
s 9301 et seq., to the St. Lawrence Seaway Development 
Corporation.  By statute, the Secretary was empowered to 
"delegate the duties and powers conferred by [the relevant] 
subtitle to any officer, employee, or member of the Coast 
Guard...."  46 U.S.C. s 2104(a) (1994).  That statute did not 
empower the Secretary to delegate such duties and powers to 
anyone outside the Coast Guard.  The Secretary relied upon 
a general delegation grant in 49 U.S.C. s 322(b) to assert the 
authority to delegate that power to any officer or employee of 
the department.  Once more, we held that general statutory 

goals and grants cannot "override the limiting language" of a 
statute specifically empowering a federal agency to act.  Hal-
verson, 129 F.3d at 186, 187.  Again, in the present controver-
sy, we have before us a statute conferring specific powers 
upon a cabinet officer (the Attorney General), and an agency 
(the NICS) under that officer.  General goals cannot add 
limitless power to the limited power delegated by Congress.

     The Attorney General attempts to bolster her claim of 
power beyond the statutory grant by a repair to the analytical 
framework of Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  Under the famil-
iar rubric of that decision, when we review an agency's 
interpretation of a statute entrusted to the agency's adminis-
tration, we undertake a two step analysis.  We first "deter-
mine whether Congress has spoken to the precise question at 
issue."  Halverson, 129 F.3d at 184 (quoting Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, Inc. v. Browner, 57 F.3d 1122, 1125 
(D.C. Cir. 1995) (applying Chevron)).  If so "that interpreta-
tion must be given effect."  Id.  If not, that is, "[i]f ... the 
statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific 
issue, then the court will defer to a permissible agency 
construction of the statute."  Id.  The Attorney General 
contends that, under the second step of Chevron, we should 
uphold her assertion of the power to establish and retain 
records on lawful conduct of citizens where the words of the 
statute do not grant that power on the theory that her 
interpretation of the statute is a permissible one, that is to 
say a reasonable one.  In fact, however, we should not even 
reach the second stage of Chevron.  The absence of a grant of 
statutory power is not an ambiguity or silence on the question 
of whether Congress has granted such a power.  We have 
disposed of that line of argument repeatedly in the past.  As 
we stated in Railway Labor Executives' Association:

     To suggest, as the [government actor] effectively does, 
     that Chevron step two is implicated any time a statute 
     does not expressly negate the existence of a claimed 
     administrative power (i.e. when the statute is not written 
     
     in 'thou shall not' terms), is both flatly unfaithful to the 
     principles of administrative law ... and refuted by pre-
     cedent....  Were courts to presume a delegation of 
     power absent an express withholding of such power, 
     agencies would enjoy virtually limitless hegemony, a 
     result plainly out of keeping with Chevron and quite 
     likely with the Constitution as well.
     
29 F.3d at 671 (citations omitted);  see also Natural Re-
sources Defense Council v. Reilly, 983 F.2d 259, 266 (D.C. 
Cir. 1993) ("[I]t is only legislative intent to delegate such 
authority that entitles an agency to advance its own statutory 
construction for review under the deferential second prong of 
Chevron.") (emphasis added) (quoting Kansas City v. Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Dev., 923 F.2d 188, 191-92 (D.C. 
Cir. 1991));  API, 52 F.3d at 1120.1

     The statute is not ambiguous on whether it grants the 
Attorney General the power to retain the records which the 
statute empowers her to destroy.  The statute simply does 
not grant her that power.  Indeed, the denial of power is even 
stronger than that considered in the cited cases.  Those 
statutes did not include "thou shall not" provisions.  The 
Brady Act does.  In the cases discussed above, the federal 
agency was seizing power not granted by Congress.  Here, 
the Attorney General is not only making such an unautho-
rized power grab, but is taking action expressly forbidden by 
Congress.

__________
     1 Christensen v. Harris County, 120 S. Ct. 1655 (2000), cited by 
the majority, is not to the contrary.  Indeed, the majority's analysis 
turns Christensen on its head.  The Supreme Court not only did not 
decide that legislative silence empowered a federal agency to act, it 
did quite the opposite.  The County, whose ability to control leave 
time scheduling was in question, appeared before the Court as the 
regulated entity asserting a limitation on federal power, not as the 
federal actor asserting a grant of power.  See id. at 1659.  Because 
the statute in question was silent or ambiguous on the issue, the 
regulated entity did not lose an ability that was inherently its own.  
See id. at 1660-62.  That is, the silent or ambiguous statute did not 
empower the federal actor to do that which was not expressly 
forbidden to it.  Just so here.

     II.  "Thou Shall Not"
          
     The Brady Act contains an express provision headed "Pro-
hibition Relating to Establishment of Registration Systems 
with Respect to Firearms."  Pub. L. No. 103-159, s 103(i), 
107 Stat. at 1542.  That section provides that

     No department, agency, officer, or employee of the Unit-
     ed States may--
     
          (1) require that any record or portion thereof generat-
     ed by the system established under this section be 
     recorded at or transferred to a facility owned, managed, 
     or controlled by the United States or any State or 
     political subdivision thereof....
     
Id.  By its clear words, this statute establishes that Congress 
has unambiguously told the Attorney General that she shall 
not do what she is doing in the regulations.  That is, she is 
forbidden to require the FBI, the NICS, or any other depart-
ment, agency, officer, or employee of the United States to 
require that records generated by the NICS be recorded at 
or transferred to any facility.  There is no exception for an 
audit log, and there is no exception for a six-month grace 
period.  Congress has simply forbidden her to do it.  She is 
doing it anyway.  The regulation must fall.  There is no 
ambiguity calling for the invocation of Chevron.

     The Attorney General argues that "[w]ithout an audit log, 
the FBI would simply be incapable of achieving the level of 
oversight deemed essential by the Attorney General."  Br. 
for Appellee at 17.  I fail to see the relevance of that 
argument.  Congress, not the Attorney General, makes the 
laws.  Congress did not authorize the maintenance of an audit 
log in violation of its explicit command not to retain records.  
Neither did it empower the Attorney General to take its place 
in the making of law any time she deems essential a level of 
oversight neither required nor permitted by statute.

     III. Conclusion
          
     The Attorney General's ultimate fallback argument is that 
Congress and the statute could have but did not include the 
adverb "immediately" before the verb "destroy" when it 

commanded her to "destroy all records of the system" with 
respect to the contact in the case of lawful transfers of 
firearms.  18 U.S.C. s 922(t)(2).  Specifically, she notes that 
it did not adopt an amendment offered in the House of 
Representatives to the effect of including that word.  I fail to 
see that this avails her anything.  Courts are reluctant "to 
draw inferences from Congress' failure to act," Schneidewind 
v. ANR Pipeline Co., 485 U.S. 293, 306 (1988).  In no case 
has a court held that power has been granted to a federal 
agency by Congress's failure to enact a limitation to a directly 
contradictory statutory command.  Congress said, "destroy 
all records."  Congress said, do not "require that any record 
...  be recorded."  Brady Act s 103(i), 107 Stat. at 1542.  
The Attorney General asserts, "Congress did not say that I 
have to destroy the records immediately.  Therefore I am 
empowered to retain the records."  The Attorney General's 
position strikes me as reminiscent of a petulant child pulling 
her sister's hair.  Her mother tells her, "Don't pull the baby's 
hair."  The child says, "All right, Mama," but again pulls the 
infant's hair.  Her defense is, "Mama, you didn't say I had to 
stop right now."

     I do not think that the parent's command to the child is 
ambiguous, nor that of Congress to the Attorney General.  I 
do not find the child's response reasonable;  nor is that of the 
Attorney General.

     I respectfully dissent from the decision of my colleagues to 
uphold the Attorney General's regulations.

                                    