                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 6, 2002   Decided November 8, 2002 

                           No. 01-1149

      Motion Picture Association of America, Inc., et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

       National Television Video Access Coalition, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                            ---------

                        Consolidated with 
                             01-1155

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

                            ---------

     Robert Corn-Revere argued the cause for petitioner Motion 
Picture Association of America, Inc., et al.  With him on the 
briefs was Ronald G. London.

     Daniel F. Goldstein argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioner National Federation of the Blind.

     C. Grey Pash, Jr., Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Jane E. Mago, General Counsel, Daniel M. Arm-
strong, Associate General Counsel, and Jacob M. Lewis, 
Attorney, United States Department of Justice.  Catherine G. 
O'Sullivan, Chief Counsel, and Nancy C. Garrison, Attorney, 
United States Department of Justice, entered appearances.

     Donald J. Evans argued the cause for intervenors.  With 
him on the brief were Liliana E. Ward, Keith A. Noreika, 
and Robert A. Long, Jr.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson, and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  The Telecommunications Act of 
1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 ("the Telecommunica-
tions Act"), added new provisions covering video program-
ming accessibility to the Communications Act of 1934, 47 
U.S.C. s 151 et seq. ("the Act").  The new provisions, codified 
in s 713 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. s 613, specifi-
cally dealt with "closed captioning" and "video description" 
technologies that can be employed to enhance television video 
services for hearing and visually impaired individuals.  
Closed captioning displays the audio portion of television 
signals as words displayed on the screen and can be activated 
at a viewer's discretion.  Video descriptions provide aural 
descriptions of a television program's key visual elements 
(such as the movement of a person in a scene) that are 
inserted during pauses in the program dialogue.  Video de-
scriptions change program content because they require the 
creation of new script to convey program details, whereas 

closed captions present a verbatim transcription of the pro-
gram's spoken words.

     Congress treated the two technologies quite differently 
when it passed the Telecommunications Act, which added 
s 713 to the Communications Act.  Section 713(a) required 
the Commission to complete a closed captioning inquiry and 
to report its findings to Congress within 180 days of the Act's 
passage.  47 U.S.C. s 613(a).  Sections 713(b) and (c) re-
quired the Commission to prescribe closed captioning regula-
tions and established compliance deadlines.  47 U.S.C. 
s 613(b)-(c).  Sections 713(d) and (e) established exemptions 
from the closed captioning rules.  47 U.S.C. s 613(d)-(e).  In 
contrast, subsections 713(f) and (g) - the sole subsections 
dealing with video description - merely defined "video de-
scription" and required the FCC to prepare a report to 
Congress.  47 U.S.C. s 613(f)-(g).  Unlike the provisions 
covering closed captioning, s 713 did not authorize the Com-
mission to adopt regulations implementing video descriptions.

     After releasing a report on video description, the FCC 
announced that it was seeking commentary on proposed rules 
mandating video description.  Implementation of Video De-
scription of Video Programming, Notice of Proposed Rule-
making, 14 F.C.C.R. 19,845 (1999) ("Notice of Proposed Rule-
making").  The FCC then adopted rules mandating television 
programming with video descriptions.  Implementation of 
Video Description of Video Programming, Report and Order, 
15 F.C.C.R. 15,230 (2000) ("Report and Order").  The Motion 
Picture Association of America ("MPAA") and the National 
Federation of the Blind ("NFB") both petitioned this court 
for review of the agency's regulations mandating video de-
scriptions.  MPAA contends that the new regulations should 
be struck down because they are not authorized by s 1 and 
they are precluded by s 713 of the Act.  See 47 U.S.C. 
ss 151, 613.  NFB contends that the regulations should be 
rejected as arbitrary and capricious, because the FCC failed 
to assess whether visually impaired persons actually want or 
need video description, as opposed to rules requiring spoken 
articulation of on-screen text.

     By its terms, the Act does not provide the FCC with the 
authority to enact video description rules.  Contrary to the 
FCC's arguments suggesting otherwise, s 1, 47 U.S.C. s 151, 
does not give the FCC unlimited authority to act as it sees fit 
with respect to all aspects of television transmissions, without 
regard to the scope of the proposed regulations.  We hold 
that where, as in this case, the FCC promulgates regulations 
that significantly implicate program content, s 1 is not a 
source of authority.  Because the FCC can point to no other 
statutory authority, the video description regulations must be 
vacated.  Accordingly, MPAA's petition for review is hereby 
granted.  NFB's petition for review is dismissed as moot, 
because the regulations to which they object will be vacated 
pursuant to the court's judgment in this case.

                          I. Background

     The Telecommunications Act added to the Communications 
Act new video programming accessibility provisions involving 
closed captioning and video description.  47 U.S.C. s 613.  
Video description is defined in the statute to include "the 
insertion of audio narrated descriptions of a television pro-
gram's key visual elements into natural pauses between the 
program's dialogue."  Id. s 613(g).  Video descriptions are 
usually transmitted over a secondary audio programming 
channel, a subcarrier that allows video distributors to trans-
mit additional soundtracks, such as foreign language pro-
gramming.  Closed Captioning and Video Description of 
Video Programming, Report, 11 F.C.C.R. 19,214, 19,221 
(1996) ("Video Accessibility Report").

     There is a marked difference between Congress' treatment 
of closed captioning and video description in s 713 of the Act.  
The new provision required the FCC to complete an inquiry 
into closed captioning, and report the results to Congress 
within 180 days of the Act's passage.  47 U.S.C. s 613(a).  It 
also affirmatively required that the FCC prescribe regula-
tions for the implementation of closed captioning, id. s 613(b), 
and established compliance deadlines for that action, id. 
s 613(c).  In contrast, s 713 only required that the FCC 

prepare a video description report for Congress;  it did not 
mandate any implementation of visual descriptions.  Id. 
s 613(f).

     The initial House bill preceding the enactment of s 713 
would have required the FCC to adopt video description 
rules.  See Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 15,274 n.9 
(Powell, dissenting) (noting that H.R. 3636 s 206 provided 
that the FCC "shall, within 1 year of enactment of the [video 
programming accessibility] section, prescribe such regulations 
as are necessary to ensure that all video programming is fully 
accessible to individuals with disabilities through the provi-
sion of closed captioning service and video description" (em-
phases and bracketed language in original)).  However, the 
bill was amended in committee to provide a discretionary 
grant of authority rather than mandate that the FCC provide 
video description.  The new language provided that, "[f]ollow-
ing the completion of such inquiry, the Commission may 
adopt regulation [sic] it deems necessary to promote the 
accessibility of video programming to persons with visual 
impairments."  Amendment No. 8 to H.R. 3636 (Moorhead) 
(Mar. 16, 1994), reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 237.  
This new version of the bill passed the House in 1995.  H.R. 
1555, s 204(f), 104th Cong. (1st Sess. 1995), reprinted in J.A. 
254-59.

     The corresponding Senate bill, however, only directed the 
FCC to report to Congress about video description:  It nei-
ther mandated video description nor provided the FCC with 
discretionary authority to adopt such rules.  S. 652, s 305, 
104th Cong. (1st Sess. 1995), reprinted in J.A. 251-53.  The 
conference committee adopted the Senate version, abandon-
ing the House language providing the FCC with discretionary 
authority.  Congress passed this version of the bill and the 
President signed it into law.

     After the enactment of s 713, the FCC issued the report 
that the Act mandated.  The report stated that "the best 
course is ... to continue to collect information and monitor 
the deployment of video description and the development of 
standards for new video technologies that are likely to affect 

the availability of video description."  Video Accessibility 
Report, 11 F.C.C.R. at 19,271.  The FCC supplemented this 
report with a second report, Annual Assessment of the Status 
of Competition in the Market for the Delivery of Video 
Programming, Report, 13 F.C.C.R. 1034 (1998).  Then, in 
1999, the FCC announced that it was seeking commentary on 
proposed rules that would mandate video description.  Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking, 14 F.C.C.R. 19,845.  The Commis-
sion sought commentary, inter alia, about whether the FCC 
possessed statutory authority to enact such rules.  Id. at 
19,857-59 pp 34-39.

     After reviewing the comments, the FCC voted 3-2 to adopt 
rules requiring certain video programmers to supplement 
certain programming with video descriptions.  See Report 
and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. 15,230.  The FCC concluded that it 
possessed the statutory authority to adopt these rules pursu-
ant to s 1 of the Act.  47 U.S.C. s 151.  Section 1 gives the 
FCC authority to regulate "interstate and foreign commerce 
in communication by wire and radio so as to make available, 
so far as possible, to all the people of the United States.... a 
rapid, efficient, Nation-wide, and world-wide wire and radio 
communication service...."  47 U.S.C. s 151.  The FCC 
majority also rejected the argument that s 713, 47 U.S.C. 
s 613, precluded the agency from mandating video descrip-
tion merely because the provision only authorized the FCC to 
conduct an inquiry.  Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 15,252-
54 pp 57-61.  Finally, the FCC found that the record demon-
strated "the importance of video description to persons with 
visual disabilities."  Id. at 15,232 p 4.  The FCC primarily 
based this conclusion on the American Council for the Blind's 
submission, which contained more than 250 e-mails and let-
ters of support for the rules.  Id.

     The FCC's video description rules require commercial tele-
vision broadcasters affiliated with the top four commercial 
networks (ABC, CBS, Fox, and NBC) to provide fifty hours 
of video description per quarter during either prime time or 
children's programming.  47 C.F.R. s 79.3(b)(1).  The rules 
also require multichannel video programming distributors 
that serve 50,000 or more subscribers to provide fifty hours of 

video description per quarter during prime time or children's 
programming on each channel that carries one of the top five 
nonbroadcast networks.  Id. s 79.3(b)(3).

     Commissioners Powell and Furchtgott-Roth dissented from 
the visual description order, because they did not believe that 
the Communications Act authorized the FCC to adopt video 
description rules.  Id. at 15,268-69 (Furchtgott-Roth, dissent-
ing);  15,272-76 (Powell, dissenting).

     Various parties sought reconsideration of the FCC's Order, 
primarily on the ground that the rules exceeded the FCC's 
legal authority.  Petition for Reconsideration of the MPAA, 
MM Docket No. 99-339, Oct. 11, 2000, reprinted in J.A. 330-
38;  Petition for Partial Reconsideration and Clarification 
Submitted by the National Association of Broadcasters, MM 
Docket No. 99-339, Oct. 11, 2000, reprinted in J.A. 339-54;  
Petition for Reconsideration of the National Cable Television 
Association, MM Docket No. 99-339, Oct. 11, 2000, reprinted 
in J.A. 355-74.  The FCC denied reconsideration, although it 
did refine certain implementation issues related to the new 
rules.  Implementation of Video Description of Video Pro-
gramming, Memorandum Opinion and Order on Reconsid-
eration, 16 F.C.C.R. 1251 (2001), erratum issued, 66 Fed. 
Reg. 16,618 (Mar. 27, 2001).  MPAA and NFB then filed 
petitions for review.

                           II. Analysis

A.   Standard of Review

     In deciding whether to defer to the FCC's construction of 
the Act, we adhere to the tests enunciated by the Supreme 
Court in Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense 
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984) and United States v. Mead 
Corp., 533 U.S. 218 (2001).  In Chevron, the Court held that, 
"[i]f the intent of Congress is clear, that is the end of the 
matter;  for the court, as well as the agency, must give effect 
to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress."  467 
US. 842-43.  This is so-called "Chevron Step One" review.  If 
Congress "has not directly addressed the precise question" at 

issue, and the agency has acted pursuant to an express or 
implicit delegation of authority, the agency's interpretation of 
the statute is entitled to deference so long as it is "reason-
able" and not otherwise "arbitrary, capricious, or manifestly 
contrary to the statute."  Id. at 843-44.  This is so-called 
"Chevron Step Two" review.  In either situation, the agency's 
interpretation of the statute is not entitled to deference 
absent a delegation of authority from Congress to regulate in 
the areas at issue.  See Ry. Labor Executives Ass'n v. Nat'l 
Mediation Bd., 29 F.3d 655, 671 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (en banc) 
(Chevron "deference is warranted only when Congress has 
left a gap for the agency to fill pursuant to an express or 
implied 'delegation of authority to the agency."') (quoting 
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44).

     Mead reinforces Chevron's command that deference to an 
agency's interpretation of a statute is due only when the 
agency acts pursuant to "delegated authority."  533 U.S. at 
226-27.  The Court in Mead also makes it clear that, even if 
an agency has acted within its delegated authority, no Chev-
ron deference is due unless the agency's action has the "force 
of law."  Id. at 227.

     In this case, the principal question is whether Congress 
"delegated authority" to the FCC to promulgate visual de-
scription regulations.  Absent such authority, we need not 
decide whether the regulations are otherwise "reasonable."  
An agency may not promulgate even reasonable regulations 
that claim a force of law without delegated authority from 
Congress.

B.   The FCC Lacks Statutory Authority to Adopt the 
     Video Description Rules

     MPAA argues that s 713 precludes the adoption of rules 
mandating video description and that s 1 does not otherwise 
authorize the FCC to adopt video description rules.  We 
largely agree, although we rest principally on the latter point.

     1.   Section 713
          
     There is no doubt that s 713, 47 U.S.C. s 613, by its terms, 
does not provide the FCC with the authority to enact video 

description rules, and the FCC does not suggest that it does.  
The harder question is whether the provision effectively bars 
the FCC from mandating video description.

     Statutory provisions in pari materia normally are con-
strued together to discern their meaning.  Erlenbaugh v. 
United States, 409 U.S. 239, 244 (1972) (noting that the rule 
that statutes in pari materia should be construed together 
"is ... a logical extension of the principle that individual 
sections of a single statute should be construed together");  
Holyoke Water Power Co. v. FERC, 799 F.2d 755, 766 (D.C. 
Cir. 1986) ("The three sections are in pari materia and must 
be read together.");  FAIC Sec., Inc. v. United States, 768 
F.2d 352, 363 (D.C. Cir. 1985) ("[T]hese two statutes are in 
pari materia and must be construed together.").  Here, when 
subsections (a), (b), and (f) of s 713 - all addressed to video 
programming accessibility - are construed together, a strong 
argument can be made that Congress meant not to authorize 
the Commission to mandate video description.  The dissent-
ing opinion of FCC Chairman Powell powerfully demon-
strates this point.  See 15 F.C.C.R. at 15,274-76 (Powell, 
dissenting).

     Subsections (a) and (f) merely call for the FCC to under-
take studies on closed captioning and video description, re-
spectively.  Subsection (f), which deals with video description, 
provides:

     Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the 
     Telecommunications Act of 1996 [enacted Feb. 8, 1996], 
     the Commission shall commence an inquiry to examine 
     the use of video descriptions on video programming in 
     order to ensure the accessibility of video programming to 
     persons with visual impairments, and report to Congress 
     on its findings.  The Commission's report shall assess 
     appropriate methods and schedules for phasing video 
     descriptions into the marketplace, technical and quality 
     standards for video descriptions, a definition of program-
     ming for which video descriptions would apply, and other 
     technical and legal issues that the Commission deems 
     appropriate.
     
47 U.S.C. s 613(f).  In contrast, subsection (b) affirmatively 
mandates that

     the Commission shall prescribe such regulations as are 
     necessary to implement this section.  Such regulations 
     shall ensure that - (1) video programming first published 
     or exhibited after the effective date of such regulations is 
     fully accessible through the provision of closed captions 
     ...;  and (2) video programming providers or owners 
     maximize the accessibility of video programming first 
     published or exhibited prior to the effective date of such 
     regulations through the provision of closed captions....
     
47 U.S.C. s 613(b).  The difference in the language employed 
in these sections makes it clear that subsection (f) is not 
intended to provide a mandate for video description require-
ments.  Subsection (f) neither parallels the closed captioning 
mandate contained in subsection (b) nor suggests that Con-
gress provided the FCC with discretionary authority to adopt 
video description rules.

     We need not decide whether s 713 positively forecloses 
agency rules mandating video description.  Rather, we find 
that s 713 does not authorize the FCC to adopt such rules.  
We also find that, when coupled with the absence of authority 
under s 1 (discussed below), s 713 clearly supports the con-
clusion that the FCC is barred from mandating video descrip-
tion.  We now turn to the question whether s 1, or any other 
provision in the Act, authorizes the Commission to mandate 
video description.

     2.   Section 1 of the Communications Act of 1934
          
     The FCC's Report and Order argues that the FCC's au-
thority to mandate video description is derived from the 
combination of s 1 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 
s 151, s 2(a) of the Act, 47 U.S.C. s 152(a) (stating that 
"[t]he provisions of this Act shall apply to all interstate and 
foreign communication by wire or radio ... and to all persons 
engaged within the United States in such communication"), 
s 4(i) of the Act, 47 U.S.C. s 154(i) (stating that "[t]he 
Commission may perform any and all acts, make such rules 
and regulations, and issue such orders, not inconsistent with 

this Act, as may be necessary in the execution of its func-
tions"), and s 303(r) of the Act, 47 U.S.C. s 303(r) (stating 
that "the Commission from time to time, as public conve-
nience, interest, or necessity requires shall ... [m]ake such 
rules and regulations and prescribe such restrictions and 
conditions, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary to 
carry out the provisions of this Act").  At oral argument, 
counsel for the FCC essentially conceded that if the agency 
cannot find its authority in s 1 then the video description 
regulations must be vacated by the court.  We agree.

     The FCC's majority opinion argues that s 1 authorizes the 
agency to mandate video description, because

     Congress ... authorized the Commission to make avail-
     able to all Americans a radio and wire communication 
     service, and to promote safety and life through such 
     service, and to make such regulations to carry out that 
     mandate, that are consistent with the public interest and 
     not inconsistent with other provisions of the Act or other 
     law.
     
15 F.C.C.R. 15,252.  This is a very frail argument, in no small 
part because it completely ignores the fact that video descrip-
tion regulations significantly implicate program content.

     There is no doubt that the video description rules regulate 
programming content.  Video description is not a regulation 
of television transmission that only incidentally and minimally 
affects program content;  it is a direct and significant regula-
tion of program content.  The rules require programmers to 
create a second script.  As Chairman Powell noted in his 
dissent, "video description is a creative work.  It requires a 
producer to evaluate a program, write a script, select actors, 
decide what to describe, decide how to describe it and choose 
what style or what pace.  In contrast, closed captioning is a 
straight translation of dialogue into text."  Report and Order, 
15 F.C.C.R. at 15,278 (Powell, dissenting).  Ultimately, video 
descriptions require a writer to amend a script to fill in audio 
pauses that were not originally intended to be filled.  Not 
only will producers and script writers be required to decide 
on what to describe, how to characterize it, and the style and 

pace of video descriptions, but script writers will have to 
describe subtleties in movements and mood that may not 
translate easily.  And many movements in a scene admit of 
several interpretations, or their meaning is purposely left 
vague to enhance the program content.  In short, it is clear 
that the implementation of video descriptions invariably 
would entail subjective and artistic judgments that concern 
and affect program content.  The FCC has even acknowl-
edged that the creation of this second script "raises creativity 
... issues."  Video Accessibility Report, 11 F.C.C.R. at 
19,221.  These effects are not insignificant, and there can be 
no doubt that the result is a direct regulation of program 
content.

     The FCC's arguments to the contrary are entirely unper-
suasive.  See Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 15,254-56.  
First, the Commission is wrong in its claim that video de-
scriptions are the same as closed captioning.  One is a simple 
transcript, a precise repetition of the spoken words.  The 
other requires an interpretation of visual scenes.  They are 
not the same.  Second, the FCC's statement that video 
descriptions are "not related to content" is specious.  Id. at 
15,255.  FCC's counsel would not even endorse that position 
at oral argument.  Requiring someone to change or add to a 
program script is related to the program's content.  Finally, 
the FCC claims that the video description regulations are 
"content-neutral."  Id. at 15,254-55.  We need not decide that 
issue, because it is irrelevant.  The question that we face is 
whether s 1 provides the FCC with authority to promulgate 
regulations that significantly regulate programming content.  
The content-neutrality of the rules is irrelevant to the inquiry 
of the FCC's delegated authority.

     During oral argument, counsel for the FCC acknowledged 
that it was not self-evident from the statute that the FCC is 
authorized to regulate program content pursuant to s 1.  
Counsel's hesitation was well placed, because s 1 merely 
authorizes the agency to ensure that all people of the United 
States, without discrimination, have access to wire and radio 
communication transmissions.  Section 1 does not otherwise 
authorize the FCC to regulate program content, as the video 

description regulations clearly do.  Both the terms of s 1 and 
the case law amplifying it focus on the FCC's power to 
promote the accessibility and universality of transmission, not 
to regulate program content.  Neither the FCC's Order nor 
its brief to this court cite any authority to suggest otherwise.  
To regulate in the area of programming, the FCC must find 
its authority in provisions other than s 1.  See, e.g., 47 U.S.C. 
s 531 (governing designation of cable channels for public, 
educational, or governmental use).

     The Communications Act was implemented for the purpose 
of consolidating federal authority over communications in a 
single agency to assure "an adequate communication system 
for this country."  S. Rep. No. 73-830, at 3 (1934);  see also 
H.R. Rep. No. 73-1850, at 3-4 (1934).  Given the limited 
distribution of communications facilities in 1934, s 1's man-
date to serve "all the people of the United States" is a 
reference to the geographic availability of service.  See Mi-
chael J. Aguilar, Note, Micro Radio:  A Small Step in the 
Return to Localism, Diversity, and Competitiveness in 
Broadcasting, 65 Brook. L. Rev. 1133, 1136-37 (1999) (explain-
ing how limited facilities influenced passage of the Communi-
cations Act of 1934);  see also Nat'l Broad. Co. v. United 
States, 319 U.S. 190, 216 (1943) ("The facilities of radio are 
limited and therefore precious;  they cannot be left to waste-
ful use without detriment to the public interest.").  Under 
s 1, Congress delegated authority to the FCC to expand 
radio and wire transmissions, so that they would be available 
to all U.S. citizens.  See, e.g., United States v. Midwest Video 
Corp., 406 U.S. 649, 667-68 (1972) ("[T]he critical question ... 
is whether the Commission has reasonably determined that 
its origination rule will 'further the achievement of long-
established regulatory goals in the field of television broad-
casting by increasing the number of outlets for community 
self-expression and augmenting the public's choice of pro-
grams and types of services...."') (citation omitted);  United 
States v. Southwestern Cable Co., 392 U.S. 157, 172 (1968) 
("[I]t was precisely because Congress wished to maintain, 
through appropriate administrative control, a grip on the 
dynamic aspects of radio transmission ... that it conferred 

upon the Commission a unified jurisdiction and broad authori-
ty.") (citations, footnotes, and internal quotations omitted).  
Section 1 does not address the content of the programs with 
respect to which accessibility is to be ensured.  In other 
words, the FCC's authority under s 1 is broad, but not 
without limits.

     The cases cited to this court by the FCC do not hold 
otherwise.  These cases do not relate to program content.  
See, e.g., United Video v. FCC, 890 F.2d 1173 (D.C. Cir. 1989) 
(FCC's "syndicated exclusivity" rules found to be content-
neutral, not otherwise arbitrary and capricious, and not viola-
tive of the Copyright Act of 1976 or the Cable Act of 1984;  
s 1 of the Communications Act not implicated);  Rural Tel. 
Coalition v. FCC, 838 F.2d 1307, 1315 (D.C. Cir. 1988) ("As 
the Universal Service Fund was proposed in order to further 
the objective of making communication service available to all 
Americans at reasonable charges, the proposal was within the 
Commission's statutory authority.  We have recognized previ-
ously that universal service is an important FCC objective.");  
North Am. Telecomm. Ass'n v. FCC, 772 F.2d 1282 (7th Cir. 
1985) (action for review of FCC orders relating to conditions 
upon which major telecommunications corporation's regional 
operating companies could enter telephone equipment busi-
ness);  GTE Serv. Corp. v. FCC, 474 F.2d 724, 730 (2d Cir. 
1973) (regulations prescribing conditions under which com-
mon carriers may sell data processing services, designed to 
insure that "carriers provide efficient and economic service to 
the public").

     One of the reasons why s 1 has not been construed to allow 
the FCC to regulate programming content is because such 
regulations invariably raise First Amendment issues.  E.g., 
Turner Broad. Sys. v. FCC, 512 U.S. 622, 651 (1994) ("[O]ur 
cases have recognized that Government regulation over the 
content of program broadcasting must be narrow, and that 
broadcast licensees must retain abundant discretion over 
programming choices.");  Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc. v. Dem-
ocratic Nat'l Comm., 412 U.S. 94, 126 (1973) (describing "the 
risk of an enlargement of Government control over the con-
tent of broadcast discussion of public issues" as a "problem of 

critical importance to broadcast regulation and the First 
Amendment").  Indeed, the parties in this case have argued 
over whether the video description rules infringe free speech 
precepts.  See Br. of Petitioner at 39-43;  Br. of Respondent 
at 35-41.  To avoid potential First Amendment issues, the 
very general provisions of s 1 have not been construed to go 
so far as to authorize the FCC to regulate program content.  
Rather, Congress has been scrupulously clear when it intends 
to delegate authority to the FCC to address areas significant-
ly implicating program content.  E.g., 18 U.S.C. s 1464 
("Whoever utters any obscene, indecent, or profane language 
by means of radio communication shall be fined under this 
title or imprisoned not more than two years, or both.");  47 
U.S.C. s 315 (governing provision of broadcast time to candi-
dates for public office);  47 U.S.C. s 399 ("No noncommercial 
educational broadcasting station may support or oppose any 
candidate for political office.").  And Congress has imposed 
limitations on regulations implicating program content.  See 
47 U.S.C. s 544(f) (providing that "[a]ny Federal agency ... 
may not impose requirements regarding the provision or 
content of cable services, except as expressly provided in this 
title");  see also 47 U.S.C. s 326 (providing that the FCC does 
not possess the power of censorship, and "no regulation or 
condition shall be promulgated or fixed by the Commission 
which shall interfere with the right of free speech by means 
of radio communication").  It is therefore clear that s 1 is not 
the provision in the Act from which the FCC can find 
delegated authority to regulate the content of broadcast 
programming.  The FCC must look beyond s 1 to find 
authority for regulations that significantly implicate program 
content.

     The FCC's position seems to be that the adoption of rules 
mandating video description is permissible because Congress 
did not expressly foreclose the possibility.  This is an entirely 
untenable position.  See Ry. Labor Executives, 29 F.3d at 671 
("Were courts to presume a delegation of power absent an 
express withholding of such power, agencies would enjoy 
virtually limitless hegemony, a result plainly out of keeping 
with Chevron and quite likely with the Constitution as well.") 

(emphasis in original).  See also Halverson v. Slater, 129 F.3d 
180, 187 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (quoting Ry. Labor Executives, 29 
F.3d at 671);  Oil, Chem. & Atomic Workers Int'l Union v. 
NLRB, 46 F.3d 82, 90 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (same);  see also Ethyl 
Corp. v. EPA, 51 F.3d 1053, 1060 (D.C. Cir. 1995) ("We refuse 
... to presume a delegation of power merely because Con-
gress has not expressly withheld such power.");  Natural Res. 
Def. Council v. Reilly, 983 F.2d 259, 266 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 
("'[I]t is only legislative intent to delegate such authority that 
entitles an agency to advance its own statutory construction 
for review under the deferential second prong of Chevron."') 
(quoting Kansas City v. Dep't of Housing & Urban Dev., 923 
F.2d 188, 191-92 (D.C. Cir. 1991)) (alteration in original).

     Congress enacted the closed captioning and video descrip-
tion provisions of s 713 together.  After originally entertain-
ing the possibility of providing the FCC with authority to 
adopt video description rules, Congress declined to do so.  
This silence surely cannot be read as ambiguity resulting in 
delegated authority to the FCC to promulgate the disputed 
regulations.

     3.   Other Statutory Provisions Cited by the Commission
          
     The Commission's brief to this court advances the some-
what opaque argument that the video description rules are 
"obviously a 'valid communications policy goal' and in the 
public interest."  Respondent's Br. at 26.  The Commission 
thus claims that the regulations are justified under s 303(r), 
which permits the FCC to regulate in the public interest "as 
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of [the] Act."  
47 U.S.C. s 303(r).  But this statutory provision simply can-
not carry the weight of the Commission's argument.  The 
FCC cannot act in the "public interest" if the agency does not 
otherwise have the authority to promulgate the regulations at 
issue.  An action in the public interest is not necessarily 
taken to "carry out the provisions of the Act," nor is it 
necessarily authorized by the Act.  The FCC must act pursu-
ant to delegated authority before any "public interest" inquiry 
is made under s 303(r).  This of course means, as FCC 
counsel conceded at oral argument, that the video description 

rules are arguably justified only if the FCC had authority to 
act pursuant to s 1 of the Act.

     The FCC's suggestion that s 4(i), without more, gives the 
agency authority to promulgate the disputed rules cannot 
withstand scrutiny.  Chairman Powell's discussion of this 
provision says it all:

          It is important to emphasize that section 4(i) is not a 
     stand-alone basis of authority and cannot be read in 
     isolation.  It is more akin to a "necessary and proper" 
     clause.  Section 4(i)'s authority must be "reasonably 
     ancillary" to other express provisions.  And, by its ex-
     press terms, our exercise of that authority cannot be 
     "inconsistent" with other provisions of the Act.  The 
     reason for these limitations is plain:  Were an agency 
     afforded carte blanche under such a broad provision, 
     irrespective of subsequent congressional acts that did not 
     squarely prohibit action, it would be able to expand 
     greatly its regulatory reach.
     
15 F.C.C.R. at 15,276 (Powell, dissenting).  We agree.

     Finally, there is really nothing to be said about s 2(a), 47 
U.S.C. s 152(a), which was also cited by the FCC in support 
of the video description regulations.  This provision does not, 
on its own, support the regulations.  Neither the FCC's 
Order nor counsel's argument on behalf of the FCC suggest-
ed otherwise.

     In short, the FCC can point to no statutory provision that 
gives the agency authority to mandate visual description 
rules.  The rules may be highly salutary.  But that is not the 
issue before this court and we offer no judgment on the 
question.  What is determinative here is the FCC acted 
without delegated authority from Congress.  Section 1 does 
not furnish the authority sought, because the regulations 
significantly implicate program content and the FCC can cite 
no authority in which a court has upheld agency action under 
s 1 where program content was at the core of the regulations 
at issue.  And it does not matter that the disputed rules here 
are arguably "content-neutral."  The point is that the rules 

are about program content and therefore can find no authori-
zation in s 1.

     Finally, if there were any serious question about proper 
result in this case, all doubt is resolved by reference to s 713.  
In s 713(f), Congress authorized and ordered the Commission 
to produce a report - nothing more, nothing less.  The 
statute does not, as with closed captioning, instruct (or even 
permit) the FCC to promulgate regulations mandating video 
description.  Once the Commission completed the task of 
preparing the report on video description, its delegated au-
thority on the subject ended.

                         III. Conclusion

     [G]iven the minimal extent to which the FCC and Con-
     gress actually influence the programming offered by 
     broadcast stations, it would be difficult to conclude that 
     Congress enacted [video description] in an effort to exer-
     cise content control....  In a regime where Congress or 
     the FCC exercised more intrusive control over the con-
     tent of broadcast programming, an argument similar to 
     [the argument raised by the Commission] might carry 
     greater weight.  But in the present regulatory system, 
     those concerns are without foundation.
     
Turner Broad. Sys., 512 U.S. at 652.  Accordingly, for the 
reasons given in this opinion, we hereby grant the petition for 
review filed by MPAA, and reverse and vacate the Commis-
sion's Order insofar as it requires broadcasters to implement 
video description.

                                    So ordered.    


















Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, concurring:

     I believe that section 713 of the Communications Act, 47 
U.S.C. s 613, plainly does not authorize the FCC to promul-
gate video description rules and, for that reason, I fully 
concur in that portion of the majority opinion that so holds.  I 
do not agree, however, that the video description rules consti-
tute "a direct and significant regulation of program content."  
Maj. Op. at 11.  I fail to see how video description need 
consist of anything more than spoken stage directions.  If so, 
video description, at least in my view, does not regulate 
program content.  While I agree that section 1 of the Com-
munications Act, 47 U.S.C. s 151, does not provide the FCC 
with authority to promulgate the video description rules, it is 
not because the rules regulate program content;  in my view, 
neither section 1, nor any of the other provisions of the Act 
the FCC relies on, independently delegates authority that 
section 713 plainly withholds.

                                                     