                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISRTICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 15, 2000       Decided July 11, 2000 

                           No. 99-1368

           BP Amoco Corpration, successor by merger of 
                   Amoco Corporation, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

      Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers International Union, 
                        AFL-CIO, et al., 
                           Intervenors

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Jeffrey S. Heller argued the cause for the petitioners.  
Stephen D. Erf and Thomas J. Piskorski were on brief.

     David Habenstreit, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for the respondents.  Leonard R. 
Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, Associate General Coun-
sel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, 
and David A. Seid, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, were on brief for the respondents.  Anne M. Lofaso, 
Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Patrick M. Flynn entered an appearance for the interve-
nors.

     Daniel V. Yager and Heather L. MacDougall were on brief 
for the amicus curiae.

     Before:  Williams, Henderson and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  The petition-
ers, BP Amoco Corp., successor by merger to Amoco Corpo-
ration, and its subsidiaries (collectively BP Amoco)1 seek 
review of a decision and order of the National Labor Rela-
tions Board (NLRB, Board) holding that BP Amoco commit-
ted an unfair labor practice by unilaterally altering its em-
ployee medical benefit plan in violation of the collective 
bargaining agreements between Amoco Corporation and five 
locals of Intervenor Paper, Allied Chemical and Energy 
Workers International Union, successor to the Oil, Chemical 
and Atomic Workers International Union (collectively identi-
fied as Union).  Because the collective bargaining agreements 
expressly incorporated the company benefit plan, which in 
turn expressly reserved to BP Amoco the right to amend the 
plan at any time, we conclude BP Amoco did not commit an 
unfair labor practice.  Accordingly, we grant BP Amoco's 
petition for review and deny the Board's cross-application for 
enforcement.

                                I.

     This dispute involves the medical benefit coverage BP 
Amoco provides to employees at its facilities in Texas City, 

__________
     1 For convenience "BP Amoco" is used to refer to all Amoco 
entities, both pre- and post-merger.

Texas, Wood River, Illinois and Yorktown, Virginia.  From 
1984 until 1989 BP Amoco provided these employees medical 
benefit coverage under its "Comprehensive Medical Expense 
Plan" (CMEP), a traditional indemnity plan under which 
participants chose their own medical providers and received 
specific benefits subject to fixed deductibles.  The CMEP 
expressly reserved to BP Amoco the "right to amend[,] 
modify, suspend or terminate" the plan "at any time."  Joint 
Appendix (JA) 489, 494.

     During contract negotiation in 1989 and 1990, BP Amoco 
and the Union agreed to replace the CMEP with the "Amoco 
Medical Plan" (AMP), a similar indemnity plan.  The AMP 
contained the following reservation of rights provision:

     The company expects and intends to continue these plans 
     indefinitely.  However, the company reserves the right 
     to amend or terminate these plans at any time and for 
     any reason. If any of these plans are amended or termi-
     nated, you and other active employees may not receive 
     benefits as desribed [sic] in other sections of this book.  
     You may be entitled to receive different benefits, or 
     benefits under different conditions.  However, it is possi-
     ble that you will lose all benefit coverage. This may 
     happen at any time, even after you retire, if the company 
     decides to terminate a plan or your coverage under a 
     plan.  In no event will you become entitled to any vested 
     rights under these plans.
     
JA 654.  Pursuant to this provision, BP Amoco amended the 
plan in 1991 and 1992 by distributing amending documents to 
employees but the amendments did not affect the reservation 
of rights provision.

     During contract negotiation in 1992 and 1993, BP Amoco 
announced its intent to adopt some form of managed care 
health plan to replace the indemnity plan.  In January 1993 
BP Amoco issued a bulletin to plan participants informing 
them of the planned change.  Additional bulletins were issued 
later in the spring providing details of the proposed managed 
care features and of two other changes affecting retiree 
benefits.

     After the Union demanded bargaining on the plan changes, 
BP Amoco met with the various locals to discuss the matter 
throughout the summer.  The Union, however, offered no 
proposals and in September 1993 BP Amoco declared an 
impasse.  BP Amoco implemented the modified plan effective 
October 1, 1993.

     The Union filed charges on behalf of its locals2 and the 
NLRB issued four complaints based thereon, which were 
consolidated.  In October and November 1994 the administra-
tive law judge (ALJ) conducted a four-day hearing.  In a 
decision issued March 17, 1995 the ALJ concluded there was 
no unfair labor practice because the Union was "bound" by 
the AMP's reservation of rights clauses which had been 
"adopt[ed]" in the collective bargaining agreements.  1999 
WL 871774, at *12 et seq.

     The NLRB General Counsel and the Union filed excep-
tions.  In a decision dated August 18, 1999, the Board re-
versed the ALJ and held that BP Amoco had violated section 
8(a)(1) and (5) of the National Labor Relations Act (Act).  
Amoco Chem. Co., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 174, 1999 WL 671774 
(1999).  BP Amoco petitioned for review of the Board's 
decision and the Board cross-applied for enforcement.

                               II.

     Section 8(a)(1) of the Act makes it generally an unfair labor 
practice for an employer "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce 
employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in the 
[Act]."  29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1).  Section 8(a)(5) more specifi-
cally makes it an unfair labor practice for an employer "to 
refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives of his 
employees."  Id. s 158(a)(5).  "An employer violates sections 
8(a)(5) and 8(a)(1) of the Act if it makes a unilateral change in 
a term or condition of employment--so-called 'mandatory 
subjects'--without first bargaining to impasse."  NLRB v. 

__________
     2 On August 20, 1993 one of the Union's locals filed a grievance 
over the benefit change.  The grievance was denied by the arbitra-
tor on October 2, 1994.

United States Postal Serv., 8 F.3d 832, 836 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 
(citing Litton Fin. Printing Div. v. NLRB, 501 U.S. 190 
(1991)).  "However, the duty to bargain under the [Act] does 
not prevent parties from negotiating contract terms that 
make it unnecessary to bargain over subsequent changes in 
terms or conditions of employment."  Id.  Thus, the parties 
may negotiate " 'a provision in a collective bargaining contract 
that fixes the parties' rights and forecloses further mandatory 
bargaining as to that subject.' "  Id. (quoting Local Union 
No. 47, Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers v. NLRB, 927 F.2d 635, 
640 (D.C. Cir. 1991);  other citations omitted).  " '[T]o the 
extent that a bargain resolves any issue, it removes that issue 
pro tanto from the range of bargaining.' "  Id. (quoting 
Connors v. Link Coal Co., 970 F.2d 902, 905 (D.C. Cir. 1992)).  
"This court has referred to this inquiry as an analysis of 
whether an issue is 'covered by' a collective bargaining agree-
ment."  Id. (citing Connors, 970 F.2d at 906;  Department of 
Navy v. Federal Labor Relations Auth., 962 F.2d 48, 57 (D.C. 
Cir. 1992)).

     In this case BP Amoco contends the terms of the AMP 
were "covered by" the collective bargaining agreements be-
tween BP Amoco and the locals because each agreement 
incorporated the AMP by reference, including its reservation 
of rights provision.  This incorporation, BP Amoco maintains, 
removed the AMP's terms from the range of mandatory 
bargaining so that BP Amoco's unilateral modification of the 
plan's terms was not an unfair labor practice.

     Below, as in past decisions, the Board incorrectly applied a 
"waiver analysis," concluding that the Union had not made a 
"clear and unmistakable waiver" of its right to bargain over 
health benefits. 1999 WL 671774, at *3-4.  As this court 
explained in United States Postal Serv.:

     [T]he "covered by" and "waiver" inquiries are analytically 
distinct:

          A waiver occurs when a union knowingly and voluntari-
     ly relinquishes its right to bargain about a matter;  but 
     where the matter is covered by the collective bargaining 
     
     agreement, the union has exercised its bargaining right 
     and the question of waiver is irrelevant.
     
8 F.3d at 836 (quoting Department of Navy v. Federal Labor 
Relations Auth., 962 F.2d 48, 57 (D.C. Cir. 1992);  emphasis in 
original).  Here, the Board acknowledges the force of the 
"covered by" principle but contends it does not apply because 
the Board's decision expressly found that the collective bar-
gaining agreements did not incorporate the reservation of 
rights clauses.  For the reasons set out below, we agree with 
BP Amoco that the reservation of rights provision was incor-
porated into the five collective bargaining agreements and 
that therefore BP Amoco's authority to modify the AMP 
without mandatory bargaining was "covered by" the agree-
ments.

     Courts generally "accord a very high degree of deference 
to administrative adjudications by the NLRB," United Steel-
workers Local 14534 v. NLRB, 983 F.2d 240, 244 (D.C. Cir. 
1993), but "[b]ecause the courts are charged with developing 
a uniform federal law of labor contracts under section 301 of 
the Labor Management Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 185 (1988), 
we accord no deference to the Board's interpretation of labor 
contracts."  United States Postal Serv., 8 F.3d at 836 (citing 
Litton Fin. Printing, 501 U.S. at 203 (citing Local Union 
1395, Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers v. NLRB, 797 F.2d 1027, 
1030 (D.C. Cir. 1986))).  Accordingly, we construe de novo the 
language of the collective bargaining agreements here to 
determine whether they incorporate by reference the AMP's 
reservation of rights provision.  See id.  We conclude that 
they do.

     The two Texas City, Texas agreements recite that specified 
"Employee Benefit Plans," including the "Amoco Medical 
Plan," "are generally set forth in the current Benefits Plan 
Booklet[s]," although "it is understood that certain provisions 
in the Booklet have been superseded by negotiation between 
the parties."  JA 981, 1221.3  The Wood River, Illinois, and 
Yorktown, Virginia facilities' agreements provide:  "Benefit 

__________
     3 Each of the agreements set forth specific superseding provi-
sions.  See JA 981, 1221.

plans for the Company ... will continue in force during the 
life of this Agreement with the understanding that these 
Plans may be bargained upon but will not be subject to 
arbitration."  Id. at 828, 874, 916.4  In each case, the quoted 
language explicitly makes the plans a part of the collective 
bargaining agreement, subject to specific, negotiated varia-
tions.  The Board itself acknowledged as much when it stated 
"the AMP summary plan description is a primary reference 
for identifying the medical insurance benefits that the Re-
spondent has contractually agreed to provide unit employ-
ees." 1999 WL 671774, at *4 [JA 1532] (emphasis added).

     Because the agreements incorporated the AMP generally, 
they incorporated all of the plan's provisions not expressly 
superseded in the agreements, including the reservation of 
rights clause.  As we noted in Air Line Pilots Ass'n, Int'l v. 
Delta Air Lines, 863 F.2d 87 (D.C. Cir. 1988):  "It is generally 
held that '[w]hen a document incorporates outside material by 
reference, the subject matter to which it refers becomes part 
of the incorporating document just as if it were set out in 
full.' "  863 F.2d at 94 (quoting Cunha v. Ward Foods, Inc., 
804 F.2d 1418, 1428 (9th Cir. 1986)).  In Mary Thompson 
Hosp., 296 N.L.R.B. 1245, 1247 (1989), enf'd, 943 F.2d 741 
(7th Cir. 1991), the Board itself noted that "[t]he word 
'incorporate' means, of course, that all provisions of the plan 
become part of the contract itself."  Specifically, the Board 
concluded there that by incorporating the plan, "the Union 
affirmatively agreed that the [employer] could terminate its 
pension plan at any time," as the employer was authorized to 
do under the plan's reservation of rights clause.  Id.  "[T]he 
right of the [employer] to do so, free and clear of mandatory 
consultation or of union objections, was contractually estab-
lished." Id.  The same result obtains here.  There was no 
need, as the Board suggests, for BP Amoco to separately 
negotiate the reservation of rights clause before it could 

__________
     4 The Board stated below, inexplicably, that "only three of the five 
local contracts even mention the summary plan as a source for 
general description of the AMP's benefits." 1999 WL 671774 , at *2.

become a part of the agreements.  No such negotiation was 
required in Mary Thompson.

     In sum, the express incorporation of the AMP into the 
collective bargaining agreements made the plan's reservation 
of rights clause a part of each agreement and thereby autho-
rized BP Amoco to unilaterally modify the AMP without the 
Union's consent.  This authority was limited only by the 
parties' "understanding," expressed in the agreements, that 
the AMP "may be bargained upon" and "that certain provi-
sions in the Booklet have been superseded by negotiation 
between the parties."  JA 981, 1221.  The only superceding 
provision in the agreements addressed the proportionate em-
ployer and employee plan contributions.  BP Amoco's reser-
vation of the right to amend the plan was not superseded and 
therefore remained a part of the plan as incorporated into the 
collective bargaining agreements.5 Because BP Amoco was 
contractually authorized to amend the plan unilaterally, it 
committed no unfair labor practice by doing so.  According-
ly,6 the petition for review is granted and the Board's cross 
application for enforcement is denied.

__________
     5 BP Amoco's reserved authority to "terminate" (as opposed to its 
right to "amend") seems to be circumscribed, however, under the 
Wood River, Illinois, and Yorktown, Virginia collective bargaining 
agreements, each of which requires that the AMP "continue in force 
during the life of [the] Agreement."  JA 828, 874, 916.  BP Amoco 
appears foreclosed by the quoted language (even apart from the 
constraints of its own self interest and the mandates of the Employ-
ee Retirement Income Security Act) from canceling the AMP 
altogether, at least for Union employees at these two facilities.

     6 In light of our disposition, we need not consider BP Amoco's 
alternate argument that if there was a bargaining obligation, it was 
satisfied because BP Amoco bargained to impasse.  See Pet'r Br. at 
34-36;  NLRB v. McClatchy Newspapers, Inc., 964 F.2d 1153, 1165 
(D.C. Cir. 1992) (in banc) ("Generally, once the parties reach a 
good-faith impasse, the duty to bargain is at least temporarily 
suspended, and the parties, typically the employer, may enact any 
change in a mandatory subject reasonably contained within its final 
proposal.").  Nor need we consider BP Amoco's additional argu-

                                                                                                                             So ordered.

__________
ment regarding the unenforceability of the Board's remedy.  See 
Pet'r Br. at 36-41.

     