                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 5, 2000    Decided October 27, 2000 

                           No. 99-1531

            Qwest Communications International Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                     MCI WorldCom, Inc. and 
                        AT&T Corporation, 
                           Intervenors

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     William R. Richardson, Jr. argued the cause for petitioner.  
With him on the briefs were William T. Lake, Patrick J. 

Carome, Julie A. Veach, Dan L. Poole, and Robert B. McKen-
na.

     Lawrence E. Sarjeant, Linda Kent, John Hunter, Julie E. 
Rones, William F. Maher, Jr., Stephen L. Goodman, and 
Richard White, Jr. were on the brief for amicus curiae in 
support of petitioner.

     Joel Marcus, Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-
sion, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, Daniel 
M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, Joel I. Klein, 
Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, Rob-
ert B. Nicholson, and Christopher Sprigman, Attorneys.  
John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, entered an appearance.

     Anthony C. Epstein argued the cause for intervenors 
WorldCom, Inc. and AT&T Corp.  With him on the brief 
were Thomas F. O'Neil, III, William Single, IV, Mark C. 
Rosenblum, Peter H. Jacoby, Judy Sello, and David Lawson. 
James P. Young entered an appearance.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle, and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Qwest Communications Interna-
tional, Inc. ("Qwest") petitions for review of a decision by the 
Federal Communications Commission ("Commission") to dis-
close raw audit data to competitors in connection with a 
notice of inquiry concerning the validity and reasonableness 
of statistical sampling for equipment not found or not verifia-
ble during a field audit.1  See In re Ameritech Corporation 
Telephone Operating Companies' Continuing Property Rec-
ords Audit et al., Memorandum Opinion and Order, 15 
F.C.C.R. 1784 (1999) ("Order").  Qwest contends that the 
Order is contrary to s 1905 of the Trade Secrets Act, 18 

__________
     1  U S West Communications, Inc., which filed the petition for 
review, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of U S West, Inc.  During the 
pendency of this appeal, U S West, Inc. merged and became Qwest 
Communications International, Inc.  Accordingly, we refer to Qwest 
as the petitioner.

U.S.C. s 1905 (1994), because nothing in s 220(f) of the 
Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. s 220(f) (1994), autho-
rizes the Commission to release otherwise protected informa-
tion.  Qwest further contends that the Commission's Order 
violates its own longstanding policy to provide special protec-
tion to audit information.  We hold that s 220(f) provides 
sufficient authorization for disclosure of trade secrets, but 
that the Commission has failed to explain how its Order is 
consistent with its policy regarding the treatment of confiden-
tial information.  Accordingly, we remand the case to the 
Commission for further proceedings.2

                                I.

     Under Part 32 of the Commission's regulations, the Region-
al Bell Operating Companies ("RBOCs") are required to 
maintain detailed accounting records of property used in their 
local telephone operations, including the property's descrip-
tion, location, and cost.  See 47 C.F.R. ss 32.2000(e)-(f).  The 
records, which serve various regulatory functions, including 
the setting of rates and the assessment of charge allocations, 
must conform to a uniform accounting system prescribed by 
the rules and must be sufficiently detailed to allow the 
property's physical existence to be confirmed during a spot 
check conducted by the Commission.  See id.

     In 1997, the Commission's Common Carrier Bureau's Ac-
counting Safeguards Division ("Bureau") began an audit of 
the RBOCs' records for hard-wired central office equipment 
in order "to determine if their records were being maintained 
in compliance with the Commission's rules and to verify that 
property recorded in the accounts represented equipment 
used and useful for the provision of telecommunications ser-
vices."3  During the audit, each piece of equipment was 

__________
     2  In view of our disposition of the Commission's reliance on 
s 220(f), we do not address the Commission's reliance on s 154(j), 
47 U.S.C. s 154(j) (1994).  See Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1788 p 8 & 
n.23.

     3  The seven RBOCs were Ameritech, Bell Atlantic, BellSouth, 
NYNEX, Pacific Bell, Southwestern Bell, and U S West Telephone 

categorized or "scored" as "(1) found [as described];  (2) found 
in another location;  (3) not found/missing;  or (4) unverifia-
ble."  The Commission explained that part of the audit in-
cluded "statistical sampling techniques so that the findings 
for the sample could be extended as representative of all of 
the equipment in the category audited, i.e., hard-wired central 
office equipment."  After reviewing the RBOCs' comments on 
draft reports, the Bureau's final audit reports revealed that 
the RBOCs may have overstated their book costs by as much 
as five billion dollars.4  The RBOCs filed objections, in the 
words of one Commissioner, "aggressively attack[ing] the 
audits, the competence of the auditors, and the credibility of 
the audit design."5  Qwest challenged the Bureau's final audit 
report, claiming that it failed to reflect additional data ac-
counting for a majority of items scored as "not found," and 
reaffirming its conclusion that the audit was fatally flawed for 
statistical and other reasons.6  In support of the latter point, 

__________
Companies.  See Public Notice, The Accounting Safeguards Divi-
sion Releases Information Concerning Audit Procedures for Con-
sidering Requests by the Regional Bell Operating Companies To 
Reclassify or "Rescore" Field Audit Findings of Their Continuing 
Property Records, 14 F.C.C.R. 6243, 6243 (1999).  The hard-wired 
central office equipment constitutes approximately one-fourth of the 
RBOCs' total capital investment.  See Press Release, FCC Releases 
Audit Reports on RBOCs' Property Records, Feb. 25, 1999 ("FCC 
Press Release").

     4  See FCC Press Release.  The audit indicated "that approxi-
mately 11 percent of the [RBOCs'] equipment could not be found, 
and approximately 14 percent was either unverifiable or found in 
another location."  Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1786 p 3.

     5  In re U S West Telephone Operating Companies' Continuing 
Property Records Audit, Order, 14 F.C.C.R. 5731, 5827 (1999) 
(Commissioner Tristani, issuing separate statement).

     6  Qwest's individualized audit report indicated that of the 1188 
hard-wired equipment-item records randomly sampled and "scored" 
for the audit, 294 (24.7% of the sampled items) "contained substan-
tive deficiencies and did not comply with the Commission's rules."  
Id. at 5736 p 3.  See also id. at 5743 p 21.  Of the 294 deficient 
records, 152 (12.79% of the sampled items) described equipment 

Qwest submitted an analysis by Deloitte & Touche's "quanti-
tative techniques expert," who raised doubts about the audi-
tors' sampling methodology and their evaluation techniques.

     The Commission, in turn, issued a notice of inquiry in April 
1999, seeking public comment on ten criticisms relating to the 
audits.  See In re Ameritech Corporation Telephone Operat-
ing Companies' Continuing Property Records Audit et al., 
Notice of Inquiry, 14 F.C.C.R. 7019, 7021-22 p 6 (1999) 
("NOI").  The only issue relevant here is Issue 2:  namely, 
"[t]he validity and reasonableness of the methodology used by 
the Bureau's auditors in determining whether to rescore or to 
modify a finding during a field audit that equipment was 'not 
found.' "7  Previously, in February 1999, the Commission 
determined, over the dissent of two Commissioners, that 
pursuant to the RBOCs' waivers of confidentiality, the release 
of the audit reports and the RBOCs' responses to them was 
in the public interest.8  MCI thereafter filed a Freedom of 
Information Act request, pursuant to 47 C.F.R. s 0.461, 
seeking public release of the RBOCs' explanations and sup-
porting documentation regarding their equipment not found, 
the Bureau's audit workpapers showing the scoring of partic-
ular items, and the continuing property records themselves.9

__________
that could not be verified against the record;  123 (10.35% of the 
sampled items) described equipment that could not be found;  and 
19 (1.60% of the sampled items) described equipment that could 
only partially be located.  See id.

     7  NOI, 14 F.C.C.R. at 7021 p 6.  Commissioner Furchtgott-
Roth indicated apparent agreement with some of the RBOCs' 
criticisms of the audit's methodology, process, and overall conclu-
sions.  See In re U S West Telephone Operating Companies' 
Continuing Property Records Audit, Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 5832-35 
(Commissioner Furchtgott-Roth, dissenting in part).

     8  See FCC Press Release.

     9  MCI sought the release of three types of information:

     [1] any materials that the RBOCs have submitted to the 
     [Bureau] to explain why hard-wired [central office] equipment 
     items were not found by the auditors or to support claims that 
     items in the audit sample should be "rescored." ... [This 
     
     Qwest opposed the release of the raw audit data on three 
principal grounds:  First, releasing the requested information 
is barred by s 220(f) of the Communications Act and previous 
Commission rulings and would be an unjustified departure 
from the Commission's established practice of not releasing 
audit-related materials, except in exceptional cases;  second, 
the requested information is confidential commercial informa-
tion, voluntarily submitted, and thus exempt from release 
under Exemption 4 of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 
U.S.C. s 552(b)(4);  and third, the requested information con-
stitutes pre-decisional deliberations and as such, is protected 
by Exemption 5 of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 
s 552(b)(5), and s 0.457(e) of the Commission's rules, 47 
C.F.R. s 0.457(e).  Qwest indicated that it was opposing only 
the request for release of data submitted regarding the "not 
found" and "unverifiable" audit items, explaining that these 
items "contain[ed] detailed information including pricing in-
formation on specific items used in the provision of telecom-
munications services...."  These items, in Qwest's view, 
were comprised of "highly sensitive business information 
which MCI could use to unfairly improve its competitive 
position" relative to Qwest and other market competitors.

     The Bureau ordered release of the requested raw audit 
data to parties under a protective order.  The Bureau relied 
on ss 154(j) and 220(f) of the Communications Act as provid-
ing the Commission with explicit authorization for the discre-
tionary release of audit materials otherwise protected from 
release under the Freedom of Information Act and the Trade 

__________
     includes] narrative explanations and supporting documentation 
     such as invoices, telephone equipment orders, property record 
     input forms, engineering drawings, and photographs[;]  [2] any 
     audit workpapers generated by [Bureau] staff during the 
     course of the audits that show or support the item-by-item 
     scoring of the items in the audit sample[;]  [and 3] [Continuing 
     Property Records] detail (vintage, description, etc.) for any 
     items scored "partially found," "not found," or "not verifiable" 
     at any time during the audit process.
     
MCI stated that release of the requested raw data was crucial for 
responding to the questions asked in the NOI, particularly Issue 2.

Secrets Act.  Relying also on "the Commission's duty to 
ensure that parties are given a reasonable opportunity to 
make informed comment on Issue No. 2," the Bureau viewed 
"the unique situation" created by the question posed in Issue 
2 to require the release of information that is "not routinely 
made available to the public, even under protective orders."  
The Bureau concluded that the question regarding the "audi-
tors' rescoring process can only be answered by allowing 
parties interested in filing comments to review this [raw data] 
material."  The Bureau's protective order limited access to 
the requested materials to (1) counsel for a party participat-
ing in the NOI proceeding and (2) technical advisors or other 
persons authorized by such counsel.  In the Bureau's opinion, 
the protective order "reasonably ameliorated" any potential 
competitive harm to the RBOCs.  All of the RBOCs except 
Bell Atlantic appealed to the Commission.

     The Commission affirmed the Bureau's decision to release 
the raw audit data subject to a protective order, relying 
principally on the Commission's explicit authority under 
s 220(f):  "[G]iven the importance of Commission audits to 
the effective performance of the Commission's statutory re-
sponsibilities with respect to carriers, [the Commission] be-
lieve[s] the [Communications] Act's statutory scheme fully 
envisions that, in some cases, disclosures of carrier-supplied 
audit information might become necessary in the course of 
carrying out the Commission's enforcement and regulatory 
policymaking functions."10  Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1789 p 8.  
The Commission also imposed "more stringent" terms for 
access to audit materials, modifying the protective order (1) 
to restrict access to the audit materials to "persons without 
decision making authority or influence regarding competitive 
issues," (2) to redact "vendor-specific pricing information," 
and (3) to limit the materials to be released to those relating 
to Issue 2.11  Id. at 1790-91 p p 13-14.  The Commission also 

__________
     10  In a footnote, the Commission cited s 154(j) as an alternate 
source of its authority.  See Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1788 n.23.

     11  Noting that MCI had not requested disclosure of materials 
concerning undetailed investment, the Commission decided not to 
require access to such information.  See id. at 1791 p 14.

provided that the RBOCs could suggest, for Bureau approval, 
other redactions to the auditors' workpapers and the RBOCs' 
comments.  Qwest petitioned for review of the Order.12

                               II.

     Qwest contends that the Commission's decision to release 
protected confidential information violates the Trade Secrets 
Act because the Commission is not "authorized by law" to 
disclose otherwise protected information.  Section 220(f) of 
the Communications Act, Qwest maintains, is "a nondisclo-
sure statute that itself prohibits agency employees from 
releasing information obtained during audits...."  Because 
s 220(f) is "wholly silent as to the power of the Commission 
to issue [ ] directions" for release of such material, Qwest 
continues, the statute's "logic and purposes reflect no [Con-
gressional] intention to authorize the Commission to disclose 
confidential information based solely on the exercise of its 
own unbounded 'discretion.' "

     The parties agree that the material ordered disclosed by 
the Commission is covered by the Trade Secrets Act.  Hence, 
the question is whether the Communications Act vests the 
Commission with authority to disclose information covered by 
the Trade Secrets Act, or more specifically, whether, for 
purposes of s 1905 of the Trade Secrets Act, the Commission 
was authorized under s 220(f) of the Communications Act to 
allow Qwest's competitors access to Qwest's raw audit data.

     The parties disagree about our standard of review.  We 
agree with the Commission that our principal inquiry of the 
meaning of s 220(f) follows the familiar two-part test under 
Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984):  
The court "must give effect to the unambiguously expressed 
intent of Congress" or in the absence of such intent, consider 
whether the agency's interpretation is a "permissible con-
struction of the statute."  Id. at 843.  Necessarily, however, 
we must first examine what Congress intended by s 1905 of 

__________
     12  The court granted Qwest's motion for a stay pending review.

the Trade Secrets Act, and in this regard, as Qwest contends, 
our review is de novo.  Hence, we look first to the language 
of s 1905 and seek guidance from its structure and history.  
See Chrysler v. Brown, 441 U.S. 281, 296 (1979).  We then do 
much the same in examining s 220(f) of the Communications 
Act, reaching the Commission's interpretation of its enabling 
statute only if Congressional intent is unclear.

     Section 1905 of the Trade Secrets Act prohibits the unau-
thorized release of trade secrets and commercial information, 
unless "authorized by law," subject to punishment by fine and 
imprisonment and removal from office or employment.  See 
18 U.S.C. s 1905.13  The history of the Act, which was 
originally enacted in 1864, traces back to Congressional con-
cern over disclosures of business information by "feckless or 
corrupt revenue agents."  Chrysler, 441 U.S. at 296.  When 
Congress in 1948 consolidated three statutes barring or limit-
ing the release of such information, it sought to address the 
demands of the new administrative state and thereby broad-
ened the reach of the Trade Secrets Act.  See CNA Fin. 
Corp. v. Donovan, 830 F.2d 1132, 1149 n.122 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  
As the court has previously recounted, Congress "recog-
ni[zed] that increased governmental access to financial rec-
ords and commercial operations of individuals and entities ... 
had to be accompanied by some restraint on the freedom of 

__________
     13  Section 1905 provides in relevant part:

     Whoever, being an officer or employee of the United States or 
     of any department or agency thereof, ... publishes, divulges, 
     discloses, or makes known in any manner or to any extent not 
     authorized by law any information coming to him [or her] in 
     the course of his [or her] employment or official duties or by 
     reason of any examination or investigation made by, or return, 
     report or record made to or filed with, such department ... , 
     which information concerns or relates to [ ] trade secrets ...;  
     or permits any income return or copy thereof or any book 
     containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or 
     examined by any person except as provided by law;  shall be 
     fined under this title, or imprisoned not more than one year, or 
     both;  and shall be removed from office or employment.
     
18 U.S.C. s 1905 (emphasis added).

governmental employees to disseminate such data to third 
parties."  Id.

     The limits established by the Trade Secrets Act, however, 
are not inconsistent with authorizations granted to federal 
agencies to release data when necessary for the carrying out 
of the agencies' statutory responsibilities.  In National Parks 
and Conservation Ass'n v. Kleppe, 547 F.2d 673 (D.C. Cir. 
1976), the court noted that the Trade Secrets Act is "merely a 
general prohibition against unauthorized disclosures of confi-
dential commercial or financial information."  Id. at 687 n.50.  
The court in CNA, continuing to explore the nature of the 
statute, observed that the Trade Secrets Act:

     seems to embody a congressional judgment that private 
     commercial and financial information should not be re-
     vealed by agencies that gather it, absent a conscious 
     choice in favor of disclosure by someone with power to 
     impart the force of law to that decision.  The Act at-
     tempts to forestall casual or thoughtless divulgence--
     disclosure made without first going through a delibera-
     tive process--with an opportunity for input from con-
     cerned parties.
     
CNA, 830 F.2d at 1141 (emphasis added).

     In the leading case on the question of the authorization 
required by s 1905 for release of trade secrets, the Supreme 
Court interpreted the phrase "authorized by law" not to have 
"a special, limited meaning."  Chrysler, 441 U.S. at 298.  
Instead, the Supreme Court instructed that the exercise by 
an agency of quasi-legislative power "must be rooted in a 
grant of such power by the Congress and subject to limita-
tions which that body imposes."  Id. at 302.  More directly, 
the Court stated that "[w]hat is important" is whether the 
reviewing court could reasonably conclude that the statutory 
grant of authority contemplated the regulations providing for 
release of information.  Id. at 308.  Thus, in rejecting the 
contention that an Executive Order directing the Secretary of 
Labor to adopt regulations as are "necessary and appropri-
ate" meant that all regulations so promulgated have the full 
"force and effect of law," the Court focused on whether there 

was a "nexus between the regulations and some delegation of 
the requisite legislative authority by Congress."  Id. at 304.  
Looking at the statutory sources for the Executive Order,14 
the Court concluded that "it is clear that when it enacted 
these statutes, Congress was not concerned with public dis-
closure of trade secrets or confidential business informa-
tion...."  Id. at 306.  By way of illustration, the Court 
contrasted the situation in NBC v. United States, 319 U.S. 
190, 217 (1943), where, based on the language and logic of the 
Communications Act, which vested comprehensive powers in 
the Commission, the Court upheld Commission regulations 
that extended beyond technical, engineering requirements.  
See Chrysler, 441 U.S. at 308.  A mere housekeeping statute, 
on the other hand, whose history indicated that it was "simply 
a grant of authority to the agency to regulate its own affairs," 
would not suffice to authorize disclosure of confidential busi-
ness information because it was not intended to provide 
authority for limiting the scope of the Trade Secrets Act.  Id. 
at 309.

     Under s 220(a) of the Communications Act, the Commis-
sion is authorized to direct the kind of financial books and 
records that carriers must maintain so that the Commission 
can fulfill its mandate of ensuring that carriers' rates and 
practices are just and reasonable.  See 47 U.S.C. s 220(a).  
In establishing a uniform system of accounts, the Commission 
is charged with "ensur[ing] a proper allocation of all costs to 
and among telecommunication services, facilities, and prod-
ucts...."  Id. s 220(a)(2).  Under s 220(c), the Commission 
"shall at all times have access to and the right of inspection 
and examination of all accounts, records, and memoranda" 
maintained by the carrier pursuant to s 220.  In addition, the 
Commission may use public accounting services.  In this 
connection, subsection (c) provides an exception to nondisclo-
sure laws as well as a nondisclosure limitation on persons 

__________
     14  Among the possible sources were the Federal Property and 
Administrative Services Act of 1949, Titles VI and VII of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964, and the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 
1972.  See Chrysler, 441 U.S. at 304-05 & nn.34-36.

having access to information submitted to the Commission.  
Subsection (c) provides that "[a]ny provision of law prohibit-
ing the disclosure of the contents of messages or communica-
tions shall not be deemed to prohibit the disclosure of any 
matter in accordance with the provisions of this section."  Id. 
s 220(c).  The statute further provides that any person con-
ducting a Commission audit shall have the powers of the 
Commission under subsection (c) and shall be subject to 
subsection (f) "in the same manner as if that person were an 
employee of the Commission."  Id.15  Section 220(f), in turn, 
provides:

     No member, officer, or employee of the Commission shall 
     divulge any fact or information which may come to his 
     [or her] knowledge during the course of examination of 
     books or other accounts, as hereinbefore provided, except 
     insofar as he [or she] may be directed by the Commission 
     or by a court.
     
Id. s 220(f) (emphasis added).

     Subsection (f), first mentioned in s 220(c) after a sentence 
that removes any legal obstacles to the disclosure of informa-
tion submitted to the Commission in accordance with s 220, 
places nondisclosure burdens on all persons having access to 
confidential information submitted to the Commission.  Thus, 
its strict limitation on how confidential information is to be 
handled arises in a context in which the Commission will have 
access to information that is otherwise protected by law from 
disclosure.  Nevertheless, Congress alluded to the possibility 
of disclosure by the Commission (and the court).  Qwest's 
contention that s 220(f) is "an integral part of a nondisclo-
sure statute" is correct so far as it goes.  However, viewing 
s 220(f) as directed to nondisclosure does not mean that its 

__________
     15  The other provisions of s 220 are not directly applicable to 
this analysis.  Section 220(b) concerns depreciation charges, see 47 
U.S.C. s 220(b), while subsection (d) establishes a penalty against 
carriers for failure to comply with the record-keeping provisions, 
see id. s 220(d), and subsection (e) establishes a penalty for false 
entries in, and destruction or alteration of, records by any carrier.  
See id. s 220(e).

last clause has no role to perform, much less nothing to do 
with the conditions under which disclosures may occur.  Un-
der Chrysler, s 1905 is satisfied without a provision of law 
that expressly refers to trade secrets.  See Chrysler, 441 U.S. 
at 308.

     Congressional intent to allow an exception to nondisclosure 
seems implicit in the statutory scheme.  In the Communica-
tions Act of 1934, Congress delegated broad authority to the 
Commission in carrying out its responsibilities for oversight 
of licensing, rate making, and carrier practices.  See 47 
U.S.C. s 151 et seq.;  NBC, 319 U.S. at 217-20.  Significantly, 
in s 220, Congress placed in the Commission the responsibili-
ty to "ensure a proper allocation of all costs."  47 U.S.C. 
s 220(a)(2).  With the additional provisions authorizing au-
dits, it reasonably follows that Congress contemplated that 
the Commission would be reviewing the type of data at issue 
here.  Thus, unlike the statutes that were considered by the 
Supreme Court in Chrysler, see 441 U.S. at 304-09, s 220 
focuses on the need for the Commission to have access to 
confidential information regarding licensees and others, and 
to determine how such information is to be protected when 
the Commission carries out its responsibilities.  The former is 
addressed in s 220(c), the latter in s 220(f).  When Congress 
consolidated various statutes on trade secrets in 1948, it gave 
no indication that federal agencies' interpretation of their 
authority to release confidential data was in error, much less 
no longer of force and effect.16  Nothing in Chrysler suggests 
that a comparable situation existed with respect to the stat-
utes considered in that case.  See Chrysler, 441 U.S. at 308.

     To the extent Qwest contends that s 220(f) is too broad an 
authorization, in its view leaving the Commission with unfet-
tered discretion, we offer two responses.  First, contrary to 
Qwest's contention, Chrysler does not require that the statu-
tory authorization under s 1905 be directed, or limited, to 

__________
     16  See, for example, s 20(7)(f) of the Interstate Commerce Act 
of 1887, 49 U.S.C. s 20(7)(f) (1976) (current version at 49 U.S.C. 
ss 11904, 14908, 16103 (1994 ed. Supp. I 1995)), which is the 
apparent model for s 220(f).

trade secrets.17  Rather, as the Supreme Court emphasized in 
Chrysler, the important question is whether the reviewing 
court can reasonably conclude that the grant of authority 
contemplates the regulations issued.  See Chrysler, 441 U.S. 
at 308.  Chrysler's test is, in one sense at least, a non-
demanding one with respect to the purpose of the Trade 
Secrets Act--namely, to ensure that Congress has authorized 
release of covered information and that any such release 
occurs only after deliberation by appropriate officials.  See 
CNA, 830 F.2d at 1141-42.  Section 220(f) is consistent with 
the restraint that Congress sought to impose in the Trade 
Secrets Act because it permits release only on order of the 
Commission (or the court) where, as the Supreme Court 
noted, such release would be consistent with the purposes of 
the Communications Act.  See Chrysler, 441 U.S. at 307-08.  
As we discuss in Part III, the Commission has adopted a 
Confidential Information Policy and regulations for release 
decisions to be made upon consideration of certain factors by 
appropriate officials.

     Second, other circuits have concluded that, under Chrysler, 
a broadly stated grant of authority to disclose confidential 
information suffices for purposes of s 1905.  Thus, the 
Fourth Circuit in Humana, Inc. v. Blue Cross, 622 F.2d 76 
(4th Cir. 1980), upheld the Secretary of Health, Education, 
and Welfare's "broad discretion to permit disclosure" where 
the statute, 42 U.S.C. s 1306(a), provided that "[n]o disclo-
sure ... shall be made except as the Secretary ... may by 
regulations prescribe ...."  Id. at 78 (emphasis added).  
Relying on Chrysler's test, that "[t]he grant of authority 
relied upon by a federal agency in promulgating regulations 
need not be specific;  it is only necessary 'that the reviewing 
court reasonably be able to conclude that the grant of author-
ity contemplates the regulations issued,' " id. (quoting Chrys-
ler, 441 U.S. at 308), the court concluded with respect to the 

__________
     17  Bartholdi Cable Co., Inc. v. FCC, 114 F.3d 274 (D.C. Cir. 
1997), is not to the contrary, as Qwest suggests.  Indeed, in 
Bartholdi, the court did not reach the statutory question that is at 
issue here.  See id. at 281-82.

disclosure of cost reports, that "absent any action by the 
Secretary, disclosure would be prohibited.  Such material, 
however, is not exempt from disclosure for by its very terms 
the statute contemplates the issuance of regulations by the 
Secretary permitting such disclosure."  Id. at 79.  In St. 
Mary's Hospital, Inc. v. Harris, 604 F.2d 407 (5th Cir. 1979), 
the Fifth Circuit had reached the same conclusion about a 
regulation authorizing disclosure of cost reports, stating that 
"[s]ection 1306 bars the disclosure of Medicare providers' 
costs reports unless the Secretary in his discretion promul-
gates a regulation like [the one being challenged] ordering 
disclosure of these reports....  At the very least s 1306 may 
reasonably be construed to contemplate the promulgation of 
[a regulation such as is at issue]."  Id. at 410.  The Sixth 
Circuit agreed in Parkridge Hospital, Inc. v. Califano, 625 
F.2d 719 (6th Cir. 1980), interpreting the statute to be "a 
broad grant of authority to the Secretary specifically to enact 
regulations providing for the release of information filed with 
the agency, at least when such disclosure serves the purposes 
described in the statute."  Id. at 724.

     While Qwest would distinguish the statute in Humana, 
Parkridge, and St. Mary's as reflecting Congress' clear intent 
to permit disclosure of trade secrets, the effect of the last 
clause of s 220(f) of the Communications Act is essentially 
the same.  That is, in both types of statutes Congress has 
alluded in an "except" clause to the possibility of disclosure of 
protected information, and in both circumstances assured that 
the Secretary and the Commission must reach a considered 
determination about releasing protected information.  The 
different statutory treatment by Congress can be said to 
reflect not a difference in congressional intent but the fact 
that the Secretary is an individual decision-maker, and by 
requiring the promulgation of regulations, Congress con-
strained the Secretary's decision-making authority regarding 
the release of protected information.  Comparable constraint 
inheres in the statutory requirements that the Commission 
may act only as a deliberative body, when there is a quorum, 
when parties may be heard, and when its actions are made on 
the record.  See generally 47 U.S.C. ss 154(h), (j).

     Accordingly, we hold that the Communications Act, and 
specifically, s 220(f), does not clearly rule out the Commis-
sion's interpretation, which we find reasonable.

                               III.

     The question remains whether the Commission has acted 
arbitrarily and capriciously in ordering the release of Qwest's 
raw audit data to some of its competitors.18  See Chrysler, 441 
U.S. at 318;  Bartholdi, 114 F.3d at 279.  Qwest contends that 
the release order is "flatly inconsistent" with the Commis-
sion's prior assurance that raw audit data would be protected.  
More particularly, Qwest contends that the Commission's 
Order is contrary to its precedents on the treatment of 
confidential information.19  Qwest calls attention to the un-
precedented nature of the release, maintaining that "whatev-
er authority the Commission may have to disclose trade 
secrets in other kinds of proceedings in order to vindicate 
rights to public participation, the logic and purposes of the 

__________
     18  Although Qwest states in its briefs that the "sole" issue on 
appeal is whether the Communications Act authorizes the Commis-
sion to release trade secrets, and arguably the court is entitled to 
take Qwest at its word, see Fed. R. App. P. 28(a)(9);  J.S.G. Boggs v. 
Rubin, 161 F.3d 37, 42 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing Carducci v. Regan, 
714 F.2d 171 (D.C. Cir. 1983));  Adams v. Hinchman, 154 F.3d 420, 
424 n.7 (D.C. Cir. 1998), the arguments in Qwest's briefs suffice to 
preserve a second issue for appeal.  The Commission has addressed 
Qwest's contention on the assumption that the court might conclude 
that the contention was properly preserved, and hence there is no 
prejudice to the Commission as a result of Qwest's failure to clearly 
designate in its briefs its alternative contention.  See Fed. R. App. P. 
28(a)(5), (8).

     19  Before the Commission, Qwest argued that the release deci-
sion was not only contrary to statute, but "contrary to the Commis-
sion's own precedent regarding treatment of audit information" and 
would adversely affect both Qwest's competitive position, and the 
Commission's ability to perform future audits.  In addition, Qwest 
asserted that release breached the understanding and expectation 
that it had in submitting such information to the Commission--
namely, that the information would be kept in confidence.

statutory provisions governing confidential agency audits are 
quite different."  The Order constitutes, in Qwest's view, a 
"standardless 'discretionary' exemption from disclosure" justi-
fied solely on the Commission's unprecedented step of open-
ing audits to public comment.

     The Commission's Confidential Information Policy in-
cludes three paragraphs regarding audits that are pertinent 
here.  See In re Examination of Current Policy Concerning 
the Treatment of Confidential Information Submitted to the 
Commission, Report and Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 24816, 24847-49 
p p 53-55 (1998), amended by 14 F.C.C.R. 20128 (1999) ("Con-
fidential Information Policy").  Paragraph 53 provides that 
only summary audit data will be released, and only under 
special circumstances.  See id. at 24847-48 p 53.  Those spe-
cial circumstances arise when:  "(i) the summary nature of the 
data therein is not likely to cause the submitter substantial 
competitive injury;  (ii) the release of the summary data and 
information is not likely to impair [the Commission's] ability 
to obtain information in future audits;  and (iii) overriding 
public interest concerns favor release of the report."  Id.

     Paragraph 54 explains the Commission's view of audit 
reports:

     The Commission has a longstanding policy of treating 
     information obtained from carriers during audits as con-
     fidential....  Carriers have a legitimate interest in pro-
     tecting confidential information, and we agree that disclo-
     sure could result in competitive injury to those who 
     provide such information to the Commission.  This policy 
     is also designed to enhance the efficiency and integrity of 
     our audit process by encouraging carriers to comply in 
     good faith with Commission requests for information.  
     Moreover, the Commission considers the audit reports to 
     be internal agency documents that, consistent with FOIA 
     Exemption 5, generally should not be disclosed to the 
     extent they present staff findings and recommendations 
     to assist the Commission in pre-decisional deliberations.
     
Id. at 24848 p 54.  Paragraph 54 also states that the Commis-
sion "will amend Section 0.457 of [its] rules to indicate that 
information submitted in connection with audits ... will not 
routinely be made available for public inspection."  Id.

     In paragraph 55, the Commission identified the standards 
that it would apply were confidential audit information to be 
released.  Observing that it has "only rarely departed from 
the general policy of withholding audit information from 
public disclosure," the Commission advised nonetheless that,

     [p]arties should note, however, that as in the past, we 
     may publicly disclose audit information in rare cases 
     where the underlying concerns that normally lead us to 
     withhold audit information from public disclosure are 
     diminished by the minimal risk posed by the release of 
     aggregate data or, where the data is otherwise not highly 
     commercially sensitive and disclosure is justified by sig-
     nificant public interest factors.
     
Id. at 24848-49 p 55 (emphasis added).  Thus, s 0.457 of the 
Commission's regulations provides, in part, that "[t]he rec-
ords in this section are not routinely available for public 
inspection," 47 C.F.R. s 0.457, and in subsection (d) that 
"[t]rade secrets ... are not routinely available for public 
inspection....  A persuasive showing as to the reasons for 
inspection will be required in requests for inspection of such 
materials submitted under s 0.461."  Id. s 0.457(d).

     Numerous cases reflect the Commission's application of 
Paragraphs 53 and 54 of its Confidential Information Policy 
and s 0.457 of its regulations.20  None Qwest maintains, until 
now, involved the release, pursuant to Paragraph 55, to a 
competitor of raw audit data in an audit or audit-related 
proceeding.  In applying its Confidential Information Policy, 
the Commission has heretofore acknowledged a distinction 
between summary audit data and raw audit data:

__________
     20  See, e.g., In Re BellSouth Corporation BellSouth Telecom-
munications, Inc., Memorandum Opinion and Order, 8 F.C.C.R. 
8129, 8130 p 7 (1993) ("BellSouth");  In Re Martha H. Platt, Memo-
randum Opinion and Order, 5 F.C.C.R. 5742, 5742 p 6 (1990) 
("Platt");  In Re Scott J. Rafferty, Memorandum Opinion and 
Order, 5 F.C.C.R. 4138, 4138 p 3 (1990) ("Rafferty");  In Re Western 
Union Telegraph Company, Memorandum Opinion and Order, 2 
F.C.C.R. 4485, 4486 p 10 (1987).

     [T]he release of commercial and financial information of 
     only a summary nature does not present the concerns 
     about competitive harm that normally lead us to withhold 
     audit-derived information from public disclosure....  
     The Summary contains no detailed underlying commer-
     cial or financial information submitted by the BOCs;  
     rather it presents a brief analysis of the aggregated 
     underlying data.  The summary nature of this informa-
     tion significantly diminishes the likelihood that the BOCs 
     will suffer any competitive harm.
     
In re Bell Telephone Operating Companies, Memorandum 
Opinion and Order, 10 F.C.C.R. 11541, 11542 p 6 (1995).

     Thus, the Commission has explained that it "withholds ... 
raw financial data obtained from carriers during audits as 
well as audit workpapers compiled by Commission staff" in 
accord with its "general policy [ ] to withhold from public 
disclosure audit reports prepared by Commission staff."  In 
Re GTE Telephone Operating Companies, Memorandum 
Opinion and Order, 9 F.C.C.R. 2588, 2588 p 4 (1994).  See 
also BellSouth, 8 F.C.C.R. at 8129 p 8.  "[A]udit reports 
[that] contain substantial raw data and other information 
provided by various [Local Exchange Carriers] that has not 
been summarized, reformatted, or otherwise edited," the 
Commission has explained, "[are] not routinely available for 
inspection."  Platt, 5 F.C.C.R. at 5742 p 6.  The Commission's 
view has been that the release of raw audit data "would likely 
impair the Commission's ability to obtain necessary informa-
tion in the future."  Rafferty, 5 F.C.C.R. at 4138 p 2.  Where 
the Commission has ordered the release of confidential finan-
cial information even if there is the possibility of competitive 
harm as a result, the occasions appear to have been confined 
to an adjudication, rulemaking, or a rate proceeding in which 
a party has placed its financial condition at issue.21

__________
     21  See, e.g., In re Alaskans for Better Media, Memorandum 
Opinion and Order, 70 F.C.C.2d 1366 (1979);  In re Classical Radio 
for Connecticut, Inc. and WTIC-FM Listeners' Guild, Memoran-
dum Opinion and Order, 69 F.C.C.2d 1517 (1978);  In re NTV 
Enterprises, Inc., Memorandum Opinion and Order, 62 F.C.C.2d 
722 (1976).

     Qwest and amicus United States Telecom Association point 
out that audits "are not voluntary, afford no statutory right of 
public participation, and have historically involved" only the 
Commission and the entity being audited.  Consistent with 
these concerns, the Commission, has applied its Confidential 
Information Policy strictly, allowing exceptions in audits and 
related proceedings only for release of summaries of audit 
data that do not reveal "competitively sensitive materials."  
Confidential Information Policy, 13 F.C.C.R. at 24824 p 9.  
While the Commission states that its Order establishes no 
"precedent that compromises the integrity of the audit pro-
cess," Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1790 p 11, the Commission's 
rulings, regulations, and Confidential Information Policy 
reflect a different approach.  As applied by the Commission, 
the exceptional circumstances considered in the Confidential 
Information Policy for audits and in Commission rulings 
appear to have been confined to release of summary audit 
data.

     Still, the unprecedented nature of the Commission's Order 
does not itself demonstrate arbitrariness.  See Capital Net-
work Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 28 F.3d 201, 204-06 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  
But, in view of the policy by which the Commission has 
constrained the exercise of its discretion under s 220(f), its 
decision to release Qwest's raw audit data to its competitors 
likely would be arbitrary and capricious if the Commission 
failed to explain how it reached the conclusions that (1) the 
raw audit data is "otherwise not highly commercially sensi-
tive," and (2) "disclosure is justified by significant public 
interest factors."  Confidential Information Policy, 13 
F.C.C.R at 24849 p 55.  See also 47 C.F.R. s 0.457(d).

     In addressing Qwest's claims of harm, the Commission 
determined that its protective order, as amended, would 
ensure that any competitive harm is minimal.  See Order, 15 
F.C.C.R. at 1790 p 12.  This reasoning followed, the Commis-
sion concluded, because disclosure was for the limited pur-
pose of responding to Issue 2 as to sampled items not found, 
unidentified, or found in another location.  See id.  This is not 
the same as finding that Qwest's raw data is "otherwise not 
highly commercially sensitive," or a finding that release of the 

data would not adversely affect Qwest's competitive position.  
Confidential Information Policy, 13 F.C.C.R. at 24849 p 55.  
Indeed, the Commission appears to acknowledge that the 
data is commercially sensitive, rationalizing release on the 
ground that the protective order ensures against competitive 
harm or ensures that such harm would be minimal.

     In concluding that the public interest outweighs any po-
tential competitive harm to the RBOCs, the Commission 
observed that the RBOCs raised issues that the auditors' 
rescoring was not done correctly, and that the previously 
released summaries of the auditors' general procedures 
were insufficient to elicit useful information, which the 
Commission defined in terms of being able to comment on 
how the auditors' general procedures were actually imple-
mented.  See Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1789 p 9.  Observing 
that it has "rarely, if ever, sought public comment on its 
auditors' methodology and findings," the Commission stated 
that it "was sufficiently concerned about the issues sur-
rounding the audits to invite public comment," and that 
broader comment "will greatly assist" the Commission in 
resolving the issues.  Id. at 1790 p 11.  Advising on appeal 
that the focus of Issue 2 involving audit methodology is 
unprecedented, the Commission repeats that "unusual 
events call for an atypical response."

     Missing from the Commission's decision is a discussion of 
why such an unprecedented release of confidential audit 
information is required for purposes of Issue 2.  The Com-
mission stated that "useful information about the accuracy 
and validity of the audits" could not be obtained "unless 
commenters were allowed to examine how those general 
procedures were actually implemented when the auditors 
decided whether rescoring was appropriate."  Id. at 1789 p 9.  
But it is unclear why this is so.  The Deloitte & Touche 
analysis submitted by Qwest, for example, appears to suggest 
that the sampling methodology could be evaluated in theoreti-
cal terms as applied to hypothetical situations or to a compos-
ite of raw data without identifying an individual RBOC's 
sensitive commercial information.  Other ways of avoiding the 
release of raw audit data to competitors might be equally 

effective for the Commission's purposes.  Or, at least on the 
basis of the record, the court cannot tell that other ways 
would not be equally effective.  Before invoking its "rare 
case" exception to its nondisclosure policy, the Commission 
must consider plausible alternatives and discount them before 
resorting to the release of raw audit data.  Otherwise, 
Qwest's claim that the Order represents a standardless ex-
emption from the Commission's policy and precedent gains 
force.  A response that the protective order adequately pro-
tects Qwest against competitive injury misses the mark.  The 
Commission must explain why only the release of raw audit 
data will achieve meaningful public comment.  In submitting 
audit data, Qwest was entitled to rely on the Commission's 
announced policy and precedent on how it would handle 
confidential audit information.  Qwest is similarly entitled to 
assurances that the unprecedented disclosures will be consis-
tent with the standards that the Commission has set for itself 
and that the invocation of the "rare case" exception under 
Paragraph 55 is warranted.  See Motor Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n 
v. State Farm Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983).

     Accordingly, we deny the petition in part, and we remand 
the case to the Commission for further consideration.

                                                     