                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 13, 2000   Decided December 22, 2000 

                           No. 00-5023

             Road Sprinkler Fitters Local Union 669, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                        Alexis M. Herman, 
                   Secretary of Labor, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv02688)

     William W. Osborne, Jr. argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for appellant.  Francis R. Sheed entered an appear-
ance.

     Maurice Baskin argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellee Grinnell Fire Protection Systems Corporation.

     Edward D. Sieger, Attorney, U.S. Department of Labor, 
argued the cause for the federal appellees.  Wilma A. Lewis, 
U.S. Attorney, R. Craig Lawrence, Stacy M. Ludwig and 
Heather Jean Kelly, Assistant U.S. Attorneys, were on the 
brief.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  A striking union challenges the 
Department of Labor's certification of an apprenticeship pro-
gram to train replacement workers, arguing that the Depart-
ment's action conflicts with the National Labor Relations Act, 
that the agency improperly acted in an NLRA-preempted 
area, and that the decision rests on an unreasonable reading 
of Department regulations.  Finding neither conflict with nor 
encroachment upon the NLRA, and deferring to the Depart-
ment's interpretation of its own regulations, we affirm the 
district court's award of summary judgment for the govern-
ment.

                                I

     The largest union of installers of fire protection sprinkler 
systems, appellant Road Sprinkler jointly operated a collec-
tively bargained apprenticeship training program with an 
employer organization.  Because the program had been certi-
fied by the Department of Labor's Bureau of Apprenticeship 
and Training ("BAT"), participating employers could pay 
apprentices sub-minimum wages.  See 29 C.F.R. s 5.5(a)(4).

     In September 1993, one of the employer organization mem-
bers, appellee Grinnell Fire Protection Systems, began nego-
tiating with Road Sprinkler for a new collective bargaining 
agreement, seeking, among other things, a new apprentice-
ship program.  Seven months later, after declaring a bargain-
ing impasse, Grinnell unilaterally imposed the terms and 
conditions of its "final offer," which did not include partic-
ipation in the joint program.

     Claiming that impasse had not been reached and that 
Grinnell's imposition of its last offer amounted to an unfair 

labor practice, Road Sprinkler filed a complaint with the 
NLRB and called a national strike.  Grinnell responded by 
hiring striker replacements.  The company also asked the 
BAT to either certify a new apprenticeship program to train 
replacement workers or allow their enrollment in programs 
run by other employers.

     Instead of acting on Grinnell's request, the BAT advised 
the parties that it would make no decision until after the 
NLRB resolved Road Sprinkler's ULP charges.  In support, 
the BAT pointed to the "union consent" provision of its own 
regulations:

     Under a program proposed for registration by an em-
     ployer or employers' association, where the standards, 
     collective bargaining agreement or other instrument, 
     provides for participation by a union in any manner in 
     the operation of the substantive matters of the appren-
     ticeship program, and such participation is exercised, 
     written acknowledgment of union agreement or "no ob-
     jection" to the registration is required.
     
29 C.F.R. s 29.3(h).  According to the BAT, the Board's 
resolution of the pending ULP proceedings would determine 
whether Road Sprinkler had a continuing role in the joint 
apprenticeship program sufficient to trigger section 29.3(h)'s 
requirement for union consent.  This court ruled the BAT 
delay improper, finding that regardless of what the NLRB 
might decide, the still-striking union was not participating in 
the apprenticeship program for purposes of section 29.3(h).  
Associated Builders and Contractors, Inc. v. Herman, 166 
F.3d 1248, 1256 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Finding also that the BAT 
lacked authority to block replacement workers from partici-
pating in programs run by other employers, we remanded for 
immediate consideration of Grinnell's certification request.  
Id. at 1254-55.

     Shortly thereafter, the NLRB completed its consideration 
of Road Sprinkler's ULP charges.  Ruling for the union, the 
Board directed the company to "restore to unit employees the 
terms and conditions of employment that were applicable 
prior" to the unfair labor practice.  See Grinnell Fire Protect. 

Sys. Co., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 76, 1999 WL 357628, at *5 (May 
28, 1999).  At this writing, Grinnell's petition for review 
remains pending in the Fourth Circuit.  Grinnell Fire Pro-
tect. Sys., Inc. v. NLRB, No. 99-1754(L) (4th Cir. argued 
June 8, 2000).

     In the meantime, the BAT, proceeding on remand from our 
earlier decision, changed its position.  Despite its previous 
suggestion that an NLRB order reinstating the joint appren-
ticeship program would trigger section 29.3(h)'s union consent 
requirement, the BAT granted Grinnell's certification request 
over Road Sprinkler's objection.  In doing so, the BAT relied 
on a different part of section 29.3--subsection (i).  That 
subsection provides for unilateral employer apprenticeship 
programs "[w]here the employees to be trained have no 
collective bargaining agent."  To support its conclusion that 
Road Sprinkler did not represent Grinnell's striker replace-
ments for the purposes of subsection (i), the BAT cited a new 
NLRB decision, Detroit Newspaper, extending the rule that 
employers need not bargain with striking unions over terms 
and conditions of employment for replacement workers to 
unfair labor practice strikes.  Detroit Newspaper Agency, 327 
N.L.R.B. No. 164, 1999 WL 145905, at *1 (Mar. 15, 1999).

     Filing suit in the U.S. District Court here, Road Sprinkler 
claimed (1) that the BAT decision conflicts with the NLRB's 
definition of "collective bargaining agent" as well as its reme-
dy for Grinnell's unfair labor practice;  (2) that in determining 
Road Sprinkler's representation status, the BAT improperly 
acted in an NLRA-preempted area;  and (3) that the agency 
unreasonably interpreted its own regulations in violation of 
the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. s 706.  In re-
sponse, the Department argued that the BAT's decision has 
no impact on the labor laws, that in any event, the decision is 
consistent with Detroit Newspaper, and that the BAT's inter-
pretation of section 29.3 was reasonable and therefore worthy 
of deference.  Agreeing, the district court entered summary 
judgment for the Department.  Road Sprinkler appeals.  Our 
review is de novo.  See Everett v. United States, 158 F.3d 
1364, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

                                II

     Before addressing Road Sprinkler's arguments, we must 
consider Grinnell's claim, not embraced by the Department, 
that we lack jurisdiction.  According to Grinnell, the APA "is 
not to be interpreted as an implied grant of subject-matter 
jurisdiction" to the federal courts.  See Califano v. Sanders, 
430 U.S. 99, 105 (1977).  Grinnell overlooks 28 U.S.C. s 1331, 
which gives federal courts what the APA does not:  "jurisdic-
tion of all civil actions arising under the ... laws ... of the 
United States," including those brought under the APA.  See 
Saavedra-Bruno v. Albright, 197 F.3d 1153, 1162 (D.C. Cir. 
1999).  The company also claims, again without Department 
support, that Road Sprinkler lacks standing;  because Road 
Sprinkler is not the collective bargaining agent of the replace-
ment workers, Grinnell argues, the union has not been in-
jured by the BAT's failure to seek its consent.  This cannot 
be.  Whether Road Sprinkler has a right under BAT regula-
tions to veto Grinnell's new apprenticeship program is pre-
cisely the question before us.  Recasting such questions as 
jurisdictional would deny standing to all litigants with unmer-
itorious claims.  See Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 498 (1975) 
(standing requires only that litigants allege a legally cogniza-
ble injury).

     Having satisfied ourselves that we have jurisdiction, we 
turn to Road Sprinkler's first claim--that the BAT's determi-
nation that the union does not represent the striker replace-
ment workers violates the NLRB's established rule that a 
bargaining unit is composed of all employees, including "non-
strikers, strikers, returning strikers and striker replacements 
employed at the time of the refusal to bargain." Nat'l Uphol-
stering Co., 311 N.L.R.B. 1204, 1210 (1993). Because the 
NLRB has exclusive jurisdiction to make representation deci-
sions within the meaning of the NLRA, see Pittsburgh Plate 
Glass Co. v. NLRB, 313 U.S. 146, 155 (1941) ("[A]fter [an 
NLRB representation order] the employer may not be com-
pelled by any other agency of the government to perform any 
acts inconsistent with that order."), the union also argues that 
the BAT's departure from the National Upholstering defini-
tion encroaches on an NLRA-preempted area.  We disagree.

     The BAT has done nothing more than resolve Road Sprin-
kler's representation status under agency regulations, not 
under the NLRA.  Simply determining the circumstances in 
which Grinnell may legally pay sub-minimum wages to ap-
prentices, the BAT's action in no way interferes with the 
NLRB's area of concern:  union authority to bargain about 
the provisions (including those relating to apprenticeship 
training programs) of collective bargaining agreements.  See 
Washington Serv. Contractors Coalition v. Dist. of Columbia, 
54 F.3d 811, 816-17 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (holding that labor law 
preemption does not apply to laws that regulate employment 
without "disturb[ing] the labor dispute resolution system 
established by the NLRA.").  Because the BAT and NLRB 
concern themselves with different questions, the phrase "col-
lective bargaining agent" need not mean the same to each.  
Given the BAT's broad discretion to interpret its own regula-
tions, see Buffalo Crushed Stone, Inc. v. Surface Transp. Bd., 
194 F.3d 125, 128 (D.C. Cir. 1999), we defer to its decision 
that Road Sprinkler is not the replacement workers' collective 
bargaining agent for the purposes of section 29.3.

     Even if the BAT had to follow NLRB precedent, moreover, 
Road Sprinkler's argument would fail.  Although replacement 
workers are technically members of the collective bargaining 
unit and hence eligible to vote in representation elections, see 
National Upholstering, 311 N.L.R.B. at 1210, the NLRB has 
now made clear in Detroit Newspaper that employers need 
not bargain with unions striking over unfair labor practices 
about terms and conditions of employment for replacement 
workers.  In light of Detroit Newspaper, we agree with the 
BAT that it would be "anomalous ... [to] deny [the company] 
registration to [its] program on the premise that [it] was 
legally required to bargain with the union over apprenticeship 
terms applicable to such workers."  Letter from Anthony 
Swoope, Director, BAT, to William J. Osborne, Jr., Atty. for 
Appellant 2 (Oct. 3, 1999).  Road Sprinkler's response--that 
Detroit Newspaper changed only the subjects of bargaining 
and not the definition of "collective bargaining agent"--is 
technically correct.  But Road Sprinkler ignores the funda-
mental proposition underlying Detroit Newspaper:  that strik-

ing unions should have no authority to negotiate over terms 
and conditions of employment for replacement workers.

     Detroit Newspaper also answers Road Sprinkler's second 
argument:  that the BAT's switch from reliance on subsection 
(h) to subsection (i) was arbitrary and capricious.  It 
switched, the BAT explains, because after Detroit Newspaper, 
it no longer considered Road Sprinkler the replacement work-
ers' collective bargaining agent within the meaning of subsec-
tion (i).  How could it be arbitrary and capricious for an 
agency to change its position in response to new legal devel-
opments?

     Equally without merit is Road Sprinkler's related challenge 
that the BAT's understanding of the relationship between 
subsections (h) and (i) is unreasonable.  Reading subsection 
(i) as creating a residual category that allows unilateral 
employer programs only where subsection (h) does not apply, 
Road Sprinkler claims that section 29.3 requires the BAT to 
first determine the need for union consent under subsection 
(h).  But the agency sees the relationship between subsec-
tions (h) and (i) quite differently:  when subsection (i) permits 
a unilateral employer program, subsection (h) need not be 
considered.  Faced with two reasonable interpretations of a 
regulatory scheme, we defer to the agency's.  See Arrow Air, 
Inc. v. Dole, 784 F.2d 1118, 1126 (D.C. Cir. 1986).

     Finally, Road Sprinkler argues that the BAT's certification 
of Grinnell's apprenticeship program conflicts with the NLRB 
remedy for the company's unfair labor practice.  By requir-
ing the employer to reinstate the terms and conditions of 
employment as they existed before the violation, Road Sprin-
kler claims that the NLRB has obliged the company to enroll 
striker replacements in the jointly-administered apprentice-
ship program.  Road Sprinkler confuses BAT certification 
with Grinnell's use of its new unilateral program.  The BAT 
has merely given the company a means of training striker 
replacements.  Whether Grinnell's decision to train replace-
ment workers in this new program would violate the remedial 
order is a matter for the NLRB.

     The order of the district court is affirmed.

                                                                       So ordered.
