                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 20, 2001    Decided March 15, 2002 

                           No. 00-5363

                       Victoria L. Breen, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                  Department of Transportation, 
               Federal Highway Administration and 
                Norman Y. Mineta, Administrator, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv01003)

     Kurt W. Hague argued the cause for appellant.  With him 
on the briefs were Theodore Whitehouse and Joseph G. 
Davis.

     Scott S. Harris, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellees.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. Howard, 

Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. 
Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Victoria Breen, a former file clerk 
at the Federal Highway Administration, brought this suit 
alleging that she was discharged from her job in violation of 
the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. s 791 et seq. Breen alleges 
that she suffers from mental and physical disabilities, but 
would have been able to perform her work with a reasonable 
accommodation.  The district court granted summary judg-
ment against Breen on the ground that no reasonable accom-
modation would have enabled her to perform the essential 
functions of her position.  Because we find that there are 
genuine issues of material fact as to Breen's ability to per-
form with an accommodation, we reverse the judgment of the 
district court.

                                I

     Viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, the facts 
are as follows.  Breen began working as an office automation 
clerk at the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) in 
1991, with duties that included the maintenance of office files.  
For the first several years, she received "satisfactory" evalua-
tions.  Some time in 1994, in connection with taking time off 
for knee surgery, Breen developed a backlog of filing that she 
was unable to reduce in a timely fashion--to the growing 
dissatisfaction of her employer.  Beginning in December 
1994, the FHWA rated her performance as "needs improve-
ment" and implemented a series of "Performance Improve-
ment Plans" (PIPs), which, inter alia, admonished her to 
accomplish her filing duties more expeditiously.

     In November 1995, Breen provided the FHWA with letters 
from her doctors that showed that she suffered from a variety 
of physical and psychiatric disorders, the one most relevant to 
the accommodation at issue in this case being obsessive-

compulsive disorder.1  The letter from Breen's psychiatrist, 
Dr. Julie Redditt, also suggested certain accommodations.  
Most relevant here were Dr. Redditt's suggestions for a 
"structured time schedule which rarely varies without at least 
a week's notice" and for an "[a]bsence of 'extra' or different 
tasks requested during her work period, especially the filing 
period."  1995 Redditt Letter at 4 (Nov. 15, 1995).  The 
psychiatrist stated that Breen "is able to perform each of the 
required operations of her job as an office automation clerk," 
and that with the accommodations "Ms. Breen's performance 
could return to its previous level."  Id. at 4, 5.  Dr. Redditt 
suggested the same accommodations in a second letter dated 
February 12, 1996.  1996 Redditt Letter at 1 (Feb. 12, 1996).

     Breen herself proposed accommodations at various times 
between the onset of her employer's dissatisfaction and her 
termination.  Chief among these was an "alternative work 
schedule," pursuant to which she would have worked one hour 
past normal business hours every day for eight days, in 
exchange for one day off every two-week pay period--thus 
maintaining a normal eighty-hour pay period.2  According to 
Breen, the "hour of quiet time after business hours to do solid 
filing" would have permitted her to complete her filing with-
out the interruptions that she found difficult to deal with as a 
consequence of her obsessive-compulsive disorder.  Rev. 
Breen Decl. p 30;  see id. p 27.  Breen requested this accom-
modation a number of times.  At the end of her second and 
third PIPs in June and September 1995 respectively, Breen 
asked for an alternative work schedule that would have 
permitted her to work during the "quiet hours."  Id. pp 6, 37.  
Breen also presented her request for an alternative work 
schedule at a meeting on February 29, 1996, id. p 18, and 

__________
     1  An orthopedist also diagnosed Breen as having knee problems 
(chondromalacia and a laterally tracking patella).

     2  Other accommodations requested by Breen included prior 
notification of the work that she would be required to do on a given 
day, a plastic floor mat to allow her stool to roll around the office 
filing area, and training another employee to cover for her when she 
was absent from the office.

again in writing one month later, Mem. from Breen to Perros 
(requesting "Alternative Work Schedule or overtime (with 
compensatory time)") (Apr. 1, 1996).

     The FHWA declined to grant Breen the alternative work 
schedule, or any of the other accommodations she requested, 
and, on April 16, 1996, terminated her employment.  One 
year later Breen filed this lawsuit, alleging that her termi-
nation was unlawful under the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. 
s 791 et seq., because the FHWA had failed to reasonably 
accommodate her disabilities.  The FHWA moved to dismiss 
or alternatively for summary judgment.  Both sides filed 
affidavits setting forth their versions of the facts, and Breen's 
counsel filed an additional affidavit pursuant to Federal Rule 
of Civil Procedure 56(f) requesting discovery.  The district 
court granted summary judgment against Breen, without 
permitting discovery, on the ground that "no reasonable 
accommodation will enable her to perform the essential func-
tions of her position."  Breen v. United States Dep't of 
Transp., No. 97-1003 (D.D.C. Sept. 11, 2000).

                                II

     The Rehabilitation Act provides that "[n]o otherwise quali-
fied individual with a disability" may be discriminated against 
by a federal agency "solely by reason of her or his disability."  
29 U.S.C. s 794(a).  The Act states that "[t]he standards used 
to determine whether this section has been violated in a 
complaint alleging employment discrimination under this sec-
tion shall be the standards applied under [certain provisions 
of] the Americans with Disabilities Act [ADA]."  29 U.S.C. 
s 794(d).  The ADA, in turn, bars discrimination against a 
"qualified individual with a disability ... in regard to ... the 
... discharge of employees ... and other terms, conditions, 
and privileges of employment."  42 U.S.C. s 12112(a).  A 
"qualified individual with a disability" is defined as "an indi-
vidual with a disability who, with or without reasonable 
accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the 
employment position that such individual holds or desires."  

Id. s 12111(8);  see 29 C.F.R. s 1614.203(a)(6) (EEOC Reha-
bilitation Act regulation).3  Accordingly, an individual with a 
disability is "qualified" if he or she can perform the essential 
functions of the position with a reasonable accommodation.  
Carr v. Reno, 23 F.3d 525, 529 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  The ADA 
further defines the term "reasonable accommodation" to in-
clude "job restructuring [and] part-time or modified work 
schedules."  42 U.S.C. s 12111(9);  see 29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.203(c)(2).

     The district court granted summary judgment against 
Breen solely on the ground that no reasonable accommoda-
tion would have enabled her to perform the essential func-
tions of her position.  We review a grant of summary judg-
ment de novo, and--as we have done in reciting the facts 
above--must view the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the nonmoving party.  Borgo v. Goldin, 204 F.3d 251, 254 
(D.C. Cir. 2000).  We may affirm a decision granting sum-
mary judgment only if there is no genuine issue as to any 
material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as 
a matter of law.  Id. (quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247 (1986)).  There plainly is a genuine 
and material factual dispute in this case.

     Breen contends that her proposed alternative work sched-
ule would have permitted her to perform her responsibilities 
by giving her time during the day in which her work would 
not have been interrupted.  In support of this assertion, she 
offers her own affidavit, an affidavit from a disabilities expert, 
Barclay Decl. pp 12-13, and the letters from her psychiatrist 
referred to above.  The FHWA responds with three reasons 
why Breen's proposal would not have enabled her to perform 
her responsibilities.

__________
     3  In addition, the ADA defines the term "discriminate" to 
include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known 
physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual 
with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such 
covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would 
impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such 
covered entity."  42 U.S.C. s 12112(b)(5)(A);  see 29 C.F.R. 
s 1614.203(c)(1).

     First, the FHWA argues that Breen's proposed alternative 
work schedule would not have "increased [her] total number 
of hours," and hence would not have given her any more time 
to accomplish her filing than she had had before.  FHWA Br. 
at 16.  The FHWA is correct that the proposed alternative 
work schedule, like Breen's prior schedule, would have totaled 
only eighty hours per pay period.  But this contention is 
wholly unresponsive to the thrust of Breen's request for 
accommodation.  Her request was not for more time, but for 
uninterrupted time.  See Rev. Breen Decl. p 30 ("An alterna-
tive work schedule would have provided me with an hour of 
quiet time after business hours to do solid filing, with no 
interruptions.").  The affidavits of Breen and her disabilities 
expert, as well as the letters from her psychiatrist, describe 
the nature of her problem as a difficulty in dealing with 
unexpected interruptions in assigned tasks.  See Rev. Breen 
Decl. p 30;  Barclay Decl. p 12;  1995 Redditt Letter at 4;  see 
also Rev. Breen Decl. p 27 ("Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 
makes it hard for me to refocus after changing tasks.  It was 
important for me to have an uninterrupted block of time to 
complete the filing.").  All declare that this problem could 
have been overcome, and that Breen could have met her 
responsibilities, if her schedule had been restructured to 
provide not more time but uninterrupted time.  Rev. Breen 
Decl. p 30;  Barclay Decl. pp 12-13;  see also 1995 Redditt 
Letter at 4 (stating that Breen could perform her job if there 
were an "[a]bsence of 'extra' or different tasks requested 
during her work period, especially the filing period").

     Second, the FHWA contends that, prior to termination, the 
agency had provided Breen with uninterrupted time, setting 
aside a period during her workday that was devoted solely to 
filing--to no avail.  In support, the FHWA offers an affidavit 
to that effect by a second-level supervisor.  Perros Decl. 
pp 18, 35.  Breen, however, declares that the promised period 
of uninterrupted work never materialized;  that, to the con-
trary, she was constantly interrupted during the appointed 
time, often with the approval of her direct supervisor.  Rev. 
Breen Decl. pp 25-29.  For purposes of reviewing a grant of 
summary judgment, we must take Breen's affidavit to be 

true.  See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255;  Borgo, 204 F.3d at 257.  
As the FHWA acknowledged at oral argument, this creates a 
factual dispute that cannot be resolved on affidavits alone.

     Finally, the FHWA asserts that it could not have provided 
the alternative work schedule Breen requested, which includ-
ed a biweekly day off to balance the extra hour on other days, 
because her services were needed in the office every day.  
Perros Decl. p 41.  Breen disputes this, and asserts that the 
FHWA allowed a number of other employees with similar 
jobs in her department to work alternative schedules that 
permitted them to be out of the office during normal business 
hours.  Rev. Breen Decl. pp 22-24.4  This creates a genuine 
issue of material fact.  See Walsh v. United Parcel Serv., 201 
F.3d 718, 726 (6th Cir. 2000) (noting that employer's allow-
ance of medical leave to other employees created genuine 
issue of fact as to whether grant of leave to plaintiff would 
have constituted reasonable accommodation);  Swanks v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 179 F.3d 929, 934 
(D.C. Cir. 1999) (observing that an employer " 'may not 
obtain summary judgment by declaring it has a policy when 
[the employee] may have evidence that [the employer] follows 
the policy ... selectively' " (quoting Baert v. Euclid Bever-
age, Ltd., 149 F.3d 626, 632 (7th Cir. 1998)) (brackets in 
original));  Woodman v. Runyon, 132 F.3d 1330, 1346 (10th 
Cir. 1997) (holding that plaintiff demonstrated factual dispute 
by providing evidence that employer had granted another 
employee the requested accommodation in a similar situa-
tion).

     Carr v. Reno, cited by the defendant, is not to the contrary.  
In Carr, the plaintiff, a coding clerk at the United States 
Attorney's Office, suffered from intermittent dizziness and 
nausea that frequently forced her to miss work without 
notice--477 hours in her first seven months alone.  23 F.3d at 
527.  Plaintiff sought an accommodation that the court de-
scribed as "an open-ended 'work when able' schedule."  Id. at 
531.  The Office denied the request on the ground that Carr's 
work, which involved coding papers relating to recent arrests 

__________
     4  In addition, Breen's Rule 56(f) affidavit specifically sought 
discovery on this point.  Dean Decl. pp 10(d), 11(c), (d).

in the District of Columbia, had a strict 4:00 p.m. deadline 
each day--a point plaintiff conceded.  Id. at 530.  Under 
those circumstances, we concluded that there was no genuine 
dispute that the requested accommodation would not have 
permitted Carr to perform the essential functions of her job.  
Id. at 530-31.5

     In this case, by contrast, the plaintiff has not conceded that 
there was a critical element of her position--such as a daily 
deadline--that rendered the accommodation she proposed 
ineffectual.  To the contrary, she has disputed that there is 
any such critical element.  Accordingly, the precedent that is 
relevant is not Carr but Langon v. Department of Health and 
Human Services, 959 F.2d 1053 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  In that 
case, plaintiff Langon, an HHS computer programmer strick-
en with multiple sclerosis, sought the accommodation of work-
ing at home.  HHS refused to grant Langon's request, as-
serting that "due to the exactness required of computer 
programmers like her, the short deadlines, and the frequent 
face-to-face contacts, her position did not lend itself to work-
ing at home."  959 F.2d at 1060 (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  Langon countered with her own deposition testi-
mony, which "disagreed with HHS about the length of the 
deadlines and the need for frequent face-to-face contacts," 
and which affirmed that her position did not require her to 
work in the office.  Id.  That conflict, we said, created "a 
genuine issue about whether, with the accommodation she 
sought, Ms. Langon could perform the essential functions of 
her position."  Id. at 1061.  We therefore reversed the dis-
trict court's grant of summary judgment.

     Breen, like Langon, has offered evidence disputing her 
employer's claim that the job restructuring she proposed was 
incompatible with the essential functions of her position.  She 
has, therefore, raised a genuine issue of material fact as to 
the ground on which the district court ruled against her:  the 

__________
     5  Carr also noted that "it is the unusual Rehabilitation Act case 
that, like this one, can be resolved against the plaintiff without 
extensive fact finding."  23 F.3d at 531.

unavailability of any reasonable accommodation that would 
have permitted her to accomplish her required tasks.6

                               III

     In assessing the evidence on this appeal from a grant of 
summary judgment we do not, of course, reach any conclu-
sions as to the ultimate merits of Breen's case.  The FHWA 
may yet be able to establish that it could not have reasonably 
accommodated Breen's disabilities, or that her Rehabilitation 
Act claim founders on other grounds.  At this stage of the 
litigation, however, it is apparent that a genuine issue of 
material fact precludes summary judgment on the ground 
stated by the district court.7  Accordingly, the judgment of 
that court is reversed and the case is remanded for further 
proceedings.

                                                       Reversed and remanded.

__________
     6  We do not consider whether there are also genuine disputes 
regarding the other accommodations that Breen requested, see 
supra note 2, because the briefs are not clear as to whether the 
others were intended as additional requirements or merely as 
alternatives to the proposed job restructuring.

     7  The FHWA argues that even if Breen raised a genuine 
dispute regarding that ground, we should nonetheless affirm the 
grant of summary judgment on another ground not relied upon by 
the district court.  The FHWA contends that Breen did not inform 
it of her claimed disabilities and proposed accommodations in a 
timely fashion, and thus failed to participate in good faith in an 
interactive process that would have permitted the agency to deter-
mine the appropriate reasonable accommodation.  Cf. 29 C.F.R. 
s 1630.2(o)(3).  Resolving reasonable inferences in Breen's favor, 
however, she has raised a disputed question of material fact con-
cerning this ground as well by proffering evidence that it was the 
FHWA that was responsible for the asserted delays of which the 
agency complains.  See, e.g., Rev. Breen Decl. p 7 (averring that it 
took the FHWA almost a year to provide specific guidance as to the 
kind of medical documentation it required).

                                        