                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 21, 2001    Decided April 20, 2001 

                           No. 00-1002

                         WorldCom, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                    AT&T Corporation, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                            ---------

                        Consolidated with
                         00-1062, 00-1070

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Jonathan J. Frankel and Darryl M. Bradford argued the 
cause for petitioners.  With them on the briefs were William 

T. Lake, Lynn R. Charytan, Dan L. Poole, Robert B. McKen-
na, Lawrence E. Sarjeant, Linda L. Kent, John W. Hunter, 
Julie E. Rones, Jodie L. Kelley, John J. Hamill, Thomas F. 
O'Neil III, Adam H. Charnes, Mark B. Erlich, Robert J. 
Aamoth, Albert H. Kramer, Renee R. Crittendon, Richard 
Martin Rindler, Charles C. Hunter and Catherine M. Han-
nan.  John H. Harwood, II entered an appearance.

     John E. Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, argued the cause for respon-
dents.  With him on the briefs were Christopher J. Wright, 
General Counsel, Jonathan E. Nuechterlein, Deputy General 
Counsel, Laurence N. Bourne, Counsel, Catherine G. O'Sulli-
van, Nancy C. Garrison and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys, 
U.S. Department of Justice.

     Daniel Meron argued the cause for intervenors AT&T 
Corporation, et al.  With him on the brief were David W. 
Carpenter, Peter D. Keisler, David L. Lawson, Mark C. 
Rosenblum, Robert J. Aamoth, Richard M. Rindler, Christy 
C. Kunin, Thomas F. O'Neil III, Adam H. Charnes, Mark B. 
Ehrlich, Jonathan J. Nadler, Rodney L. Joyce, Darryl M. 
Bradford, Jodie L. Kelley and John J. Hamill.  James P. 
Young entered an appearance.

     Dan L. Poole, Robert B. McKenna, Jr., William T. Lake, 
Lynn R. Charytan, Michael K. Kellogg, Mark L. Evans, 
Sean A. Lev, Aaron M. Panner, Roger K. Toppins, Lawrence 
E. Sarjeant, Linda L. Kent, John W. Hunter, Julie E. Rones, 
Michael E. Glover, Edward H. Shakin, Donna M. Epps and 
M. Robert Sutherland were on the brief of intervenors Qwest 
Communications International, Inc., et al.  John H. Harwood, 
II, Gail L. Polivy, John F. Raposa, M. Edward Whelan, III, 
Alfred G. Richter, Hope E. Thurrott and James D. Ellis 
entered appearances.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  Packet-switching and digital sub-
scriber line technologies ("DSL") make it possible to send 
data at high speed over conventional copper wire.  Two DSL 
modems are attached to a telephone loop, one at the subscrib-
er's premises and one at the telephone company's central 

office.  If the line carries both ordinary telephone service and 
high-speed data transmission, the carrier must separate these 
streams at the company's central office, using a digital sub-
scriber line access multiplexer.  With this device the carrier 
sends ordinary voice calls to the public, circuit-switched tele-
phone network (which keeps a phone line open during a voice 
call) and sends data traffic to a packet-switched data network 
(which compresses data and can send it in split-second bursts 
during gaps on a line), where it can then be routed to a 
corporate local area network or internet service provider 
("ISP").  See In re Deployment of Wireline Services Offering 
Advanced Telecommunications Capability, 13 F.C.C.R. 24,-
011, 24,026-27 p p 29-31 (1998) ("Advanced Services Order").  
The high-speed services thus provided are known as "DSL-
based advanced services."1

     At issue before us is the Federal Communications Commis-
sion's decision that "incumbent" local exchange carriers 
("LECs"), when they provide such services, are subject to a 
range of special duties under the Telecommunications Act of 
1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 ("the Act").  These 
duties, to which we'll return in detail later, are intended to 
facilitate entry into local telephone markets.  They include, 
for example, an obligation to provide competitors "access to 
network elements on an unbundled basis," and to offer, at 
wholesale rates, any telecommunications service that the firm 
offers at retail to subscribers other than telecommunications 
carriers.  See 47 U.S.C. ss 251(c)(3) & (4)(A).

     In 1998, in response to a request for clarification from 
Qwest2 and others, the Commission held that DSL-based 

__________
     1  In the order under review the Commission defined "advanced 
services" as "high speed, switched, broadband, wireline telecommu-
nications capability that enables users to originate and receive high-
quality voice, data, graphics and video telecommunications."  In re 
Deployment of Wireline Services Offering Advanced Telecommuni-
cations Capability, 15 F.C.C.R. 385, 385 n.2 (1999).

     2  US WEST, Inc., the parent company of US WEST Communi-
cations, Inc., merged with Qwest Communications International, 
Inc. on June 30, 2000.

advanced services constitute either "telephone exchange ser-
vice" or "exchange access," and therefore were subject to the 
duties set out in s 251(c).  Advanced Services Order, 13 
F.C.C.R. at 24,031-34 p p 38-44.  On Qwest's petition for 
review in this court, the Commission sought a remand to 
address some of Qwest's arguments, which we granted.  See 
US WEST Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 1999 WL 728555 
(D.C. Cir. 1999).

     On remand the Commission again found incumbent LECs' 
provision of DSL-based advanced services to be subject to 
s 251(c) obligations.  In re Deployment of Wireline Services 
Offering Advanced Telecommunications Capability, 15 
F.C.C.R. 385 (1999) (the "Remand Order").  It invoked two 
theories to support its conclusion.  The first interpreted the 
statutory language defining incumbent LECs, and the second, 
as in the original order, viewed DSL-based advanced services 
as either "telephone exchange service" or "exchange access."  
Because the Commission's reading of the statutory language 
defining incumbent LECs is at least reasonable, we deny 
Qwest's petition to vacate the entire Commission order.  But 
because the Commission's interpretation of "telephone ex-
change service" and "exchange access" is in essence the one 
that we vacated and remanded in yet another case, Bell 
Atlantic Telephone Cos. v. FCC, 206 F.3d 1 (D.C. Cir. 2000), 
we vacate and remand on that issue.  We take the two 
theories in turn.

                     * * *

     The definition of incumbent LEC.  Qwest concededly pro-
vides "telephone exchange service" and "exchange access" 
and under the statute is thus a "LEC" in the abstract.  But 
Qwest argues that its DSL-based advanced services can be 
subjected to the duties created by s 251(c) only to the extent 
that those specific services belong to either of the categories 
that are the defining characteristics of a LEC.  The language 
of the Act gives Qwest's analysis some purchase.

     The Act defines incumbent LECs (naturally enough) as a 
subcategory of LECs.  A LEC

     means any person that is engaged in the provision of 
     telephone exchange service or exchange access.  Such 
     term does not include a person insofar as such person is 
     engaged in the provision of a commercial mobile service 
     under section 332(c) of this title, except to the extent that 
     the Commission finds that such service should be includ-
     ed in the definition of such term.
     
47 U.S.C. s 153(26) (emphasis added).  The concept of incum-
bency, by contrast, is based purely on history.  An incumbent 
LEC with respect to an area is

     the local exchange carrier that--(A) on February 8, 1996, 
     provided telephone exchange service in such area;  and 
     (B)(i) on February 8, 1996, was deemed to be a member 
     of the exchange carrier association pursuant to section 
     69.601(b) of the Commission's regulations (47 C.F.R. 
     69.601(b));  or (ii) is a person or entity that, on or after 
     February 8, 1996, became a successor or assign of a 
     member described in clause (i).
     
47 U.S.C. s 251(h).

     Qwest argues that the phrase in s 153(26) "is engaged in 
the provision of" plainly bars the Commission from regulating 
carriers' DSL-based advanced services under s 251(c) be-
cause such services are not "telephone exchange service" or 
"exchange access."  Qwest interprets the second sentence in 
the LEC definition as confirming that services other than 
"telephone exchange service" or "exchange access," like com-
mercial mobile services, are excluded from regulation.  Under 
Qwest's reading, the second sentence states that "you are a 
local exchange carrier if you are engaged in providing tele-
phone exchange service or exchange access, but you are not a 
local exchange carrier if you are engaged in providing com-
mercial mobile services."  Oral Arg. Tr. at 10.  In contrast, 
the Commission argues that DSL-based advanced services 
qualify as "telecommunications services" as to which s 251(c) 
imposes many of its duties on incumbent LECs, so that it 
may regulate a carrier engaged in providing such services so 
long as the carrier qualifies as a LEC by providing either 
"telephone exchange service" or "exchange access" and meets 

the definition of incumbent under s 251(h).  See Respon-
dent's Br. at 4 n.4, 19-20;  Oral Arg. Tr. at 26 (Commission 
counsel acknowledging that a carrier must still be a "live 
LEC" to be an incumbent LEC).  Under the Commission's 
reading, the second sentence of the LEC definition indicates 
that a carrier can be a LEC with respect to services other 
than "telephone exchange service" or "exchange access":  the 
explicit exclusion of "commercial mobile service" (subject to 
an exception) lends some credence to the view that Con-
gress's premise was inclusive.  Congress, the Commission 
reasons, must have assumed that without the exclusion such 
persons would have been included "insofar as" they were 
"engaged in" providing mobile service merely on the basis of 
(elsewhere) providing exchange service or access, even if 
mobile service itself did not fit either category.

     The statutory definitions do not compel Qwest's reading.  
There is nothing linguistically odd about defining a set of 
firms subject to regulation in terms of the conduct of particu-
lar activities, and yet also regulating some other activities 
that are not part of the definition.  And the definition does 
not say that a carrier is a LEC only "when" or "to the extent" 
that it provides the regulation-triggering services.  When 
defining a rural telephone company Congress specified inclu-
sion "to the extent that such entity" was performing specified 
services, 47 U.S.C. s 153(37) (emphasis added), and similarly 
provided that a telecommunications carrier should be "treat-
ed" as a common carrier "only to the extent that it is engaged 
in providing telecommunications services," id. s 153(44) (em-
phasis added).  These explicit specifications tend to under-
mine Qwest's argument that such a clause must be implied in 
the LEC definition.  See Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 
16, 23 (1983).

     The Commission draws a similar argument from Con-
gress's articulation of the s 251(c) duties.  Those under 
s 251(c)(2) expressly apply to "telephone exchange service" 
or "exchange access," while the rest have no such limitation.  
These distinctions are hard to reconcile with the idea that the 

duties apply only to firms insofar as they provide "telephone 
exchange service" or "exchange access."

     Given the ambiguity in the statutory language, our task is 
not to choose the best interpretation but merely to decide if 
the Commission's is reasonable.  See Atlantic Mutual Insur-
ance Co. v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 523 U.S. 382, 
389 (1998);  Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources De-
fense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984).

     Qwest suggests that the Commission's reading will produce 
absurd results, involving imposition of s 251(c) duties on 
incumbents' provision of long distance, wireless, and cable 
services.  See Qwest's Main Br. at 17-18;  see also Mova 
Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Shalala, 140 F.3d 1060, 1068 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).  But the Commission's response alleviates much of 
this fear.  See Respondent's Br. at 29-30.  First, the worry 
about cable services seems inapplicable.  The Act says that a 
"telecommunications carrier shall be treated as a common 
carrier ... only to the extent that it is engaged in providing 
telecommunications services."  47 U.S.C. s 153(44) (emphasis 
added).  Telecommunications services do not include conven-
tional cable services (though the Commission has suggested 
that cable service used for high-speed internet access might 
be a different story).  See In re Inquiry Concerning High-
Speed Access to the Internet Over Cable and Other Facilities, 
15 F.C.C.R. 19,287, 19,293-98 p p 14-24 (2000).  And the 
s 251(c) duties have built-in limits that constrain their appli-
cation to the other items (long distance and wireless).  The 
interconnection obligations (and any related collocation 
duties) are by their terms restricted to telephone exchange 
and exchange access services.  See 47 U.S.C. ss 251(c)(2) & 
(6).  The unbundling obligations of s 251(c)(3) (and likewise 
any related collocation duties) are constrained by the "neces-
sary" and "impair" restrictions of 47 U.S.C. s 251(d)(2).  See 
Remand Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 391 p 14.  Only the duty of an 
incumbent LEC under s 251(c)(4), to offer at wholesale those 
telecommunications services that it sells at retail, seems 
unlimited;  but in a competitive market the burden would be 
revenue-neutral, as retail prices should represent wholesale 
rates plus the additional costs needed for retailing.

     Accordingly, we find no error in the Commission's conclu-
sion that it can apply the s 251(c) duties to a firm that met 
the s 251(h) criteria on February 8, 1996 and is still provid-
ing "exchange access" or "telephone exchange service."

     Classification of DSL-based advanced services as "tele-
phone exchange service" or "exchange access."  The Commis-
sion's alternative theory was that DSL-based advanced ser-
vices actually constituted either "telephone exchange service" 
or "exchange access," depending on how the technology was 
used.  Because the communications set in motion by ISP-
bound traffic typically do not start and end within the same 
exchange, but proceed over the internet to out-of-exchange 
sites, the Commission found that such traffic constitutes 
"exchange access."  Id. at 391-92 p 16.  In contrast, the 
Commission found that work-at-home applications and other 
non-Internet communications (such as a corporate network) 
using DSL technology that begin and terminate within an 
exchange qualify as "telephone exchange service."  Id.

     Before addressing this, a few words about justiciability.  
As this theory was one of the Commission's two alternative 
bases for its ruling against Qwest, the company obviously had 
standing to seek its overthrow.  Resolution of the first issue 
in the Commission's favor does not, under settled law, moot 
the challenger's attack on the second basis.  See Air Line 
Pilots Ass'n Int'l v. UAL Corp., 897 F.2d 1394, 1397 (7th Cir. 
1990).  By considering both bases, there is obviously potential 
for economy by the inferior federal courts, as higher-level 
review might remove the first basis for the outcome.  See id.

     Further, there is a question of standing.  The second (as 
yet unmentioned) petitioner, WorldCom, objects to the Re-
mand Order on grounds that intersect with those of Qwest.  
Though WorldCom concurs with the Commission that DSL-
based advanced services are "telephone exchange service" or 
"exchange access," it objects to the Commission's view that a 
customer's calls to a local ISP are "exchange access" because 
of the resulting out-of-exchange communications over the 
internet;  if the calls are classified as "exchange access," 
WorldCom will not receive reciprocal compensation from 

incumbent LECs for them.  Normally a party that has ob-
tained the result that it sought in the agency proceeding 
cannot sue merely because it disagrees with the rationale, see 
Telecommunications Research & Action Center v. FCC, 917 
F.2d 585, 588 (D.C. Cir. 1990), and WorldCom most definitely 
favors the result here (the subjection of incumbent LECs' 
DSL-based advanced services to s 251(c) duties).  It has 
been suggested, however, that such cases as International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers v. ICC, 862 F.2d 330, 334 
(D.C. Cir. 1988), and Better Government Ass'n v. Department 
of State, 780 F.2d 86, 91 (D.C. Cir. 1986), might be read to 
hold that "despite a disposition which favors a given party it 
might still challenge a general rule if that rule remains in 
existence and creates cognizable harm through its effects on 
that party's future rights."  Telecommunications Research & 
Action Center, 917 F.2d at 588 (Silberman, J., concurring).  
As the standing of one petitioner is enough, Animal Legal 
Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 445 (D.C. Cir. 
1998)(en banc), and Qwest has undoubted standing to attack 
the Commission's second theory, we need not pursue the 
suggestion.

     Our treatment of the merits can be brief.  The Commis-
sion's Remand Order was issued a few months before our 
decision in Bell Atlantic Telephone Cos. v. FCC, 206 F.3d 1 
(2000).  There we held that the Commission, in arriving at 
the same conclusion for ISP-bound calls in In re Implementa-
tion of the Local Competition Provisions in the Telecommu-
nications Act of 1996;  Inter-Carrier Compensation for ISP-
Bound Traffic, 14 F.C.C.R. 3689, 3691-3703 p p 3-20 (1999), 
had "not provided a satisfactory explanation why LECs that 
terminate calls to ISPs are not properly seen as 'termi-
nat[ing] ... local telecommunications traffic,' and why such 
traffic is 'exchange access' rather than 'telephone exchange 
service.' "  Bell Atlantic, 206 F.3d at 9.  The Commission 
does not seriously contest that its decision here, classifying 
certain DSL offerings as either "telephone exchange service" 
or "exchange access" under 47 U.S.C. s 153, relied not only 
on the Reciprocal Compensation Order vacated in Bell Atlan-

tic but also on its defective reasoning, see Remand Order, 15 
F.C.C.R. at 391-92, 400-02 p p 15-16, 33, 35.

     Accordingly we vacate and remand the Commission's classi-
fication of DSL-based advanced services as "telephone ex-
change service" or "exchange access."  See National Fuel 
Gas Supply Corp. v. FERC, 899 F.2d 1244, 1249-50 (D.C. Cir. 
1990).  Qwest's claim that incumbent LECs can be subject to 
s 251(c) duties only with respect to the provision of "tele-
phone exchange service" or "exchange access," however, is 
denied.

                                                            So ordered.

                      