                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 19, 1999     Decided March 3, 2000 

                           No. 99-1230

                       Michael D. Landry, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

             Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
              Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

     John C. Deal argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Kathryn R. Norcross, Counsel, Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, argued the cause for respondent. With her on 
the brief were Ann S. DuRoss, Assistant General Counsel, 
and Colleen J. Boles, Senior Counsel. Thomas A. Schulz, 
Assistant General Counsel, and Ashley Doherty and Thomas 
L. Holzman, Counsel, entered appearances.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Separate opinion concurring in part and concurring in the 
judgment filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  Congress has given the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") a variety of weap-
ons to use against individuals whose actions threaten the 
integrity of federally insured banks or savings associations.  
Among these is the power to remove a bank officer from his 
position and to bar him from further participation in the 
operations of a federally insured depository institution.  See 
12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1).  On April 30, 1996 the FDIC notified 
Michael D. Landry that it intended to seek such an order 
against him because of his conduct as Senior Vice President, 
Chief Financial Officer, and Cashier of First Guaranty Bank, 
Hammond, Louisiana.

     As required by statute, the FDIC assigned the matter to 
an administrative law judge for a formal, on-the-record, ad-
ministrative hearing.  See 12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(4);  5 U.S.C. 
ss 554, 556.  The ALJ held a two-week hearing and then 
issued a decision recommending that the FDIC issue the 
proposed prohibition order.1  Landry filed exceptions to the 
ALJ's recommendation, and the case was forwarded to the 
FDIC's Board of Directors for a final decision.  The Board 
agreed with the recommendation and issued an order of 
removal and prohibition.  See In re Michael D. Landry, 
FDIC 95-65e, May 25, 1999 ("Order"), Joint Appendix 
("J.A.") 218, 264-66.  Landry filed a timely petition for 
review.  The principal issue for review is Landry's argument 
that the FDIC's method of appointing ALJs violates the 

__________
     1 In the same proceedings, FDIC enforcement counsel also 
sought, and ultimately received, a prohibition order against Alton B. 
Lewis, a member of the Bank's Board of Directors who also did 
some legal work for the bank.  Lewis's petition for review is 
pending before the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth 
Circuit.  See Lewis v. FDIC, No. 99-60412 (5th Cir. filed June 18, 
1999).

Appointments Clause of the Constitution, Art. II, s 2, cl. 2.  
Landry also argues that the evidence against him did not 
meet the statutory minimum for the remedies against him 
and that the FDIC violated various procedural requirements.  
We affirm.

                              * * *

     From the late 1980s to early 1993, First Guaranty was in 
serious financial trouble.  In 1990, the FDIC issued a capital 
directive requiring it to obtain a $4.7 million infusion of 
capital by January 1, 1991.  The Bank tried unsuccessfully 
to raise capital through a stock solicitation, and when the 
FDIC completed its 1991 examination the Bank's position 
looked bleaker than ever.  Soon afterward, the FDIC told 
the Bank's board of directors that it would seek to terminate 
the Bank's deposit insurance.  It agreed, however, to delay 
termination proceedings while further recapitalization plans 
proceeded.  In early 1992 the FDIC conducted another ex-
amination and found that the Bank's financial position had 
improved slightly, but that it was still a candidate for near-
term failure.  After Landry and others pursued a series of 
attempts to add capital to the Bank--some of which can only 
be described as bizarre and desperate--the Bank's board on 
September 17, 1992 accepted an offer of purchase, and in 
December 1992 the Bank received the necessary capital infu-
sion.

     Landry's alleged malfeasance occurred in connection with a 
capital enhancement plan initially proposed by Rick A. Jen-
son, the Bank's former president, and Scott Crabtree, a 
consultant, involving a corporation called Pangaea.  The 
FDIC and Landry agree that he had a role in this plan but 
disagree as to the scope of his role, his motivation, and the 
significance of his conduct.  The FDIC Board, adopting the 
ALJ's factual findings, found that Landry and his two associ-
ates were the incorporators of Pangaea Corporation, and that 
they planned to use Pangaea to acquire an 80% interest in the 
Bank.  They hoped to raise $16 million by selling 30% of 
Pangaea's stock, retaining 70% for themselves.  Of the $16 
million Pangaea would use $7.5 million to beef up the Bank's 

capital through purchases of its stock, $6.5 million to form a 
limited partnership to buy real estate from the Bank's portfo-
lio, and $2 million to pay Pangaea expenses and to finance 
other ventures.  They presented this plan as a means of 
finding capital for the Bank, and obtained approval at an 
executive meeting of the Bank's board of directors on August 
8, 1991, but as Landry would later admit, the board was 
misled because the plan was "not presented as a management 
takeover/buyout of the Bank."  Instead, the Bank's board was 
led to believe that Pangaea was an arm of the Bank so that a 
capital infusion would entail no genuine change in control of 
the Bank.  After board approval, the Bank forwarded a draft 
copy of a descriptive booklet to the FDIC examiners.  They 
rejected the plan because they believed it offered no short 
term capital infusion and Pangaea had no serious prospect of 
actually raising the $16 million.  (The FDIC had determined 
that investors could have acquired complete ownership of the 
entire bank for $5 million, so that investors would not be 
willing to pay $16 million for a 30% interest in an entity 
(Pangaea) that would own only 80% of the Bank.)

     Undeterred, Jenson, Crabtree and Landry pursued a vari-
ety of imaginative sources of capital, many of which involved 
Pangaea.  These sources included:  individuals seeking Unit-
ed States citizenship under a provision of the immigration 
laws admitting individuals who invest $1 million in a new 
business venture that creates ten or more new jobs;  pension 
funds solicited for the immigration scheme with the help of an 
image-enhancement firm with pension fund contacts;  a pre-
ferred stock offering for Pangaea prepared by Funding Place-
ment Services;  and an Ecuadorian currency scheme through 
which one could purportedly obtain a 500% return in six 
weeks.

     Although this "Pangaea plan" never much developed, and 
although Pangaea was unlikely ever to have received approval 
to acquire the Bank from its board of directors or federal 
regulators, the FDIC Board found that Landry's fellow Pan-
gaea incorporators--with Landry's full knowledge and coop-
eration--executed enough of the plan to cause the Bank to 
lose substantial sums of money in the form of promotional 

expenses, see Order at 14, 17-18, 29-30, J.A. at 231, 234-35, 
246-47, questionable loans, see id. at 14-15, 17, J.A. 231-32, 
234, and other unwise or illegal banking activities, see id. at 
13, 16, 20, J.A. at 230, 233, 237, without informing the 
directors that their plan was designed to enrich the incorpo-
rators while providing little or no benefit to the Bank itself.  
The Board also found Landry had failed to satisfy FDIC 
rules requiring disclosure of material changes in the Bank's 
operations.  See Order at 20, J.A. at 237.

     The Board's most compelling evidence came in the form of 
a 16-page letter dated June 3, 1993 that Landry himself 
wrote to bank examiner G. Martin Cooper ("Landry letter"), 
and to which he attached more than 500 pages of supporting 
material.  The Landry letter described the activities at issue 
here and linked them to Pangaea.  Landry's personal culpa-
bility, laid bare in this letter, was reinforced by Landry's 
resignation letter (not accepted by the Bank's board of di-
rectors), in which he described his conduct as "self dealing" 
and "for the good of Pangaea Corporation at the expense of 
First Guaranty Bank," as well as his May 12, 1995 deposition, 
in which he admitted that Pangaea had become a vehicle to 
"make money off the bank."  After examining all of the 
evidence, the FDIC Board concluded that although other 
wrongdoers may have been more culpable, Landry's conduct 
met the statutory criteria and thus warranted a removal and 
prohibition order.  See Order at 21-22, J.A. at 238-39.

                       Appointments Clause

     Landry argues that the FDIC's method for appointing 
ALJs violates the Appointments Clause of the Constitution:

     [The President] ... shall nominate, and by and with the 
     Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint ...  
     Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are 
     not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be 
     established by Law:  but the Congress may by Law vest 
     the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think 
     
     proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or 
     in the Heads of Departments.
     
U.S. Const., Art. II, s 2, cl. 2.

     Landry would classify ALJs who conduct administrative 
proceedings for the various federal banking agencies as "infe-
rior officers" of the United States.  If so, Congress's instruc-
tion to the banking agencies to "establish their own pool of 
administrative law judges" to conduct such hearings, see 
Federal Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act 
("FIRREA"), s 916, 103 Stat. at 486, codified at 12 U.S.C. 
s 1818 note, would be unconstitutional because it vests ap-
pointment authority in a set of agencies that are not (accord-
ing to Landry) "departments" under the Appointments 
Clause.  The FDIC counters that the ALJs in question need 
not be appointed by heads of departments because they are 
employees rather than inferior officers.

     The FDIC also makes a preliminary objection--that Lan-
dry has shown no prejudice from any Appointments Clause 
violation that may have occurred.  The FDIC itself deter-
mined Landry's responsibility after reviewing the ALJ's rec-
ommended decision de novo.  See 12 U.S.C. s 1818(h)(1) 
(requiring the FDIC to make its own findings of fact when 
issuing its final decision);  12 CFR ss 304.38, 304.40 (requir-
ing the FDIC Board to issue the agency's final decision).  
The Supreme Court has not decided whether an Appoint-
ments Clause violation requires reversal where it appears to 
have done a party no direct harm.  Ryder v. United States, 
515 U.S. 177, 182-83, 186 (1995).  But in Freytag v. Commis-
sioner, 501 U.S. 868 (1991), in reaching the Appointments 
Clause issue despite its not having been raised below, the 
Court classified the clause as "structural," because of its 
purpose to prevent encroachment of one branch on another 
and to preserve the Constitution's structural integrity.  Id. at 
878-79.  Here, of course, the issue was raised all right;  the 
problem is that Landry's injury may be questionable.  But 
the Court uses the term "structural" for a set of errors for 
which no direct injury is necessary--such as a criminal 
defendant's indictment by a grand jury chosen in a racially or 

sexually discriminatory manner.  See Vasquez v. Hillery, 474 
U.S. 254, 261 & n.4, 263 (1986) (race);  Ballard v. United 
States, 329 U.S. 187, 195 (1946) (sex).  In such cases, of 
course, the later conviction by a petit jury supplies virtual 
certainty that a properly constituted grand jury would have 
indicted, as the Court has observed in regard to lesser-
ranking grand jury errors.  See United States v. Mechanik, 
475 U.S. 66, 70-71 & n.1 (1986).  As grand juries do not draft 
opinions for the petit jury, the latter's insulating effect is 
positively surgical compared to the FDIC's action here, how-
ever independent its review of the ALJ's decision.

     The Court recently noted its use of the label "structural," 
observing that only in a limited class of cases has it "found an 
error to be 'structural,' and thus subject to automatic rever-
sal."  Neder v. United States, 119 S. Ct. 1827, 1833 (1999).  
Issues of separation of powers (including Appointments 
Clause matters, Freytag, 501 U.S. at 878), seem most fit to 
the doctrine;  it will often be difficult or impossible for 
someone subject to a wrongly designed scheme to show that 
the design--the structure--played a causal role in his loss.  
And in Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc., 514 U.S. 211 (1995), 
the Court gave a further explanation:  "[S]eparation of pow-
ers is a structural safeguard rather than a remedy to be 
applied only when specific harm, or risk of specific harm, can 
be identified....  [I]t is a prophylactic device, establishing 
high walls and clear distinctions because low walls and vague 
distinctions will not be judicially defensible in the heat of 
interbranch conflict."  Id. at 239.  For Appointments Clause 
violations, demand for a clear causal link to a party's harm 
will likely make the Clause no wall at all.

     There is certainly no rule that a party claiming constitu-
tional error in the vesting of authority must show a direct 
causal link between the error and the authority's adverse 
decision.  In fact, the opposite is often true.  For example, in 
a challenge to the authority of a non-Article III court on the 
grounds that the challenger is entitled to a court enjoying 
Article III's exceptional tenure provisions, the assumption 
that inadequate tenure may prejudice the challenger is so 
automatic that it usually goes unmentioned.  See Northern 

Pipeline Construction Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line Co., 458 
U.S. 50 (1982);  Palmore v. United States, 411 U.S. 389 (1973);  
Crowell v. Benson, 285 U.S. 22 (1932).  Bowsher v. Synar, 478 
U.S. 714 (1986), extended this principle to general separation-
of-powers claims.  Although the union plaintiffs there had 
clearly been injured by a suspension and proposed cancella-
tion of their cost-of-living adjustments, see id. at 721, there 
was no showing that the Comptroller General's exposure to 
removal by Congress in any way increased the probability of 
the cuts.  Instead, the Court seemed to presume that subtle 
variations in the quality of tenure would affect conduct.  See 
also Ryder, 515 U.S. at 182-83, 186-88.

     Of course in the above cases there was no de novo review 
following the decision of the (arguably) unlawfully designated 
official.  (But see Vasquez v. Hillery, 474 U.S. at 261 & n.4, 
263, and Ballard v. United States, 329 U.S. at 195, reversing 
convictions based on indictment by discriminatorily selected 
grand jury, despite later petit jury verdict, discussed above at 
6-7.) Here there is.  But Freytag itself indicates that judicial 
review of an Appointments Clause claim will proceed even 
where any possible injury is radically attenuated.  There, the 
Court made plain that, had it not found the "inferior officer" 
appointed in a constitutional way, it was ready to throw out 
the Tax Court's decision simply on the ground that special 
trial judges ("STJs") held what it viewed as clearly the 
powers of an "inferior officer" (to make final decisions), even 
though the STJ had not exercised any power to make final 
decisions in Freytag's case.  See 501 U.S. at 871-72 & n.2, 
882.  Indeed, the Court made no attempt to explain how the 
STJ's possession of powers not used in Freytag's case could 
possibly have prejudiced him.  Id.

     Moreover, Appointments Clause analysis of purely decision-
recommending employees presents a special problem.  Sup-
pose that a purely recommendatory power, i.e., one followed 
as here by de novo review, can make an employee an "inferior 
officer" within the meaning of the Appointments Clause--a 
hypothesis we must assume at this stage.  If the process of 
final de novo review could cleanse the violation of its harmful 
impact, then all such arrangements would escape judicial 

review, unless the officer's powers happened fortuitously, as 
in Freytag, to be combined with still greater powers.  Recog-
nition of this problem may well explain the Court's statement 
in United States v. L.A. Tucker Truck Lines, 344 U.S. 33 
(1952), that a defect in the appointment of an "examiner" 
(precursor of today's ALJ) was, if properly raised, "an irregu-
larity which would invalidate a resulting order."  Id. at 38.  
Thus, to refuse to entertain Landry's claim is to rule, in 
effect, that officers holding purely recommendatory powers 
subject to de novo review are not "inferior officers," i.e., it is 
to resolve the merits without purporting to do so.

     For this reason our decision here is not inconsistent with 
Doolin v. OTS, 139 F.3d 203 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  There we 
relied on Mechanik, 475 U.S. at 70-71, to conclude that 
although enforcement proceedings culminating in a "cease 
and desist order" were initiated by an improperly appointed 
Director of the OTS and therefore defective, the ultimate 
issuance of the final merits order by a properly appointed 
Director ratified the initiation and cured the error.  Doolin 
139 F.3d at 212-14.  But Doolin did not present the catch-22 
of the present case, where the government's argument re-
quires one to believe that, even if we assume that a pure 
power to recommend is enough to lift an employee into the 
august "inferior officer" realm, it is not enough to taint the 
ultimate judgment and thus give the loser a chance to raise 
the issue.

     Finally, we note that in United States v. Colon-Munoz, 192 
F.3d 210 (1st Cir. 1999), the First Circuit said that "structur-
al" has two meanings, referring not only to errors related to 
the constitutional structure but also to ones simply deemed so 
"fundamental" as to deprive a criminal trial of basic fairness.  
Id. at 217-18 n.9.  The court used the distinction to justify 
not applying Freytag's rejection of the waiver argument, a 
problem not before us.  But Colon-Munoz never passed on 
the issue that is before us--whether an issue that is structur-
al in the sense that it derives from the constitutional struc-
ture can be reviewed even where the link between the error 
and the party's harm is conjectural.

     We now turn to whether a violation of the Appointments 
Clause occurred.  The line between "mere" employees and 
inferior officers is anything but bright.  See Nick Bravin, 
Note, Is Morrison v. Olson Still Good Law?  The Court's 
New Appointments Clause Jurisprudence, 98 Colum. L. Rev. 
1103, 1114-15 (1998) ("Early Supreme Court attempts to 
define the term 'officer' provide inexact, if any, judicially 
manageable standards");  Edward Susolik, Note, Separation 
of Powers and Liberty:  The Appointments Clause, Morrison 
v. Olson, and Rule of Law, 63 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1515, 1545 
(1990) ("[A] definitive understanding of the term 'officer' is 
not forthcoming for two simple reasons:  (1) there are too few 
cases for any consistent precedential principle to be articulat-
ed, and (2) the few cases that do exist posit conclusions rather 
than arguments and provide little insight to justify their 
results.").  In fact, the earliest Appointments Clause cases 
often employed circular logic, granting officer status to an 
official based in part upon his appointment by the head of a 
department.  See, e.g., United States v. Mouat, 124 U.S. 303, 
307 (1888) ("Unless a person in the service of the Government 
... holds his place by virtue of an appointment by the 
President, or of one of the courts of justice or heads of 
Departments authorized by law to make such an appointment, 
he is not, strictly speaking, an officer of the United States");  
United States v. Germaine, 99 U.S. 508, 510 (1878);  United 
States v. Hartwell, 73 U.S. (6 Wall) 385, 393 (1867).  In an 
attempt to clarify the inquiry, the Court has often said that 
"any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to 
the laws of the United States is an 'Officer of the United 
States,' " Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 126 n.162 (1976);  see 
also Edmond v. United States, 520 U.S. 651, 662 (1997);  
Ryder v. United States, 515 U.S. 177 (1995);  Freytag, 501 
U.S. at 881-82,2 but ascertaining the test's real meaning 

__________
     2 In its Order, the Board seemed to agree with Landry that the 
ALJs were inferior officers but found this status irrelevant because 
the federal banking agencies are "departments" capable of accept-
ing Congress's delegation of appointment power.  The FDIC has 
abandoned its apparent concession and now argues that the ALJs 
are not inferior officers.  Because we agree that the ALJs in 

requires a look at the roles of the employees whose status 
was at issue in other cases.

     In the most analogous case, Freytag, the Court decided 
that STJs were inferior officers.  501 U.S. at 881-82.  In so 
finding, the Court relied on authority of the STJs not 
matched by the ALJs here.  In particular, the Court noted 
that STJs have the authority to render the final decision of 
the Tax Court in declaratory judgment proceedings and in 
certain small-amount tax cases.  See id. at 882.  But the 
ALJs here can never render the decision of the FDIC.  See 
12 CFR s 308.38 (noting that ALJs must file a "recom-
mended decision, recommended findings of fact, recom-
mended conclusions of law, and [a] proposed order" (emphasis 
added)).  Final decisions are issued only by the FDIC Board 
of Directors.  See 12 CFR s 308.40(a), (c).  Moreover, even 
for the non-final decisions of the type made by the STJ in 
Freytag, the Tax Court was required to defer to the STJ's 
factual and credibility findings unless they were clearly erro-
neous, see Tax Court Rule 183(c), 26 U.S.C. App. (1994);  
Stone v. Commissioner, 865 F.2d 342, 344-47 (D.C. Cir. 1989), 
whereas here the FDIC Board makes its own factual findings, 
see 12 U.S.C. s 1818(h)(1);  12 CFR s 308.40(c);  see also In 
re Landry, FDIC-95-65e, 1999 WL 639568, at *1 (FDIC July 
8, 1999) (noting that the FDIC had given Landry's case "an 
exhaustive de novo review").  Landry argues that the FDIC 
Board did not undertake a de novo review of his case, but his 
characterization of the FDIC's work goes only to its careful-
ness, not its authority.

     It is, to be sure, uncertain just what role the STJs' power 
to make final decisions played in Freytag.  Many of the 
features of the STJ job that the Court found to contribute to 
its being covered by the Appointments Clause have analogues 

__________
question are not inferior officers we need not decide whether any of 
the federal banking agencies are in fact "departments" for purposes 
of the Appointments Clause.  Moreover, because the issue before us 
does not depend on the FDIC's interpretation of the statute or 
exercise of its discretion, there is no problem under SEC v. Chenery 
Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196 (1947).

here.  The office of STJ was "established by Law" (the 
threshold trigger for the Appointments Clause) and the 
"duties, salary, and means of appointment" for the office were 
specified by statute, a factor that has proved relevant in the 
Court's Appointments Clause jurisprudence.  Freytag, 501 
U.S. at 881.  The ALJ position here is also "established by 
Law," as are its specific duties, salary, and means of appoint-
ment.  See 5 U.S.C. s 5372 (pay scales for ALJs);  5 U.S.C. 
s 3105 (hiring practices);  5 U.S.C. ss 556-557 (functions);  12 
CFR pt. 308 (same).  Similarly, both the ALJs here and the 
STJs in Freytag "take testimony, conduct trials, rule on the 
admissibility of evidence, and have the power to enforce 
compliance with discovery orders."  Freytag, 501 U.S. at 881-
82.  And, the Court observed, "In the course of carrying out 
these important functions, the special trial judges exercise 
significant discretion," id. at 882, rather a magic phrase under 
the Buckley test.  Further, the Court introduced mention of 
the STJs' power to render final decisions with something of a 
shrug:  "Even if the duties" of STJs involving conduct of non-
final proceedings "were not as significant as we and the two 
courts [Tax Court and Fifth Circuit] have found them to be, 
our conclusion would be unchanged."  Id.  Only then did it go 
on to discuss the STJs' power to make final decisions.

     Nonetheless, in another way the Court laid exceptional 
stress on the STJs' final decisionmaking power.  After noting 
those powers, the Court went on to explain why Freytag 
could raise the claim even though in his case the STJ had not 
been exercising them:

     Special trial judges are not inferior officers for purposes 
     of some of their duties under [the enabling statute], but 
     mere employees with respect to other responsibilities.  
     The fact that an inferior officer on occasion performs 
     duties that may be performed by an employee not sub-
     ject to the Appointments Clause does not transform his 
     status under the Constitution.
     
Id.  All this explanation would have been quite unnecessary if 
the purely recommendatory powers were fatal in themselves.  
Accordingly, we believe that the STJs' power of final decision 

in certain classes of cases was critical to the Court's decision.  
As the ALJs hired pursuant to s 916 of FIRREA have no 
such powers, we conclude that they are not inferior officers.

                Privilege and Brady/Jencks claims

     During pre-trial discovery the FDIC asserted claims of 
deliberative process, law enforcement, and attorney-client 
privilege in various permutations to justify withholding 97 
documents.  As required by the FDIC's rules, see 12 CFR 
s 308.25(e), FDIC enforcement counsel produced a privilege 
log which briefly described each document and indicated its 
date, author, and recipient and the privileges claimed.  In 
addition, enforcement counsel produced the affidavit of Cott-
rell L. Webster, the Memphis regional director of the FDIC's 
division of supervision, claiming to have personally reviewed 
each of the withheld documents, formally invoking the law 
enforcement and deliberative process privileges, and explain-
ing how each privilege applied.

     The ALJ rejected an initial effort to compel production of 
the documents, and the FDIC denied interlocutory review.  
It specifically rejected Landry's claim that there were docu-
ments that Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), required 
the FDIC to disclose.  In doing so it observed that enforce-
ment counsel's assurance that no such withheld documents 
existed was enough to defeat Landry's claims in the absence 
of some source of doubt rising above Landry's unadorned 
"suspicions."  The ALJ also denied several requests to com-
pel production made during the hearing itself.  But when the 
hearing was over, the FDIC Executive Secretary ordered 
that the record be reopened and that FDIC enforcement 
counsel submit a more detailed privilege log.  After reviewing 
the revised privilege log, the Board upheld the assertion of 
privilege for 44 of the documents but reopened the record a 
second time and ordered enforcement counsel to produce the 
remaining 46 documents (seven had been produced to Landry 
for other reasons) for in camera inspection.

     After reviewing the newly submitted documents, the Board 
found most of them not to be privileged but did not order 

disclosure because it found the error harmless in light of the 
cumulative nature of the information withheld.  See Order at 
5-6, 51-52, J.A. at 223-24, 268-69.  The FDIC Board did not 
address any of Landry's claims under Jencks v. United 
States, 353 U.S. 657 (1957).  Because the FDIC had not ruled 
on Landry's Brady and Jencks claims for the documents that 
it did not review in camera, we ordered the FDIC to produce 
these documents so that we could decide whether material 
had been withheld improperly.

     Privilege.  We begin with Landry's challenges to the 
FDIC's claims of privilege.  His most substantial argument is 
that the deliberative process and law enforcement privileges 
were not properly invoked.  Assertion of either of these 
qualified, common law executive privileges requires:  (1) a 
formal claim of privilege by the "head of the department" 
having control over the requested information;  (2) assertion 
of the privilege based on actual personal consideration by that 
official;  and (3) a detailed specification of the information for 
which the privilege is claimed, with an explanation why it 
properly falls within the scope of the privilege.  See In re 
Sealed Case, 856 F.2d 268, 317 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (noting the 
requirements for invoking the law enforcement privilege);  
Northrop Corp. v. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 751 F.2d 395, 
399 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (same for deliberative process privilege).  
Landry's argument is that assertion merely by the Memphis 
regional director of the FDIC's division of supervision, Cott-
rell L. Webster, rather than by the head of the FDIC, is 
inadequate.

     The argument mistakenly assumes that only assertion by 
the head of the overall department or agency is enough.  Our 
cases hold to the contrary.  In Tuite v. Henry, 98 F.3d 1411 
(D.C. Cir. 1996), we allowed Counsel to the Justice Depart-
ment's Office of Professional Responsibility, rather than the 
Attorney General herself, to assert the law enforcement 
privilege for information obtained during investigations of 
potentially illegal Justice Department recordings of conversa-
tions between a defendant and his lawyer.  See id. at 1417.  
Similarly, in Friedman v. Bache Halsey Stuart Shields, Inc., 
738 F.2d 1336 (D.C. Cir. 1984), in rejecting enforcement 

counsel's assertion of the law enforcement privilege, we im-
plied that officials other than the head of the department 
could assert the privilege, stating:  "the files had not been 
examined for this purpose by responsible members or officers 
of CFTC."  Id. at 1342 (emphasis added);  see also Kerr v. 
United States Dist. Ct. for North. Dist. of Cal., 511 F.2d 192, 
198 (9th Cir. 1975) (finding common law executive privilege 
inapplicable because "[n]either the Chairman of the [Califor-
nia Adult] Authority nor the Director of Corrections nor any 
official of these agencies asserted, in person or writing, any 
privilege in the district court" (emphasis added)), aff'd, 426 
U.S. 394 (1976).  District courts in this Circuit have also 
allowed lesser officials to assert these privileges.  See, e.g., 
Koehler v. United States, 1991 WL 277542, at *5 (D.D.C. Dec. 
9, 1991) (allowing the head of the U.S. Army Criminal Investi-
gation Command to assert privilege);  Alexander v. FBI, 186 
F.R.D. 154, 166 (D.D.C. 1999) (implying that affidavits of FBI 
general counsel or inspector general would have been suffi-
cient if they had provided enough information to assess 
whether the law enforcement privilege applied).

     For these privileges, it would be counterproductive to read 
"head of the department" in the narrowest possible way. The 
procedural requirements are designed to "ensure that the 
privilege[s are] presented in a deliberate, considered, and 
reasonably specific manner."  In re Sealed Case, 856 F.2d at 
271.  As we have seen, built into the requirements is the need 
for "actual personal consideration" by the asserting official.  
Id.  Insistence on an affidavit from the very pinnacle of 
agency authority would surely start to erode the substance of 
"actual personal" involvement.  See generally Note, The Mili-
tary and State Secrets Privilege:  Protection for the National 
Security or Immunity for the Executive?, 91 Yale L.J. 570, 
572 n.18 (1982) (noting widespread belief that official claims of 
privilege by department heads are often made after perfunc-
tory review of subordinates' decisions).  Further, both privi-
leges advance important goals;  the gains from imposing 
demands in the interest of careful assertion must be balanced 
against the losses that would result of imposing super-

stringent procedures.  See United States Dep't of Energy v. 
Brett, 659 F.2d 154, 155-56 (Temp. Emer. Ct. App. 1981).

     Under our cases, the head of the appropriate regional 
division of the FDIC's supervisory personnel is of sufficient 
rank to achieve the necessary deliberateness in assertion of 
the deliberative process and law enforcement privileges.

     We note that decisions involving the more sensitive and 
absolute privilege for state and military secrets have been 
more insistent on assertion at the highest level.  See, e.g., 
United States v. Reynolds, 345 U.S. 1, 7-8 n.20 (1953) (quot-
ing Duncan v. Cammell, Laird & Co., [1942] A.C. 624, for the 
proposition that the decision to invoke the state secrets 
privilege should be taken by "the minister who is the political 
head of the department");  Clift v. United States, 597 F.2d 
826, 829 (2d Cir. 1979) (declining to require disclosure where 
the Secretary of Defense did not invoke the privilege because 
of a statute criminalizing such disclosure but noting "the 
Government would be wiser not to put courts to this test in 
the future");  Kinoy v. Mitchell, 67 F.R.D. 1, 9-10 (S.D.N.Y. 
1975) (requiring Attorney General himself to lodge a formally 
sufficient claim of privilege);  26 Charles Alan Wright & 
Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Federal Practice and Procedure 
s 5670 (1992).  We express no opinion on who may assert 
that privilege.

     Landry's claim that the FDIC fell fatally short by not 
including the disputed documents in the record is meritless.  
See Vaughn v. Rosen, 484 F.2d 820, 825-26 (D.C. Cir. 1973) 
(noting the immense and unjustifiable cost to the appellate 
courts of mandatory review of documents for privileged mate-
rial).  But see Kerr v. United States Dist. Ct. for North. Dist. 
of Cal., 426 U.S. 394, 405-06 (1976) (noting that in camera 
review may be used to resolve a privilege dispute).

     Landry also argues that the FDIC waived its privileges by 
initiating this action.  He is mistaken.  Here he relies on an 
erroneous reading of In re Subpoena Duces Tecum Served on 
the OCC, 145 F.3d 1422 (D.C. Cir.), reh'g granted, 156 F.3d 
1279 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  In our first pass at the case, we said 
that the deliberative process privilege was unavailable where 

"the Constitution or a statute makes the nature of govern-
mental officials' deliberations the issue," offering Title VII 
cases as an archetypal instance.  See 145 F.3d at 1424.  But 
when the government in petition for rehearing expressed 
anxiety that any claim of arbitrary and capricious decision-
making would necessarily call the government's deliberations 
into question, we responded by explaining that "our holding 
...  is limited to those circumstances in which the cause of 
action is directed at the agency's subjective motivation."  156 
F.3d at 1280.  Because an ordinary enforcement action in no 
way implicates the FDIC's subjective motivations, and Lan-
dry makes no credible claims that improper factors motivated 
this enforcement action, there is no waiver.

     Brady/Jencks.  In its order the FDIC Board assumed 
without deciding that Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), 
applies to enforcement proceedings, and though the Board's 
order did not address Jencks v. United States, 353 U.S. 657 
(1957), FDIC counsel assures us that the FDIC has the same 
view of it.  Thus we also assume without deciding that both 
cases apply.  Cf. Communist Party of the United States v. 
Subversive Activities Control Bd., 254 F.2d 314, 327-28 (D.C. 
Cir. 1958) (holding that in agency adjudications in which the 
government has not claimed privilege, written reports made 
at the time of an event must be produced when the credibility 
of the witness on matters discussed in the report is in 
question).  After reviewing the documents alleged to contain 
Jencks and Brady material, we find no reason to disturb the 
FDIC's order.

     We begin with Brady.  After Landry requested that the 
FDIC produce all Brady materials, the government informed 
the ALJ and the FDIC Board that it had reviewed the 
contested documents and had disclosed all exculpatory factual 
material.  Normally we accept the government's representa-
tions as to whether documents in its possession constitute 
Brady material.  See Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 
59 (1987) (noting that a prosecutor's decision as to whether 
exculpatory Brady information exists or is material is usually 
final);  United States v. Lloyd, 992 F.2d 348, 352 (D.C. Cir. 
1993) (same).  As the FDIC observed in denying interlocu-

tory review, it takes more than the adverse party's conclusory 
suspicions to impel the adjudicator to delve behind the gov-
ernment's representation that it has conducted a Brady re-
view and found nothing.

     Landry's Jencks claims have more merit.  He argues that 
the withheld reports by Jerry Cox and G. Martin Cooper, the 
bank examiners who testified at his hearing, touch upon the 
events and activities discussed in their testimony and there-
fore must be produced.  See Jencks, 353 U.S. at 668.  Be-
cause the FDIC concedes Jencks's applicability in this case, 
Landry has established a prima facie violation if the docu-
ments in question cover the same territory as the examiners' 
testimony.  After examining the documents and the examin-
ers' testimony we find that several of them do so.  Even so, a 
privilege might beat the Jencks claim.  See Norinsberg Corp. 
v. USDA, 47 F.3d 1224, 1229 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (presuming 
that, in a license revocation hearing in which the agency had 
adopted the Jencks Act, a witness's opinions in a report that 
formed part of the deliberative process would be protected 
from Jencks Act disclosure);  see also Communist Party, 254 
F.2d at 327.  But see Jencks, 353 U.S. at 671-72 (noting that 
criminal actions must be dismissed when the government 
chooses not to comply with a court order to produce relevant 
statements or reports on the ground of privilege).  But the 
FDIC here makes no claim that privilege defeats its Jencks 
obligations--though the ALJ did.

     The FDIC does, however, claim harmless error, and the 
claim is sound.  Because these documents merely duplicate 
other evidence in the record, we find the error harmless even 
under the strict application of harmless error used to assess 
Jencks violations.  See Norinsberg Corp., 47 F.3d at 1230;  
United States v. Lam Kwong-Wah, 924 F.2d 298, 310 (D.C. 
Cir. 1991).

            Evidence Satisfying the Statutory Standard

     The statute authorizes a prohibition or removal order:

          Whenever the [FDIC] determines that--
     
     (A) any institution-affiliated party has, directly or indi-
     rectly--
     
          ...
               (ii) engaged or participated in any unsafe or unsound 
     practice in connection with any insured depository insti-
     tution or business institution;  or
     
          (iii) committed or engaged in any act, omission, or 
     practice which constitutes a breach of such party's fidu-
     ciary duty;
     
     (B) by reason of the violation, practice, or breach de-
     scribed in ... subparagraph (A)--
     
          (i) such ... institution ... has suffered or will proba-
     bly suffer financial loss or other damage;
           ...
          (iii) such party has received financial gain or other 
     benefit by reason of such violation ...;  and
     
     (C) such violation, practice, or breach--
     
          (i) involves personal dishonesty on the part of such 
     party;  or
     
          (ii) demonstrates willful or continuing disregard by 
     such party for the safety or soundness of such ... 
     institution....
     
12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1) (1994).  That is, the statute requires:  
misconduct, with certain adverse effects, committed with a 
culpable state of mind.  Landry argues that each of these 
three factors is absent.

     Misconduct.  The Board ruled that Landry's actions consti-
tuted both unsafe and unsound banking practices under 
s 1818(e)(1)(A)(ii) and breaches of his fiduciary duty under 
s 1818(e)(1)(A)(iii).  Because there is significant overlap be-
tween the two categories, see Kaplan v. OTS, 104 F.3d 417, 
421 & n.2 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (recognizing that both involve 
undue risk and that a fiduciary breach can qualify as an 
unsafe or unsound practice), it is unsurprising that the Board 
found that most of Landry's misconduct fit into both catego-
ries.  Landry argues that fiduciary breach is a matter of state 

rather than federal law, an issue we left open in Kaplan v. 
OTS, 104 F.3d 417, 421 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  see also Atherton 
v. FDIC, 519 U.S. 213, 217-26 (1997), as we do again today:  
the evidence is enough to show his participation in unsafe or 
unsound practices.

     In Kaplan we suggested that an "unsafe or unsound prac-
tice" was one that posed a "reasonably foreseeable" "undue 
risk to the institution."  104 F.3d at 421.  Other courts seem 
to have agreed, using slightly different language.  The Third 
Circuit in In re Seidman, 37 F.3d 911 (3d Cir. 1994), for 
example, said that an "imprudent act ... pos[ing] an abnor-
mal risk to the financial stability of the banking institution" 
would qualify.  Id. at 928.  We trust that "undue" risks are 
abnormal in the banking industry, so we see no difference 
there.  Plunging ahead with such a risk where its character is 
"reasonably foreseeable" surely constitutes the imprudence of 
which the Third Circuit speaks.

     The acts attributable to Landry meet both parts of the test.  
The ALJ's and the Board's findings leave no doubt as to their 
imprudence.  After a thorough review of the transactions we 
summarized above, the Board correctly concluded:  "The list 
of misguided and aborted projects and relationships that 
management entered into with minimal information and virtu-
ally no expertise is shocking."  That these activities exposed 
the Bank to abnormal risk is also unassailable.  Conduct 
attributable to Landry included substantial involvement in at 
least one large loan to an uncreditworthy out-of-territory 
borrower, long-term contracts with consultants whose fees 
were "proportionately greater than the services rendered," 
and the use of Bank funds for travel and related expenses in 
pursuit of breathtakingly irresponsible schemes.  In the 
Bank's weakened condition, these expenditures created an 
undue and abnormal risk of insolvency.  As the FDIC Board 
found:

     [R]ather than preserve the Bank's few remaining assets, 
     Landry chose to dissipate them in furtherance of his 
     personal takeover of the Bank.
     
          ... [Landry] failed to disclose that Bank funds were 
     being spent in furtherance of Pangaea and IAIS [a 
     partnership intended to be used for the immigration law 
     scheme].  He failed to disclose the contracts and certain 
     uncreditworthy loans to which he or Jenson had commit-
     ted the Bank, or the fee-splitting arrangements, which 
     benefited him and Pangaea to the Bank's detriment.
     
Order at 26, J.A. at 243.

     Landry argues that the continuing profitability of the Bank 
during the relevant period forecloses a finding of undue risk, 
but in so arguing he misconstrues the concept of risk, which 
is independent of the outcome in a particular case.  Just as a 
loss, without more, does not prove that an act posed an 
abnormal risk, see Johnson v. OTS, 81 F.3d 195, 204 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996), a profit does not establish its absence.

     Effects.  The Board found that Landry's misdeeds had the 
forbidden effects, see Order at 29-30, J.A. at 246-47, because 
they caused both financial loss to the Bank, see 18 U.S.C. 
s 1818(e)(1)(B)(i), and personal financial gain for Landry, see 
id. s 1818(e)(1)(B)(iii).  The losses consisted of $278,000 in 
expenses paid by the Bank in promoting Pangaea, and 
$174,900 in loan write-offs.  Order at 29, J.A. at 246.  (Al-
though relatively small in relation to large-scale banking 
transactions, these expenses constitute over 12% of the 
amount ultimately used to recapitalize the bank.)  Landry 
argues that none of the loans that yielded losses are properly 
attributed to him, but his method is simply to show that most 
of the misconduct at issue consisted of actions more directly 
attributable to his co-incorporators.  Section 1818(e) autho-
rizes punishment for actions taken "directly or indirectly."  
So long as the misconduct at issue meets the stringent 
preconditions for a removal order it doesn't matter that 
Landry engaged in many of the proscribed acts only indirect-
ly, though knowingly, and certainly not that others may have 
been more guilty.

     Landry also argues that his expenses cannot be considered 
losses because they were approved by the appropriate Bank 
officers and the Bank's shareholders.  But these approvals 
were tainted, even assuming they could otherwise salvage the 

expenses.  Landry's own letters show that he understood that 
his expenses and those of his co-incorporators were incurred 
on behalf of Pangaea to the detriment of the Bank, without 
the shareholders' having understood the fact.

     Culpability.  The Board found that Landry's misconduct 
doubly satisfied the culpability prong because it involved both 
personal dishonesty, see 12 U.S.C. s 1818(e)(1)(C)(i), and 
willful or continuing disregard for the safety or soundness of 
the Bank, see id. s 1818(e)(1)(C)(iii).  The courts of appeals 
that have examined the question are in agreement that both 
standards of culpability require some showing of scienter.  
See Kim v. OTS, 40 F.3d 1050, 1054-55 (9th Cir. 1994) 
(collecting cases).  We have no trouble upholding the finding 
of personal dishonesty.  In his letters and deposition testimo-
ny Landry repeatedly admitted that he solicited money for 
Pangaea in the guise of seeking capital for the Bank.  See 
Order at 31-32, J.A. at 248-49.  Knowing participation in a 
scheme that used the Bank's funds for personal gain while 
representing the scheme as the Bank's own, above-board plan 
to recapitalize itself qualifies as personal dishonesty.  See 
Greenberg v. Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 
968 F.2d 164, 171 (2d Cir. 1992) (finding that failure to 
disclose insider transactions provided ample support for a 
finding of personal dishonesty);  Van Dyke v. Board of Gover-
nors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 876 F.2d 1377, 1379 (8th Cir. 
1989) (accepting the Board's definition of personal dishonesty 
which included "deliberate deception by pretense and stealth" 
and "want of fairness and [straightforwardness]" (alteration 
in original)).

     Landry offers two arguments against this finding.  First, 
he claims that a requirement that a bank control transaction 
must secure approval by the bank's directors and by regu-
lators "provide[s] the ultimate assurance of fairness that 
precludes a sanction against Landry," citing Kaplan, 104 F.2d 
at 424.  In Kaplan, however, we said only that when a 
director cast a vote in favor of an arguably risky transaction, 
his anticipation of the need for board and regulatory approval 
afforded "reasonable assurance that an unfair transaction 
would not take place."  Id.  There the vote was completely 

independent of a later scheme by others to circumvent the 
OTS's and the S&L board's approval processes.  Id. at 422.  
Here, Landry and his co-incorporators' conduct, when viewed 
ex ante, was far from blameless.  Instead, it accomplished the 
step missing in Kaplan by disguising wrongdoing from the 
regulators and the Bank's board of directors and directly 
misleading both.

     Second, Landry argues, once again, that the Bank's approv-
al of his expenses, and the failure of its board of directors and 
the FDIC to seek to remove him after fully initially examin-
ing the transactions at issue here, proves that he did not act 
dishonestly.  But neither the independent audits commis-
sioned by the Bank after the recapitalization, nor Landry's 
cooperation with the 1993 examination, eliminate his prior 
involvement as a co-incorporator and participant in the 
scheme.  His later honesty, forthrightness, and integrity are 
to be commended, and his continued employment at the Bank 
show that its management found that his role in the Pangaea 
scheme was outweighed by the benefits he offered the Bank.  
But we do not have the power to substitute our judgment--or 
the Bank's management's--for that of the FDIC.  Once we 
conclude that Landry's conduct satisfies the statutory precon-
ditions, we must uphold its decision.

     Landry also argues that the FDIC reached its decision 
without taking account of exculpatory evidence.  It is well 
established that the substantial evidence rule requires consid-
eration of the evidence on both sides;  evidence that is sub-
stantial viewed in isolation may become insubstantial when 
contradictory evidence is taken into account.  See Universal 
Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 488 (1951);  Johnson v. 
OTS, 81 F.3d 195, 204 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  But here the 
evidence to which Landry points is not exculpatory;  it shows 
no more than that Landry had a lesser role than others in the 
individual actions taken in furtherance of the illegal scheme 
and that many of his actions were approved by the Bank.  
The FDIC Board did consider these factors, however, and its 
findings on all relevant facts are adequately supported by 
record evidence, including Landry's own statements.

     Last, Landry says that the Board failed to provide ade-
quate record citations for its factual findings.  Indeed, Lan-
dry is correct that several critical findings lack record cita-
tion.  Such omissions might render an agency's reasoning 
incomprehensible, possibly requiring a remand.  See general-
ly SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196 (1947) ("If the 
administrative action is to be tested by the basis upon which 
it purports to rest, that basis must be set forth with such 
clarity as to be understandable.").  But here the FDIC Board 
explicitly adopted the ALJ's findings of fact which, in turn, 
contained ample record citations for the factual findings that 
Landry disputes.

                             *  *  *

     For the foregoing reasons, Landry's petition for review is

                                                          Denied.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and concur-
ring in the judgment:  I join the court's opinion except for its 
disposition of Landry's claim under the Appointments Clause 
of the Constitution.  In my view, Freytag v. Commissioner, 
501 U.S. 868 (1991), cannot be distinguished.  The Adminis-
trative Law Judge who presided over Landry's case was as 
much an "inferior Officer" under Article II, s 2, cl. 2 of the 
Constitution as the special trial judge in Freytag.  I never-
theless would sustain the FDIC's decision and order because 
Landry suffered no prejudicial error.

     Rather than paraphrase the critical portion of Freytag, I 
will quote it in full:

     Petitioners argue that a special trial judge is an "inferior 
     Office[r]" of the United States....
     
          The Commissioner, in contrast to petitioners, argues 
     that a special trial judge ... acts only as an aide to the 
     Tax Court judge responsible for deciding the case.  The 
     special trial judge, as the Commissioner characterizes his 
     work, does no more than assist the Tax Court judge in 
     taking the evidence and preparing the proposed findings 
     and opinion.  Thus, the Commissioner concludes, special 
     trial judges ... are employees rather than "Officers of 
     the United States."
     
          "[A]ny appointee exercising significant authority pur-
     suant to the laws of the United States is an 'Officer of 
     the United States,' and must, therefore, be appointed in 
     the manner prescribed by s 2, cl. 2, of [Article II]."  
     Buckley [v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 126 (1976)]. The two courts 
     that have addressed the issue have held that special trial 
     judges are "inferior Officers."  The Tax Court so con-
     cluded in First Western Govt. Securities, Inc. v. Commis-
     sioner, 94 T.C. 549, 557-559 (1990), and the Court of 
     Appeals for the Second Circuit in Samuels, Kramer & 
     Co. v. Commissioner, 930 F.2d 975, 985 (1991), agreed.  
     Both courts considered the degree of authority exercised 
     by the special trial judges to be so "significant" that it 
     was inconsistent with the classifications of "lesser func-
     tionaries" or employees.  Cf. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. 
     United States, 282 U.S. 344, 352-353 (1931) (United 
     States commissioners are inferior officers).  We agree 
     
     with the Tax Court and the Second Circuit that a special 
     trial judge is an "inferior Office[r]" whose appointment 
     must conform to the Appointments Clause.
     
          The Commissioner reasons that special trial judges 
     may be deemed employees in subsection (b)(4) cases 
     because they lack authority to enter a final decision.  But 
     this argument ignores the significance of the duties and 
     discretion that special trial judges possess.  The office of 
     special trial judge is "established by Law," Art. II, s 2, 
     cl. 2, and the duties, salary, and means of appointment 
     for that office are specified by statute.  See Burnap v. 
     United States, 252 U.S. 512, 516-517 (1920);  United 
     States v. Germaine, 99 U.S. 508, 511-512 (1879). These 
     characteristics distinguish special trial judges from spe-
     cial masters, who are hired by Article III courts on a 
     temporary, episodic basis, whose positions are not estab-
     lished by law, and whose duties and functions are not 
     delineated in a statute.  Furthermore, special trial 
     judges perform more than ministerial tasks.  They take 
     testimony, conduct trials, rule on the admissibility of 
     evidence, and have the power to enforce compliance with 
     discovery orders.  In the course of carrying out these 
     important functions, the special trial judges exercise 
     significant discretion.
     
          Even if the duties of special trial judges [just de-
     scribed] were not as significant as we and the two courts 
     have found them to be, our conclusion would be un-
     changed [because they may be assigned to conduct other 
     types of proceedings and render independent judg-
     ments]....  Special trial judges are not inferior officers 
     for purposes of some of their duties ... but mere 
     employees with respect to other responsibilities.
     
501 U.S. at 880-82.

     There are no relevant differences between the ALJ in this 
case and the special trial judge in Freytag.  Both held offices 
"established by Law," Art. II, s 2, cl. 2;  501 U.S. at 881.  In 
both instances, "the duties, salary, and means of appointment 
for that office are specified by statute."  Id.;  see maj. op. at 

12.  Both "take testimony, conduct trials, rule on the admissi-
bility of evidence, and have the power to enforce compliance 
with discovery orders."  501 U.S. at 881-82;  Samuels, 930 
F.2d at 986;  see 12 C.F.R. s 308.5 (defining the ALJ's 
duties).  "In the course of carrying out these important 
functions," both the special trial judge in Freytag and the 
ALJ in this case "exercise significant discretion."  501 U.S. at 
882.

     The majority attempts to distinguish Freytag on two 
grounds.  Neither survives close attention.  First, the majori-
ty says that the Tax Court, in reviewing the special trial 
judge's "non-final decision" in Freytag, gave deference to 
factual and credibility findings pursuant to Tax Court Rule 
183(c), whereas the FDIC reviewed the ALJ's decision de 
novo.  Maj. op. at 11.  It would be odd for the constitutional 
status of a special trial judge to depend on an internal rule of 
procedure, particularly since the Tax Court had discretion to 
pick whatever standard of review it saw fit.  See 26 U.S.C. 
s 7443A(c).  Odd or not, the Supreme Court in Freytag 
decided that Tax Court Rule 183 and its deferential standard 
were "not relevant to our grant of certiorari"--and the Court 
granted the writ, so it explained, in order "to resolve the 
important questions the litigation raises about the Constitu-
tion's structural separation of powers."  501 U.S. at 874 n.3, 
873.1  The majority's first distinction of Freytag is thus no 
distinction at all.  The fact that an ALJ cannot render a final 
decision and is subject to the ultimate supervision of the 

__________
     1 There was doubt, despite this court's decision in Stone v. 
Commissioner, 865 F.2d 342, 344-47 (D.C. Cir. 1989), whether the 
Tax Court had authority to provide by rule that it would give 
deference to special trial judge decisions rendered after an assign-
ment pursuant to 26 U.S.C. s 7443A(b)(4).  The Tax Court derived 
its rulemaking authority from s 7443A(c), but on its face that 
provision applied only to assignments under (b)(1) through (b)(3).  
Hence, the petitioners in Freytag argued that "Congress did not 
intend for Tax Court supervision of special trial judge findings and 
opinions in (b)(4) cases to be appellate in nature."  Brief for 
Petitioners, 1991 WL 521270, at *22, Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 
U.S. 868 (1991) (No. 90-762).  The Supreme Court avoided deciding 
the issue by deeming Rule 183 irrelevant to its disposition.

FDIC shows only that the ALJ shares the common character-
istic of an "inferior Officer."  "[W]e think it evident that 
'inferior officers' are officers whose work is directed and 
supervised at some level by others who were appointed by 
Presidential nomination with the advice and consent of the 
Senate."  Edmond v. United States, 520 U.S. 651, 663 (1997).

     According to the majority opinion, the second difference 
between this case and Freytag is that here the ALJ can never 
render final decisions of the FDIC, whereas special trial 
judges could, in cases other than the sort involved in Freytag, 
render a final decision of the Tax Court.  See maj. op. at 11, 
12-13.  It is true that the Supreme Court relied on this 
consideration;  the last paragraph of the opinion quoted above 
indicates as much.  What the majority neglects to mention is 
that the Court clearly designated this as an alternative hold-
ing.  The Court introduced its alternative holding thus:  
"Even if the duties of special trial judges [just described] 
were not as significant as we and the two courts have found 
them to be, our conclusion would be unchanged."  501 U.S. at 
882 (italics added).  What "conclusion" did the Court have in 
mind?  The conclusion it had reached in the preceding para-
graphs--namely, that although special trial judges may not 
render final decisions, they are nevertheless inferior officers 
of the United States within the meaning of Article II, s 2, cl. 
2.  The same conclusion, the same holding, had also been 
rendered in Samuels, Kramer & Co. v. Commissioner, 930 
F.2d 975, 986 (2d Cir. 1991), a decision the Supreme Court 
cited and expressly approved.  See 501 U.S. at 881.  There 
the Second Circuit held that a special trial judge performing 
the same advisory function as the judge in Freytag was an 
inferior officer;  the court of appeals did not mention the fact 
that in other types of cases, the judge could issue final 
judgments.2

__________
     2 The Second Circuit reached this conclusion for the same reasons 
given in the third full paragraph of Freytag quoted in the text:

     The special trial judges are more than mere aids to the judges 
     of the Tax Court.  They take testimony, conduct trials, rule on 
     
     That the ALJ in this case is an inferior officer thus follows 
from Freytag.  It follows also from the Supreme Court's 
recognition that the role of the modern administrative law 
judge "is 'functionally comparable' to that of a judge....  He 
may issue subpoenas, rule on proffers of evidence, regulate 
the course of the hearing, and make or recommend decisions.  
See [5 U.S.C.] s 556(c)."  Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. 478, 
513 (1978) (emphasis added).  Furthermore, the ALJ, in 
proposing findings of fact and a recommended decision, which 
the FDIC reviewed de novo,3 performed functions essentially 
like those of a federal magistrate assigned to conduct a 
hearing and to submit proposed findings and recommenda-
tions to a district judge.  See 28 U.S.C. s 636(b)(1)(B).  When 
there is an objection to a magistrate's findings and recom-
mendations, the district judge--like the FDIC--must conduct 
de novo review.  See 28 U.S.C. s 636(b)(1)(C).  Nonetheless, 
it has long been settled that federal magistrates are "inferior 
Officers" under Article II, which is why they are appointed by 
"Courts of Law" under 28 U.S.C. s 631.  See Rice v. Ames, 
180 U.S. 371, 378 (1901);  Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United 
States, 282 U.S. 344, 352-54 (1931);  Pacemaker Diagnostic 

__________
     the admissibility of evidence, and have the power to enforce 
     compliance with discovery orders.  Contrary to the contentions 
     of the Commissioner, the degree of authority exercised by 
     special trial judges is "significant."  See Buckley [v. Valeo, 424 
     U.S. 1, 126 (1976)]. They exercise a great deal of discretion and 
     perform important functions, characteristics that we find to be 
     inconsistent with the classifications of "lesser functionary" or 
     mere employee.  Cf. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 
     282 U.S. 344, 352 (1931) (United States commissioners are 
     inferior officers).
     
930 F.2d at 986.

     3 De novo review does not mean that the ALJ's recommended 
decisions are without influence.  In this case the FDIC "affirm[ed] 
the recommendation of the ALJ and adopt[ed] his Recommended 
Decision, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, as discussed 
herein."  In re Landry, FDIC-95-65e, 1999 WL 440608, at *4 
(FDIC May 25, 1999).

Clinic v. Instromedix, 725 F.2d 537, 545 (9th Cir. 1984) (en 
banc).

     Because the ALJ in this case was an "inferior Officer," the 
next question would ordinarily be whether he was duly ap-
pointed by the President, a Court of Law, or the Head of a 
Department, as Article II requires.  The FDIC assumed that 
the ALJ was an inferior officer and ruled that he was 
properly appointed, having been hired by the Office of Thrift 
Supervision and assigned to this case by the Office of 
Financial Institution Adjudication.  See In re Landry, 
FDIC-95-65e, 1999 WL 440608, at *28 & n.37 (FDIC May 25, 
1999).  In this court, the FDIC has given up on this claim.  
For reasons it did not explain, it expressly abandoned the 
argument that the ALJ was appointed by the head of a 
department.  See Brief for Respondent at 48 n.32.  I accept 
that as a waiver of the defense.  It is true that "one who 
makes a timely challenge to the constitutional validity of the 
appointment of an officer who adjudicates his case is entitled 
to a decision on the merits of the question and whatever relief 
might be appropriate if a violation indeed occurred."  Ryder 
v. United States, 515 U.S. 177, 182-83 (1995).  But I do not 
take this salutary rule to mean that a court may not accept a 
concession from the party defending the appointment.

     The remaining question then is what relief is appropriate.  
Given the FDIC's de novo review and the majority's thorough 
rejection of Landry's various claims of error,4 I am persuaded 
that he suffered no prejudice.  The Administrative Procedure 
Act contains a harmless error rule.  See 5 U.S.C. s 706;  
Doolin Sec. Sav. Bank, F.S.B. v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 
139 F.3d 203, 212 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  The majority suggests 

__________
     4 On some points, the FDIC supplied different rationales to reach 
the same conclusions as the ALJ and on other matters the FDIC 
reached different conclusions. See, e.g., In re Landry, 1999 WL 
440608, at *33 (ordering release of certain documents withheld by 
the ALJ under the due process privilege).  In the end, the conclu-
sive evidence came from Landry himself.  See, e.g., id. at *13-14 
(reproducing portions of Landry's resignation letter to the bank).

that harmless error cannot apply because the constitutional 
violation is "structural" in nature.  But as the majority 
acknowledges, in none of the "structural" cases it cites was 
there de novo review.  See maj. op. at 8.  Still, the majority 
reasons that "[i]f the process of final de novo review could 
cleanse the violation of its harmful impact, then all such 
arrangements could escape judicial review."  Id. at 8-9.  The 
majority is not correct about this.  The rule in Ryder, quoted 
in the preceding paragraph, requires us to decide the Ap-
pointments Clause claim first, before we reach the question of 
relief.  If we had done so correctly here, our decision would 
have been, in effect, a declaratory judgment that an ALJ 
sitting on a case such as this had to be appointed by the head 
of a department.  Such a judgment would have been the 
"practical equivalent" of mandamus, as we said in Sanchez-
Espinoza v. Reagan, 770 F.2d 202, 208 n.8 (D.C. Cir. 1985).  
If any litigant in the future wished to challenge the ALJ's 
status before trial, mandamus would lie.  Or a litigant could 
refuse to present evidence before an unconstitutional officer, 
or refuse to comply with an ALJ's discovery orders, and 
bring the case here for review after the FDIC acted.  See 
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 668 (1988).  Then there 
would be real prejudice.  Here there is none and I therefore 
join in the denial of Landry's petition for judicial review.

            