                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 7, 2002   Decided January 10, 2003 

                           No. 01-1331

                        Randy Steenholdt, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Federal Aviation Administration, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                 Federal Aviation Administration

     Jason A. Dickstein argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioner.

     Kenneth G. Caplan, Special Attorney to the Attorney Gen-
eral, Federal Aviation Administration, argued the cause for 
respondent.  On the brief was R. Brooke Lewis, Special 
Attorney to the Attorney General.

     Before:  Sentelle, Rogers and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner Randy Steenholdt 
challenges the decision of the Federal Aviation Administra-
tion ("FAA") not to renew his authority to examine certain 
aircraft repairs for compliance with the FAA's airworthiness 
regulations.  Because the decision is "committed to agency 
discretion by law," 5 U.S.C. s 701(a)(2) (1996), we have no 
jurisdiction to review the substance of the FAA's decision.  
Petitioner also argues that the Administration failed to follow 
its own procedures.  Insofar as there was any such failure, it 
was without prejudice to any right of the Petitioner, and we 
therefore deny the petition for review.

                                I

     The Federal Aviation Act ("FA Act") provides that the 
FAA Administrator "may delegate to a qualified private 
person ... the examination, testing, and inspection neces-
sary" to issue certificates identifying aircraft as compliant 
with the standards set forth in the Federal Aviation Regula-
tions, and may "rescind this delegation ... at any time for 
any reason."  49 U.S.C. s 44702(d) (1997).  The Administra-
tor has appointed a network of private individuals to serve as 
Designated Engineering Representatives ("DERs"), who per-
form certain examinations, tests, and inspections required to 
determine compliance with FAA airworthiness regulations.  
The Administrator has delegated the authority to select 
DERs to Managers of local Aircraft Certification Offices 
("ACOs").  14 C.F.R. s 183.11 (2002).  DER appointments 
are for one-year periods and may be renewed for additional 
one-year periods at the Administrator's discretion.  14 C.F.R. 
s 183.15.

     The FAA evaluates a DER's performance annually to 
determine whether that DER is performing at a satisfactory 
level.  If the DER's performance is not satisfactory, the FAA 
may take corrective action ranging from counseling to nonre-
newal.  14 C.F.R. s 183.15 lists the circumstances under 
which the FAA may choose not to renew a DER's designa-

tion.  The regulation recites five specific bases for termi-
nation, and a sixth open-ended basis:  "[f]or any reason the 
Administration considers appropriate."  14 C.F.R. 
s 183.15(6).  If the DER requests review of that decision, a 
first-level review is conducted by the appointing ACO Manag-
er.  If the DER seeks further review, a second-level review is 
conducted by the Manager of the Directorate.  Designated 
Engineering Representative (DER) Guidance Handbook, 
FAA Order No. 8110.37C p 706 (Sept. 30, 1998).

     In 1991, the Administrator issued Order 8130.24 "establish-
ing ... procedures for the termination or nonrenewal of the 
certificate" for among others, a designated engineering repre-
sentative.  The order recites as a purpose that "these proce-
dures are intended to ensure that due process is accorded 
before a final decision is made on termination or nonrenewal 
of the ... designations."  FAA Order 8130.24, p 1.  The 
order, by its terms, specifies "conditions that may require the 
termination of a designation or delegation and list[s] the 
procedures that field offices should employ to accomplish such 
actions."  FAA Order 8130.24, p 4(b).  The order notes that 
the FAA developed the procedures therein because "designa-
tion holder[s] must be provided with adequate notice and 
afforded the opportunity to respond to the proposed action."  
FAA Order 8130.24, p 4c.

     The order directs that the appropriate FAA office will 
provide written notice to the DER of the proposed nonrenew-
al of the designation.  The notice "shall include" among other 
things the "[s]pecific reasons for the proposed ... nonrenew-
al, including examples of unacceptable conduct, when applica-
ble" and "permission to request reconsideration."  FAA Or-
der 8130.24, p 6a(1).

     Upon reconsideration, if the Manager of the ACO confirms 
the proposed nonrenewal, he will send a letter to the DER, 
clearly stating "the decision and the justification therefor" 
and responding "to each of the arguments presented by the 
[DER]."  FAA Order 8130.24, p 6a(4).  The letter shall also 
state that the DER is permitted to request second-level 

review with the Directorate Manager responsible for the 
relevant ACO.  Id.

     If second-level review occurs and the Directorate Manager 
concurs in the decision not to renew the DER, the Director-
ate Manager will send a letter to the DER "reciting the final 
decision and justification."  FAA Order 8130.24, p 6b(2).  The 
letter will "respond to each of the arguments presented by 
the [DER]."  Id.  In addition, the letter will state that the 
FAA's decision is final but that the DER may petition for 
review in a U.S. Court of Appeals within 60 days.  Id.

     In 1992, Petitioner Steenholdt received designation from 
the Chicago ACO as a Company DER for Northwest Airlines, 
authorizing him to operate as a DER only for Northwest 
Airlines.  Gregory Michalik, Airframe Branch Manager of the 
Chicago ACO, was appointed as Petitioner's FAA Advisor.  
Shortly thereafter, Petitioner received his Consultant DER 
authorization, which allowed him to offer DER services to 
others seeking such services.  Michalik served as Petitioner's 
FAA Advisor for Petitioner's Consultant designation as well.

     In November of 1995, oversight of Petitioner's work as a 
Consultant DER was transferred to Manzoor Javed.  Peti-
tioner and Javed did not get along well and had disputes 
about the quality of Petitioner's work.  Some of Petitioner's 
clients began complaining about Javed, and Javed began 
writing unfavorable reviews of Petitioner's work.  By Sep-
tember of 1997, the FAA had become concerned about Peti-
tioner's work.  Javed and ACO engineer Joe McGarvey re-
ported that Petitioner had exceeded the authority of his 
designation by approving a repair for an engine anti-icing 
valve attachment when his authorization included only air-
frame repairs.  Further, the ACO found that Petitioner did 
not address the problem fully in his submittals to the FAA.

     In 1998, the ACO reported further problems with Petition-
er's work.  In February of 1998, Petitioner attended a coun-
seling meeting regarding the quality of his work and his 
performance as a DER.  Subsequently, Javed and McGarvey 
stated that Petitioner failed to properly apply the Federal 
Aviation Regulations, failed to show sound judgment in his 

submittals, and failed to include sketches and figures in his 
engineering analyses.  They recommended that Petitioner 
attend another counseling meeting.

     The ACO reported that Petitioner's work continued to 
deteriorate in 1999.  Javed reported that Petitioner failed to 
show sound judgment or sound technical competence with 
respect to a project involving the landing weight of an air-
craft.  Around this time, Javed recommended that Petition-
er's designation be limited to repairs.  (Originally, Petitioner 
had both repair and alteration authority.)  McGarvey went so 
far as to recommend that Petitioner's Consultant DER desig-
nation not be renewed.  The FAA did renew Petitioner's 
Consultant DER designation at this time but limited his 
authorization to repairs only.

     In 2000, after further unsatisfactory reviews, Javed recom-
mended nonrenewal of Petitioner's designation, stating that 
his "DER performance is lacking in spite of two face-to-face 
meetings within the last two years.  He requires excessive 
oversight[,] compromising the purpose of the Designee Sys-
tem.  In order to maintain the integrity of the Designee 
System, I recommend his DER appointment should not be 
renewed."  (Letter from Prather to Dickstein of 1/11/2001, at 
enclosure 6 (DER Performance Evaluation Form for period 
from August 1999 to September 2000, completed by Javed).)

     In September 2000, Petitioner's designation was renewed, 
but only for a period of three months.  On October 26, 2000, 
Mary Ellen Schutt (Manager of the Airframe & Administra-
tive branch of the Chicago ACO) notified Petitioner that she 
did not intend to renew his DER designation, effective Janu-
ary 1, 2001.  She listed several areas in which Petitioner's 
performance was lacking during the previous year and during 
the three years prior.  Schutt sent Petitioner a second letter, 
on November 1, 2000, highlighting specific problems with 
several of Petitioner's Engineering Authorization submittals.

     On November 6, 2000, Petitioner through counsel request-
ed reconsideration of Schutt's proposed nonrenewal.  Along 
with this request, Petitioner filed a list of points and answers 

to the points raised in Schutt's two letters relating to the 
proposed nonrenewal.  Petitioner also attached letters from a 
few of his clients, indicating that difficulties with Javed were 
the cause of Petitioner's apparently deteriorating perfor-
mance.

     On November 20, 2000, Schutt sent Petitioner a letter 
extending Petitioner's DER designation through September 
2001 while Petitioner's request for reconsideration awaited 
resolution.  On January 11, 2001, Royace Prather, Manager 
of the Chicago ACO, sent a letter to counsel for Petitioner 
responding to a letter requesting reconsideration of the 
FAA's proposal not to renew Petitioner's designation.  
Prather's letter rejected the request and confirmed that the 
FAA would not renew Steenholdt's consultant DER appoint-
ment beyond its then-current expiration date of March 1, 
2001.  Prather reviewed Petitioner's performance and stated 
that despite meetings and counseling, Petitioner "has not 
acted on the counseling provided him and his performance is 
still lacking in the key areas we identified in our previous 
letter of October 26, 2000."  (Letter from Prather to Dick-
stein of 1/11/01, at 1.)  Prather's letter included as enclosures 
several letters and evaluations of Petitioner that detailed 
problems with Petitioner's performance.  Prather included 
negative factual assertions about Petitioner that Schutt had 
not mentioned earlier in her recommendation of nonrenewal.  
Prather's letter also gave Petitioner notice that "standard 
procedure gives you permission to request a second level re-
consideration" by the Directorate Manager responsible for 
the local ACO.  (Id. at 5.)

     Petitioner, through counsel, sought second-level review 
with the Manager of the Small Airplane Directorate.  Peti-
tioner requested that the Directorate overturn the decision of 
the local ACO or allow Petitioner to meet with the Director-
ate Manager and to file a written document in support of his 
position.  (Petitioner's Notice of Appeal to Small Airplane 
Directorate of 2/12/01 (incorrectly marked as 2/12/00).)  The 
Directorate Manager responded to Petitioner's counsel by 
letter dated February 22, 2001.  The Directorate Manager 
stated that after reviewing all "available data on this matter," 

he "did not find sufficient evidence that the earlier decision 
for non-renewal be overturned."  (Letter from Gallagher to 
Dickstein of 2/22/01.)  The Directorate Manager offered Peti-
tioner the opportunity "to meet with the Manager of the 
Small Airplane Directorate, or his representative, should [the 
Directorate Manager] not be available" and requested that 
Petitioner file his supporting document prior to any such 
meeting.  (Id.)

     Petitioner submitted a document in support of his position 
on March 23, 2001.  On May 18, 2001, Petitioner, accompa-
nied by counsel, met with the Directorate Manager's repre-
sentative, Melvin Taylor, other ACO employees, and agency 
counsel.  At this meeting, Petitioner submitted evidence in 
support of his position.  Petitioner's counsel attempted to 
question Javed (who was in attendance);  however Taylor 
explained that Petitioner would not be permitted to question 
any FAA employees.  The FAA presented no evidence and 
made no argument.  At the conclusion of Petitioner's presen-
tation of evidence, Taylor directed Petitioner and his counsel 
to leave the room.  Agency personnel remained in the meet-
ing room to discuss Petitioner's case.

     On May 29, 2001, the Directorate Manager informed Peti-
tioner by letter that he was affirming the ACO's decision not 
to renew Petitioner's DER designation.  The Directorate 
Manager stated that he "considered all the available informa-
tion including that which [Petitioner] and [Petitioner's] attor-
ney presented at the [May 18] meeting."  (Letter from 
Gallagher to Petitioner of 5/29/01, at 1.)  The Directorate 
Manager stated that he had not found sufficient evidence to 
overturn the decision of the Chicago ACO and that "the 
decision to non-renew has been confirmed by this office based 
on [Petitioner's] DER performance in the following key areas:  
Integrity, Sound Judgement [sic], Cooperative Attitude;  Ap-
plication of Regulations, Policy, and Guidance;  Quality of 
Submittals;  and Adherence to DER Procedures."  (Id.)  The 
letter referenced five previous letters in which Petitioner's 
deficiencies were discussed at length.

     Petitioner filed a timely petition for review with this Court 
on July 27, 2001.  The FAA argues that this Court lacks 
jurisdiction to review its nonrenewal decision because both 
the substance and the procedure of that decision are commit-
ted to agency discretion by law.

                                II

                                A

     There is a strong presumption of reviewability under the 
Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), Abbott Labs. v. Gard-
ner, 387 U.S. 136, 140 (1967);  however, the APA expressly 
precludes judicial review of agency action "committed to 
agency discretion by law."  5 U.S.C. s 701(a)(2).  Agency 
action is committed to agency discretion by law when "the 
statute is drawn so that a court would have no meaningful 
standard against which to judge the agency's exercise of 
discretion."  Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 830 (1984).  If 
no "judicially manageable standard" exists by which to judge 
the agency's action, meaningful judicial review is impossible 
and the courts are without jurisdiction to review that action.  
Id.  This Court has noted that judicially manageable stan-
dards "may be found in formal and informal policy statements 
and regulations as well as in statutes."  Padula v. Webster, 
822 F.2d 97, 100 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  In determining whether 
agency statements create such a standard, the Court inquires 
whether the statements create binding norms by imposing 
rights or obligations on the respective parties.  Id.

     The FA Act very clearly commits the renewal/nonrenewal 
designation to agency discretion.  Section 44702(d)(2) empow-
ers the Administrator of the FAA to rescind a DER designa-
tion "at any time for any reason the Administrator considers 
appropriate."  The regulations promulgated pursuant to the 
FA Act also give the Administrator of the FAA unfettered 
discretion, in that they allow rescission of a designation "[f]or 
any reason the Administration considers appropriate."  14 
C.F.R. s 183.15(d)(6).  Although the exception to reviewabili-
ty created by the "committed to agency discretion by law" is 
a "narrow exception" applicable only where "statutes are 

drawn in such broad terms that in a given case there is no 
law to apply," Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe, 401 
U.S. 402, 410 (1970) (internal quotations omitted), this is just 
such a case.  With regard to the substance of the FAA's 
nonrenewal decision, there is no law to apply.  See Adams v. 
FAA, 1 F.3d 955, 956 (9th Cir. 1993);  Greenwood v. FAA, 28 
F.3d 971, 974-75 (9th Cir. 1994).

     Petitioner argues that the conclusive language of section 
701 of the APA applies only to bar review under the APA.  
Petitioner contends that section 46110 of the FA Act specifi-
cally provides for review of orders, like the one for which he 
seeks review in this case, "issued by the Secretary of Trans-
portation [or the Administrator of the FAA]."  49 U.S.C. 
s 46110(a).  He further contends that the "committed to 
agency discretion" bar of section 701 of the APA has no 
applicability to this independent basis of review.  We dis-
agree.  As the Ninth Circuit stated in Adams, "[a]lthough the 
chapter of the [FA] Act relevant to this case provides for 
judicial review of any order issued by the Board or Secretary 
of Transportation ..., there is no judicially-manageable stan-
dard by which we may review the FAA administrator's 
decision not to renew Adams' designation."  1 F.3d at 956.  
That chapter simply outlines judicial review of FAA orders 
generally;  49 U.S.C. s 46110 identifies who can apply for 
review, in what court review may be had, deadlines for filing, 
and so forth.

     Petitioner suggests that the "substantial evidence" stan-
dard in s 46110 provides us with a means to review the 
FAA's present decision.  However, this argument begs the 
question:  substantial evidence of what?  For any decision 
made by the Administrator, there will always be substantial 
evidence that the decision was made "at any time for any 
reason."  Because there are no constraints on the Adminis-
trator's discretion, there certainly are no judicially managea-
ble standards by which to judge the Administrator's action.  
Petitioner's mistake is that he confuses the presence of a 
standard of review with the existence of law to apply.  Were 
we to accept this as a basis for review of the Administrator's 
action, there would be "law to apply" in every agency action;  

no agency action could ever be committed to agency discre-
tion by law because the "substantial evidence" standard of 
section 706(2)(E) of the Administrative Procedure Act applies 
generally to all agency action.  Petitioner's interpretation 
would render section 701(a)(2) meaningless.

                                B

     In addition to arguing that the FAA erred in the substance 
of its decision, a subject over which we have no jurisdiction, 
Petitioner additionally asserts that the FAA failed to follow 
its own procedures - specifically, the procedures set out for 
the renewal of designations in FAA Order 8130.24.  In sup-
port of our jurisdiction to review this claim, Petitioner relies 
upon United States ex rel. Accardi v. Shaughnessy, 347 U.S. 
260 (1954).  The Accardi doctrine requires federal agencies to 
follow their own rules, even gratuitous procedural rules that 
limit otherwise discretionary actions.  "Courts, of course, 
have long required agencies to abide by internal, procedural 
regulations ... even when those regulations provide more 
protection than the Constitution or relevant civil service 
laws."  Doe v. United States Dep't of Justice, 753 F.2d 1092, 
1098 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (referring to employment regulations);  
see also American Farm Lines v. Black Ball Freight Serv., 
397 U.S. 532, 539 (1970).  However, Petitioner's allegation of 
procedural error avails him nothing.  Insofar as Petitioner 
demonstrates any violation of the procedures in Order 
8130.24, such violations are without prejudice, let alone sub-
stantial prejudice.

     Petitioner alleges several deficiencies in the FAA's review 
process.  He contends that the FAA ignored the arguments 
he made at his first-level review, and objects to what he 
perceives as the addition of new complaints against him at his 
first-level review.  Petitioner is incorrect.  The FAA's series 
of letters to Petitioner, including the final order, identify 
Petitioner's deficiencies generally and give specific examples.  
The final order lists Petitioner's problem areas and refers 
back to the prior letters to set forth the basis of the FAA's 
final decision.  In addition, the FAA clearly addresses Peti-

tioner's arguments in Prather's letter on first-level review.  
With regard to the allegedly new complaints lodged against 
Petitioner during first-level review, Petitioner claims that 
Prather raised issues about Petitioner's approval of a power-
plant part and about Petitioner's approval of certain certifica-
tion test plans.  However, it appears that Petitioner may 
have raised both of these issues initially.  (Letter from Dick-
stein to Small Airplane Directorate of 11/6/00, at 8 (raising 
powerplant part issue).)  It is unclear whether Petitioner or 
the FAA first raised the certification test plan issue.  Never-
theless, Petitioner has not shown that the addition of allega-
tions has prejudiced him to any extent.  Furthermore, noth-
ing in the FAA's rules precludes the ACO Manager from 
basing his determination on reasons not stated in the original 
proposal of nonrenewal.  Fried v. Hinson, 78 F.3d 688, 691 
(D.C. Cir. 1996).

     With regard to second-level review, Petitioner again con-
tends that the FAA failed to address his arguments.  Peti-
tioner also argues that the FAA failed to identify any specific 
reasons for its decision.  These arguments fail for the same 
reasons as Petitioner's similar arguments with respect to the 
first-level review.

     Petitioner also claims that the FAA failed to maintain a 
record of the second-level review meeting.  In addition, Peti-
tioner objects to the FAA refusal to permit him to question 
FAA personnel present at the second-level review meeting, to 
the Directorate Manager's failure to attend the meeting, and 
to what Petitioner perceives as ex parte communications 
among FAA personnel after the meeting.

     With regard to these claims, it appears that Petitioner 
mistakes the FAA's review process for a formal adjudication.  
Petitioner identifies no FAA rule that gives him a right to 
question FAA personnel at review meetings, nor does he 
explain how he is prejudiced by the Directorate Manager's 
absence from the meeting or by the alleged ex parte commu-
nications.  Similarly, with respect to the possibly weak record 
of the second-level review hearing, Petitioner (who was pres-
ent at the meeting) has presented no theory under which the 

weak record prejudiced his opportunity to access the proce-
dures of the FAA.

     In sum, the FAA acted in substantial compliance with its 
gratuitous procedural rules, and any departure therefrom was 
in no way prejudicial to Petitioner.  Petitioner had notice of 
and an opportunity to respond to all allegations at every step 
in the FAA's process.  Because Petitioner has not been 
prejudiced by the FAA's alleged departure from its gratu-
itous procedures, the Accardi doctrine - even if it provides an 
independent basis for review in other cases (a question we 
need not answer today) - does not give Petitioner a basis for 
review.

                               III

     In sum, we lack jurisdiction to review the FAA's decision 
not to renew Petitioner's DER designation.  As to Petition-
er's allegation of violations of the FAA's own procedure, we 
find none that cause him any substantial prejudice.  Accord-
ingly, we deny the petition for review.

                                     