                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 20, 2001     Decided May 4, 2001 

                           No. 00-1020

                       DEK Energy Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

                 Pan-Alberta Gas, Ltd., et al., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     MaryJane Reynolds argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioner.

     Beth G. Pacella, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 

the brief was Dennis Lane, Solicitor.  Susan J. Court, Spe-
cial Counsel, entered an appearance.

     John R. Staffier argued the cause for intervenors Pan-
Alberta Gas, Ltd., et al.  With him on the brief were Marisa 
A. Sifontes, Mary Ann Walker and Lee A. Alexander.  Neil 
L. Levy, Carl M. Fink and Stefan M. Krantz entered appear-
ances.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  This dispute arises out of a 
proposal to restructure a contractual relationship providing 
for the transportation and sale of gas from Pan-Alberta 
Natural Gas Ltd. in Canada ("Pan-Alberta") to Southern 
California Gas Company ("SoCal").  Petitioner DEK Energy 
Company, which sells gas in Northern California, objects to 
one element of the transaction.  Under the restructuring, an 
entitlement to ship 244,000 million Btu ("MMBtu") per day of 
gas from the Canadian border to Stanfield, Oregon was 
transferred from Pacific Interstate Transmission Company to 
Pan-Alberta's affiliate, Pan-Alberta Gas (U.S.), Inc. ("Pan-
Alberta-US").  DEK objects that, pursuant to the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission's approval, Pan-Alberta-US 
will enjoy a lower rate for this service than DEK believes 
would prevail if FERC had not made various legal errors.  
DEK claims that it will suffer a competitive injury if the gas 
in question ends up being sold in Northern California.  Be-
cause DEK has not shown that any competitive injury is more 
than highly speculative, we dismiss the petition for want of 
Article III standing.

                              * * *

     Under a now superseded agreement, Pan-Alberta sold 
244,000 MMBtu per day of Canadian gas to Northwest Alas-
kan Pipeline Company.  Northwest Alaskan then sold it to 
the Pacific Interstate Transmission Company, a wholly owned 
SoCal subsidiary that had been created as a middleman to 
overcome regulatory restrictions on gas purchases at an 

international border by local distribution companies such as 
SoCal.  Pacific Interstate Transmission used facilities of Pa-
cific Gas & Electric Company Gas Transmission, Northwest 
Corporation ("PG&E GT-NW") to deliver the gas to Stan-
field, Oregon.  Thereafter the gas traveled on other pipelines 
through Ignacio, Colorado to the Arizona/California border 
and SoCal's California transmission system.  To fulfill its 
delivery obligations for the leg of the journey from the 
Canadian border to Stanfield, Oregon, Pacific Interstate 
Transmission held 244,000 MMBtu per day capacity on the 
PG&E GT-NW pipeline.

     In 1998 the parties to the agreement filed petitions under 
s 7(b) of the Natural Gas Act (NGA), 15 U.S.C. s 717f(b), 
and s 9 of the Alaska Natural Gas Transportation Act, 15 
U.S.C. s 719, seeking approval from the Commission for a 
restructured arrangement removing Northwest Alaskan and 
Pacific Interstate Transmission from the process and allowing 
SoCal to purchase Canadian gas directly from Pan-Alberta-
US.  The new agreement provided that Pacific Interstate 
Transmission would assign its full entitlement to 244,000 
MMBtu/day of PG&E GT-NW's capacity to Pan-Alberta-US, 
which would pay the same rate as Pacific Interstate Trans-
mission had.  At the same time, the sales obligation to SoCal 
picked up by Pan-Alberta-US was reduced to 144,000 
MMBtu/day, thereby leaving 100,000 MMBtu/day in excess 
capacity.  As consideration for Pan-Alberta-US's assumption 
of these obligations (and the attendant risks), Pacific Inter-
state Transmission proposed to pay Pan-Alberta-US $31 
million.

     Petitioner DEK sells gas in the Northern California mar-
ket.  It holds about 11,000 MMBtu/day capacity on PG&E 
GT-NW from the Canada/Idaho border all the way to the 
Oregon/California border under a firm 20-year contract ex-
piring in 2013.  Its theory of competitive injury stems largely 
from the rate structure on PG&E GT-NW, under which 
shippers pay (at least) three different rates, evidently depend-
ing on the time at which they started taking service (the 
lower rates being associated with the earlier dates).  Pan-
Alberta-US enjoys the middle rate, the same as formerly 

paid by Pacific Interstate Transmission, whereas DEK pays 
the highest rate.  (By October 2002, evidently, virtually all 
shippers will pay the same rates.)  DEK claims that if Pacific 
Interstate Transmission's capacity had been disposed of in 
what it regards as the legally required manner, under the 
"capacity release" program, the successor shipper would, like 
DEK, have been subjected to the highest rate.  Although the 
Commission and intervenors (Pan-Alberta and Pan-Alberta-
US) contest this claim, we assume it to be correct.

     In the proceedings before the Commission, DEK pressed 
its contention that the capacity could be transferred only 
through the capacity release mechanism;  FERC rejected the 
claim on the merits, offering several reasons, including its 
view that Pan-Alberta-US was not truly a new or replace-
ment shipper intended to be covered by the generic capacity 
release rate policy.  It therefore approved the proposed 
restructuring.  See Pacific Interstate Transmission Co., 85 
FERC p 61,378 (1998).  DEK reiterated its objections in a 
request for rehearing, and was rebuffed again.  See Pacific 
Interstate Transmission Co., 89 FERC p 61,246 (1999).  Be-
fore us, FERC not only defends its decision on the merits but 
presses two jurisdictional defenses.  First it argues that DEK 
has failed to establish injury-in-fact as required under Article 
III of the U.S. Constitution (and s 19(b) as well).  And it 
argues that DEK's challenge is a collateral attack on a 1996 
rate settlement order, and thus precluded by the 60-day time 
limit imposed on petitions for review of FERC decisions.  See 
NGA s 19(b), 15 U.S.C. s 717r(b).  Because of our decision 
on Article III standing, we need not reach the other jurisdic-
tional defense and we cannot reach the merits.

     Article III requires that a petitioner seeking access to 
federal courts must allege an "an injury in fact" that is 
"concrete and particularized" and "actual or imminent, not 
conjectural or hypothetical."  Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 
504 U.S. 555, 559-61 (1992) (internal quotation omitted).  
Here DEK claims only that Pan-Alberta-US's enjoyment of a 
lower tariff may injure DEK by enabling Pan-Alberta-US to 
sell the 100,000 MMBtu per day in the Northern California 
market under conditions that might either completely under-

cut DEK's sales, or force it to reduce its prices.  There is no 
claim that Pan-Alberta-US has yet exploited the PG&E GT-
NW capacity to sell a single molecule of gas in Northern 
California.  As any substantial new delivery of gas into 
DEK's market area would presumably tend to lower the 
market-clearing price, we take it that Pan-Alberta-US's es-
pecially favorable rate is relevant largely because it would 
enhance Pan-Alberta-US's ability to sell profitably in DEK's 
areas and thus would increase the probability of such entry, 
and, moreover, to sell at rates and in quantities that might 
force DEK to cut its prices or lose sales.

     There is quite a gulf between the antipodes of standing 
doctrine--the "imminent" injury that suffices and the merely 
"conjectural" one that does not.  We have insisted that to 
escape the latter characterization the claimant must show a 
substantial (if unquantifiable) probability of injury.  In a 
recent case involving extension of natural gas pipelines we 
said, "The nub of the 'competitive standing' doctrine is that 
when a challenged agency action authorizes allegedly illegal 
transactions that will almost surely cause petitioner to lose 
business, there is no need to wait for injury from specific 
transactions."  El Paso Natural Gas Co. v. FERC, 50 F.3d 
23, 27 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (emphasis supplied).  In that case 
petitioner El Paso, a potential competitor in the Baja Califor-
nia market, claimed to be injured by FERC's decision that 
certain local distribution companies attempting to extend 
their pipelines into that part of Mexico would not be subject 
to FERC regulations but instead to those of the California 
Public Utilities Commission.  We found no standing, as El 
Paso had failed to show that it was really going to compete in 
Baja California, not having satisfied certain pre-conditions to 
FERC approval of its entry into that market.  See id.

     In the present case DEK's claimed injury is similarly too 
speculative.  The basic proposition is that FERC's alleged 
error increased the likelihood that DEK will be exposed to 
additional competition in its Northern California markets--
competition weighty enough either to reduce DEK's sales or 
force it to cut its prices.  To consider the degree of likelihood, 
we need to focus on the alternative outcomes of the proceed-

ing.  There seem to be three relevant possibilities:  (1) 
FERC, accepting DEK's view of the law, might have insisted 
on applying the regular capacity release procedures, demand-
ing that the rate on the transferred entitlement to ship to 
Stanfield be the higher one, and this insistence would have 
torpedoed the entire restructuring.  (This is FERC's view of 
what would have happened.)  (2) FERC, accepting DEK's 
view of the law, might have insisted on the capacity release 
provisions, but the restructuring would have survived, and 
Pan-Alberta-US would have paid the highest rate for its use 
of the Canada-to-Stanfield capacity.  (This is DEK's view of 
what would have happened.)  (3) FERC might have acted as 
it did, allowing Pan-Alberta-US to use the Canada-to-
Stanfield capacity at the previously prevailing rate.  There is 
a fourth alternative:  FERC might have insisted on the 
increased rate and the restructuring would have gone 
through, but at the higher rate the capacity might have 
attracted no takers and the daily 100,000 MMBtu would not 
have flowed south from Canada at all.  For DEK this fourth 
possibility might have been the most appealing, as it would 
likely preclude the gas from ever reaching (and thereby 
affecting) the Northern California market, but neither DEK 
nor any party asserts it as a possibility and we therefore 
discard it.  Accordingly, the key issue is the likely difference 
in impact on DEK as between FERC's actual choice (alterna-
tive (3)) and the other two.

     Alternative (1) leaves the capacity in Pacific Interstate 
Transmission's hands under the terms of the original agree-
ment.  Superficially that might appear to favor DEK, with 
the capacity committed to the SoCal transaction.  But the 
restructured deal sought to reduce SoCal's purchase obli-
gation by the very 100,000 MMBtu/day in question, suggest-
ing that that quantity was surplus to SoCal.  Thus, even 
assuming that under this scenario the gas proceeds on to 
Southern California, we have no clue whether DEK's interest 
in the Northern California market is any more jeopardized by 
gas that has reached Stanfield, Oregon (as under FERC's 
actual order) than by gas held by SoCal in Southern Califor-
nia and viewed by it as surplus.  DEK has given no detail on 

the location of its Northern California markets, or on the 
options for moving gas to those markets from Stanfield or 
from Southern California.  We note, purely by way of exam-
ple, that the distance from Stanfield to San Francisco appears 
to be nearly 600 miles as the crow flies and over 800 miles by 
road.

     Under alternative (2) the restructuring goes forward and 
the Canada-to-Stanfield rate is higher for Pan-Alberta-US 
than under FERC's order.  But it is unclear whether 
FERC's order makes it more likely that DEK will be subject 
to material competition from Pan-Alberta-US.  Everything 
else being equal, DEK would prefer to see potential rivals' 
costs high than low.  But the gas reaches Stanfield either 
way, and Pan-Alberta-US's decisions whether to sell it in 
DEK's Northern California markets or elsewhere will depend 
on both gas market conditions there and in alternative mar-
kets reachable from Stanfield, and on transportation costs 
from Stanfield to the alternative markets.  DEK presents no 
evidence on these matters, even though it is entitled on 
appeal to supplement the agency record in order to demon-
strate standing.  See Western Power Trading Forum v. 
FERC, 2001 WL 339469, *4 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  Northwest 
Environmental Defense Center v. Bonneville Power Admin-
istration, 117 F.3d 1520, 1527 (9th Cir. 1997).

     At oral argument, counsel for intervenor Pan-Alberta-US 
noted that Pan-Alberta-US's current practice is to sell its 
capacity on a spot market without any regard to the trans-
ported gas's final destination, deferring any long term com-
mitment of the excess capacity.  Some of this gas may well 
wend its way into DEK's markets But without more informa-
tion from which to infer quantities capable of having a market 
effect, that is an inadequate basis for saying that that 
FERC's decision "will almost surely" cause DEK "to lose 
business," El Paso, 50 F.3d at 27, or to cut prices in order to 
preserve business.

     We recognize that whenever a gas vendor secures trans-
port capacity that enables it to ship gas closer to another 
vendor at competitive rates, the latter may perceive an in-

creased risk of competition.  But under any of the scenarios 
relevant here, the 100,000 daily MMBtu of gas will arrive at a 
point several hundreds of miles from DEK's market, with 
some vague probability that any gas will actually reach that 
market and a still lower probability that its arrival will cause 
DEK to lose business or drop its prices.  More is needed to 
move an injury from "conjectural" to "imminent."

     The petition is

                                                                      Dismissed.

                 