                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                      Filed August 29, 2000

                        Division No. 95-2

                     In re:  Ronald H. Brown 
                    (Brannock Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     This matter coming to be heard and being heard before the 
Special Division of the Court upon the petition of Lisa M. 
Brannock for reimbursement of attorneys' fees and costs 
pursuant to Section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 
1978, as amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591 et seq. (1994), and it 
appearing to the court for the reasons set forth more fully in 
the opinion filed contemporaneously herewith that the peti-
tion is not well taken, it is hereby

     ORDERED, ADJUDGED, and DECREED that the peti-
tion of Lisa M. Brannock for attorneys' fees she incurred 
during the investigation by Independent Counsel Daniel S. 
Pearson be denied.

                                                   Per curiam

                                                  For the Court:

                                                       Mark J. Langer, Clerk

                                              by

                                                   Marilyn R. Sargent

                                                       Chief Deputy Clerk

                                 































                           United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                      Filed August 29, 2000

                        Division No. 95-2

                     In re:  Ronald H. Brown 
                    (Brannock Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                ON APPLICATION FOR ATTORNEYS' FEES

     Opinion for the Special Court filed PER CURIAM.

     PER CURIAM:  Lisa M. Brannock petitions this court 
under Section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 
as amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591 et seq. (1994) (the "Act"), for 
reimbursement of attorneys' fees in the amount of $7,354.45 
that she incurred during and as a result of the investigation 
conducted by Independent Counsel ("IC") Daniel S. Pearson.  
Because we conclude that Brannock has not carried her 
burden of showing that the fees would not have been incurred 
but for the requirements of the Act, we deny the petition in 
its entirety.

                            Background

     Ronald H. Brown began a term as Secretary of Commerce 
in January of 1993.  Allegations arose thereafter concerning 
improprieties related to his financial transactions.  In particu-
lar, there were media reports that Secretary Brown may have 
failed to disclose required information about First Interna-

tional, a company he owned with a business associate, Nolan-
da S. Hill.  As the Secretary of Commerce is a "covered 
person" under 29 U.S.C. s 591(b)(2), the Independent Coun-
sel statute was triggered.  On February 15, 1995, pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. s 592(a)(1), the Department of Justice ("DOJ") 
notified the Court that it had initiated a preliminary investi-
gation concerning Secretary Brown's finances.  That investi-
gation subsequently determined, inter alia, "that Secretary 
Brown received things of value totalling almost $500,000 from 
First International while he was Secretary of Commerce," 
and after completion of the preliminary investigation the 
Attorney General applied to this Court for the appointment of 
an independent counsel.  Application to the Court Pursuant 
to 28 U.S.C. s 592(c)(1) for the Appointment of an Indepen-
dent Counsel, May 16, 1995.  On July 6, 1995, we appointed 
Daniel S. Pearson independent counsel for this matter.  The 
Order appointing Pearson authorized him to investigate, inter 
alia, First International and other companies controlled or 
operated by Nolanda Hill.  Lisa Brannock, the fee petitioner 
here, was the registered agent of one of Hill's companies and 
former officer or director of two other Hill corporations.

     The IC's investigation was proceeding when, on April 3, 
1996, Secretary Brown was killed in an airplane accident.  IC 
Pearson subsequently determined that, in light of the Secre-
tary's death, "the original reason for the appointment of an 
Independent Counsel ... no longer existed," Final Report of 
the Independent Counsel In re:  Ronald H. Brown at 7 
(submitted June 10, 1996) (hereinafter Final Report), and it 
would be "in the public's best interest to transfer the investi-
gation" to the Department of Justice, id. at 1.  The DOJ 
agreed to the transfer, which was completed by May 31, 1996.  
Id.  On June 10, 1996, IC Pearson submitted his final report 
to this Court.  On July 7, 1999, the DOJ advised the Court 
that its investigations and prosecutions of all matters referred 
to it by the IC had been completed.  Thereafter, the present 
fee petitioner filed an application with this Court, seeking 
reimbursement of attorneys' fees assertedly incurred in con-
nection with the IC's investigation.

                             ANALYSIS

     The Ethics in Government Act provides for reimbursement 
of attorneys' fees expended by subjects in defense against an 
investigation under the Act.  Specifically, 28 U.S.C. 
s 593(f)(1) states:

     Upon the request of an individual who is the subject of 
     an investigation conducted by an independent counsel 
     pursuant to this chapter, the division of the court may, if 
     no indictment is brought against such individual pursuant 
     to that investigation, award reimbursement for those 
     reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by that individual 
     during that investigation which would not have been 
     incurred but for the requirements of this chapter.
     
     Because the Act "constitutes a waiver of sovereign immuni-
ty it is to be strictly construed."  In re Nofziger, 925 F.2d 
428, 438 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1991) (per curiam).  Therefore, 
the Act provides only reimbursement for attorneys' fees that 
survive an elemental analysis determining whether the peti-
tioner is the "subject" of the independent counsel's investiga-
tion, incurred the fees "during" that investigation, and would 
not have incurred them "but for" the requirements of the Act.  
The petitioner "bears the burden of establishing all elements 
of his entitlement."  In re North (Reagan Fee Application), 
94 F.3d 685, 690 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1996) (per curiam).

     As we have held, "[a]ll requests for attorneys' fees under 
the Act must satisfy the 'but for' requirement of" the Act.  In 
re Sealed Case, 890 F.2d 451, 452 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1989) 
(per curiam).  The purpose of awarding only fees that would 
not have been incurred "but for" the Act is to ensure that 
"officials who are investigated by independent counsels will 
be subject only to paying those attorneys' fees that would 
normally be paid by private citizens being investigated for the 
same offense by" federal executive officials such as the Unit-
ed States Attorney.  Id. at 452-53 (citing S. Rep. No. 97-496, 
at 18 (1982), reprinted in 1982 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3537, 3554 
(referring to "fees [that] would not have been incurred in the 
absence of the special prosecutor [independent counsel] 

law")).  We conclude that Brannock has not met the "but for" 
requirement.

     The Order appointing Pearson as IC authorized him to 
investigate "whether Ronald H. Brown, Secretary of the 
Department of Commerce, committed a violation of any feder-
al criminal law ... in connection with:  (1) accepting money 
and other things of value from Nolanda Hill or First Interna-
tional, Inc."  Order Appointing Independent Counsel, July 6, 
1995.  As the Independent Counsel points out, it thus appears 
that the investigation of Nolanda Hill, whom Lisa Brannock 
was employed by, was precipitated by her alleged act of 
giving things of value to a high-ranking government official.

     The Order further gave IC Pearson the "jurisdiction and 
authority to investigate whether Nolanda Hill violated federal 
criminal law ... through or in connection with the operations 
of her organizations, including, but not limited to First Inter-
national, Inc., and related organizations."  Id.  One such 
related organization investigated by the IC was the Corridor 
Broadcasting Corporation ("Corridor"), of which Hill was 
owner, president, and chief executive officer.  According to 
the IC's Final Report, the IC's office "investigated allegations 
that at the same time Corridor failed to make payments on its 
outstanding loans by asserting lack of finances to the banks 
and FDIC, it was using Corridor income for the personal 
benefit of its owner Nolanda Hill."  Final Report at 6.  
Ultimately, Nolanda Hill pleaded guilty to preparing and 
presenting fraudulent tax returns for three years, based upon 
income from Corridor Broadcasting Co.  Evaluation by Inde-
pendent Counsel at 11 n.4.  Lisa Brannock was an officer or 
director of two broadcasting stations owned by Corridor.

     Another related organization of Hill's was Columbia Leas-
ing Enterprise.  The IC investigated Hill for using this 
company in connection with acts involving the aiding and 
assisting in false and fraudulent statements.  Brannock was 
listed as Columbia's registered agent and therefore its custo-
dian of records.  Evaluation by Independent Counsel at 10-
11.

     As we noted in In re Nofziger, 938 F.2d 1397 (D.C. Cir., 
Spec. Div., 1991) (per curiam), under the Act, "the first 
requirement a subject must meet is to submit legal and 
factual authority proving that he was subjected to an investi-
gation and prosecution that satisfy the 'but for' requirement, 
i.e., an investigation that subjected him to different standards 
of the criminal law than are applied to private citizens, or ... 
that constituted a more rigorous application of the criminal 
law than is applied to private citizens."  Id. at 1400.  The acts 
listed above for which Nolanda Hill was investigated--giving 
things of value to a high government official, tax fraud, false 
statements--did not subject her to a "different standard" nor 
constitute a "more rigorous application" of the criminal law.  
Indeed, the listed acts are regularly investigated by United 
States Attorneys as well as by the Tax Division of the DOJ.  
We are thus persuaded that even in the absence of the Act 
Nolanda Hill would have been investigated for these activities 
and that Lisa Brannock, as an employee of Hill's, would have 
nevertheless incurred the attorneys' fees for which she now 
seeks reimbursement.  Cf. In re Pierce (Olivas Fee Applica-
tion), 178 F.3d 1350, 1355 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) (per 
curiam) ("If the investigative act generating the defensive 
costs would, in the absence of the Act, have been pursued by 
other authorities--'had the case been handled by the Depart-
ment of Justice or other executive authorities rather than the 
Independent Counsel'--then Congress did not contemplate 
the award of counsel fees.").

                            Conclusion

     The petition of Lisa M. Brannock for reimbursement of 
attorneys' fees is denied for failure to satisfy the "but for" 
requirement of 28 U.S.C. s 593(f)(1).

                                         