                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 10, 2000   Decided February 15, 2000 

                           No. 99-3033

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Santos D. Vizcaino, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 97cr00259-01)

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Alex J. Bourelly, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. Lewis, 
U.S. Attorney, and Darrell C. Valdez, John R. Fisher and 
Mary-Patrice Brown, Assistant U.S.Attorneys.

     Before:  Silberman, Williams and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Sentenced for possessing with intent 
to distribute both powder and crack cocaine, appellant argues 
that the district court erred by failing to recognize its authori-
ty to depart downward pursuant to section 5K2.0 of the 
United States Sentencing Guidelines on the ground that the 
crack affected his sentence so significantly as to take it 
outside of the Guidelines' "heartland."  Because appellant 
failed to request such a downward departure in the district 
court, and because the district court did not plainly err by 
failing to grant it sua sponte, we affirm.

                                I

     A grand jury indicted appellant Santos Vizcaino for pos-
sessing with intent to distribute fifty grams or more of crack 
cocaine and for possessing with intent to distribute powder 
cocaine.  Pleading guilty to the powder cocaine count, Vizcai-
no avoided the ten-year statutory mandatory minimum sen-
tence that would have applied had a jury convicted him on the 
crack cocaine charge.  As a condition of dropping the crack 
cocaine charge, the government required Vizcaino to accept 
responsibility for approximately 185 grams of crack cocaine.  
Under the relevant Sentencing Guideline, a criminal defen-
dant's sentence turns not only on the quantity of drugs 
involved in the offense of conviction, but also on "all acts and 
omissions ...  that were part of the same course of conduct 
or common scheme or plan as the offense of conviction."  
United States Sentencing Guidelines s 1B1.3(a)(2).  Because 
the Guidelines treat offenses involving crack more severely 
than those involving only powder cocaine, Vizcaino's accep-
tance of responsibility for crack dramatically affected his 
potential sentence.  Had his sentence been determined only 
by the amount of powder cocaine to which he pled guilty, the 
Guideline range would have been 27-33 months.  With the 
crack, his Guideline range increased to 121-151 months.  
Recognizing the crack's impact on the potential sentence, the 
district court informed Vizcaino at the plea colloquy that his 
"lawyer and the government's lawyer have agreed that the 

Guideline range which is going to control the sentence that I 
impose on you is, at bottom, 121 months and at top, 151 
months."  Asked if he understood, Vizcaino answered, "Yes."  
The district court accepted Vizcaino's plea.

     At sentencing, Vizcaino's counsel asked the district court to 
depart below the 121-151 month Guideline range, explaining 
only that "Mr. Santos Vizcaino has some material he wishes 
to share ... which we think may take it below the Guide-
lines."  Vizcaino then told the court this:  "I want to explain 
to you a few months ago I did sign a plea agreement to accept 
responsibility for powder cocaine.  And based on this, I think 
that I should be sentenced for powder cocaine, which would 
change the category within the guidelines that were approved 
by the Congress...."  Vizcaino spoke at length (for five or 
six transcript pages) about his children, his wife, his drug use, 
and the impact that his imprisonment was having on his 
children.  The district court, apparently responding to Vizcai-
no's earlier statement that he had accepted responsibility for 
powder cocaine, then pointed out:  "In your plea agreement, 
in paragraph 3, you not only acknowledge responsibility for 
the powder cocaine that formed the basis of the charge to 
which you entered a plea of guilty, but you also acknowledged 
that you were accountable for 185 grams of cocaine base, or 
crack cocaine.  And the government's evidence would have 
shown that that represented relevant conduct."  Vizcaino 
responded:  "Your Honor, I believe my lawyer has a copy of 
the plea agreement in which I said that I was held accounta-
ble for, I think, 200 grams of cocaine powder.  And over 
here...."  The district court interrupted:  "You were ac-
countable for 223 grams of cocaine powder and 185 grams of 
crack.  In any event, the Guidelines leave me no choice 
whatsoever, Mr. Vizcaino."  Vizcaino explained that he had 
entered into the plea in order to avoid the statutory mandato-
ry minimum sentence for crack cocaine, to which the district 
court replied:  "There is not only the mandatory minimum 
under the statute, but there are the Guidelines, which I must 
follow, and the Guidelines are, for my purposes, also manda-
tory.  I cannot depart from the Guidelines unless there is a 
reason for doing so."

     Concluding that "there is nothing in this record which, 
under the law, as it has been interpreted by our court of 
appeals, entitles me to depart from the Guideline range," the 
district court sentenced Vizcaino to 121 months imprison-
ment, the lowest sentence in the Guideline range.  "Now let 
me tell you this," the district court added:

     This is one of those cases in which, in my judgment, the 
     Guidelines operate to produce an unjust result.  Were I 
     at liberty, I would sentence you to a somewhat lesser 
     term of imprisonment, but I do not have that option....  
     I have several highly complimentary letters having to do 
     with Mr. Vizcaino, and they would, in the ordinary cir-
     cumstances, be highly persuasive, were I at liberty to 
     impose a lesser sentence than I am.  I am going to direct 
     that these be filed and made part of the record in this 
     case so that the court of appeals will have them available 
     to them when they determine whether or not I am 
     correct in my determination that there is no basis for a 
     departure from the guidelines in this case.
     
Vizcaino now appeals from the 121-month sentence.

                                II

     This appeal requires us to return to an oft-litigated issue:  
the scope of a district court's authority to depart downward 
under section 5K2.0 of the United States Sentencing Guide-
lines. Section 5K2.0 provides:  "[T]he sentencing court may 
impose a sentence outside the range established by the 
applicable guidelines, if the court finds 'that there exists an 
aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind, or to a 
degree, not adequately taken into consideration by the Sen-
tencing Commission in formulating the guidelines that should 
result in a sentence different from that described.' "  United 
States Sentencing Guidelines s 5K2.0 (quoting 18 U.S.C. 
s 3553(b)).  The Supreme Court has explained that district 
courts may depart under section 5K2.0 on the basis of a 
particular factor not specifically mentioned in the Guidelines 
if, "considering the structure and theory of both relevant 
individual guidelines and the Guidelines taken as a whole ... 

it is sufficient to take the case out of the Guideline's heart-
land."  Koon v. United States, 518 U.S. 81, 96 (1996) (internal 
citation and quotation marks omitted).

     Citing cases from other circuits, Vizcaino maintains that the 
district court erred by failing to recognize that where consid-
eration of relevant conduct, i.e., conduct different from but 
related to an offense of conviction, drastically affects a sen-
tence, a district court has authority to depart downward.  
See, e.g., United States v. Lombard, 72 F.3d 170, 183-87 (1st 
Cir. 1995) (holding that trial court had authority to depart 
under section 5K2.0 where consideration of relevant conduct 
raised defendant's sentence from 262 months to mandatory 
life imprisonment);  United States v. Concepcion, 983 F.2d 
369, 385-89 (2d Cir. 1992) (remanding to trial court to consid-
er whether impact of relevant conduct, which increased defen-
dant's sentence from 24-30 months to 262-327 months, war-
ranted downward departure under section 5K2.0).  Although 
this circuit has never considered whether district courts have 
authority to depart on this ground, Vizcaino argues that his 
sentence presents a compelling case for such a departure.  
His 121-month sentence was well over four times the low end 
of the 27-33 month range that would have been applicable 
had he been sentenced only for the powder cocaine included 
in his plea agreement.  As Vizcaino observes, moreover, the 
Guidelines offense level and resulting sentencing range were 
determined exclusively by the 185 grams of crack;  the co-
caine powder that Vizcaino possessed with intent to distribute 
and that formed the basis of the offense to which he pled 
guilty had absolutely no impact on his sentence.  Because of 
this, and given the district court's clearly expressed concern 
about the length of Vizcaino's sentence, the district court 
might have considered departing downward had Vizcaino 
made a section 5K2.0 argument.  But see United States v. 
Lombard, 72 F.3d at 186-87 (noting that authority to depart 
downward would not necessarily exist where case involved 
only "sizable sentence increases based on an uncharged quan-
tity of drugs").

     As the government points out, however, neither Vizcaino 
nor his lawyer requested such a departure.  Not only did his 
lawyer fail to make any argument at all, but the closest 
Vizcaino came to raising the issue was this:  "I think that I 

should be sentenced for powder cocaine, which would change 
the category within the guidelines that were approved by the 
Congress."  At most, this statement asked the district court 
to exclude crack cocaine from its sentencing consideration.  
Because Vizcaino had accepted responsibility for the crack 
and had not disputed that it was relevant conduct for pur-
poses of the Guidelines, however, the district court had no 
choice but to include crack in its sentencing calculations 
unless the Guidelines provided some basis for not considering 
it.  Vizcaino offered the district court no such basis.  To be 
sure, Vizcaino was not required to state the issue as clearly as 
appellate counsel has, or, for that matter, even to cite to 
section 5K2.0 in order to preserve the issue for appeal.  But 
absent any statement that the district court could have rea-
sonably interpreted as arguing that crack so distorted the 
sentence as to take it out of the Guidelines' heartland, we 
cannot conclude that Vizcaino preserved the issue.

     Citing United States v. Beckham, 968 F.2d 47 (D.C. Cir. 
1992), Vizcaino contends that he need not precisely articulate 
the basis for his downward departure request in order to 
preserve the issue for appeal.  In Beckham, we remanded for 
resentencing on the basis of a "refined" argument on appeal 
even though in the district court the defendant, like Vizcaino, 
only "complained about the harshness of his sentence in 
general terms."  Id. at 53.  This case differs from Beckham 
in a critical respect.  In Beckham, the government did not 
argue that the defendant had waived his departure argument 
by failing to ask for it in the district court.  Id. at 54 n.5 
("Although [the defendant's] refinement of the disproportion-
ality argument was not raised below, the government failed to 
object to it, or even to comment upon it, in its brief, thus 
waiving any waiver argument it may have had.").  Far from 
waiving the waiver issue in this case, the government has 
argued it strenuously.

     Because Vizcaino failed to preserve the argument for ap-
peal, we review the district court's failure to depart sua 
sponte at most for plain error.  See United States v. Albrit-
ton, 75 F.3d 709, 712 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("assuming, without 
deciding, that we conduct plain error review" where defen-

dant waives downward departure argument).  As Vizcaino's 
counsel conceded at oral argument, under a plain error 
standard his downward departure argument is "in trouble."  
Even assuming the district court erred, absent precedent 
from either the Supreme Court or this court holding that 
relevant conduct's disproportional weight may form a basis 
for a section 5K2.0 departure, the asserted error--failure to 
recognize authority to depart on those grounds--falls far 
short of plain error.  See United States v. Merlos, 8 F.3d 48, 
51 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (absent an opinion by this circuit or the 
Supreme Court on the issue in dispute, there is no plain error 
unless district court failed to follow "absolutely clear" legal 
norm such as clear statutory provision or court rule);  United 
States v. Blackwell, 694 F.2d 1325, 1342 (D.C. Cir. 1982) ("the 
lack of ... precedent in the circuit and the novelty of the 
issue presented militate against" finding plain error).

     Vizcaino's sentence is affirmed.

                                                      So ordered.

                                                   