                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 14, 1999   Decided January 11, 2000 

                           No. 98-1280

         The Grand Council of the Crees (of Quebec) and 
           New England Coalition for Energy Efficiency 
                      and the Environment, 
                           Petitioners


                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

                        Hydro-Quebec and 
                H.Q. Energy Services (U.S.) Inc., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     William Andrew Nelson argued the cause for petitioners. 
With him on the briefs were James A. Dumont, Leonard A. 
Busby, and Howard J. Bashman.

     Larry D. Gasteiger, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent. With him on 
the brief were Jay L. Witkin, Solicitor, and John H. Conway, 
Deputy Solicitor.

     Pierre F. de Ravel d'Esclapon was on the brief for interve-
nor H.Q. Energy Services (U.S.) Inc. in support of respon-
dent.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  H.Q. Energy Services (U.S.) Inc. 
("H.Q. Energy") is a wholly owned subsidiary of Hydro-
Quebec, an electric utility that owns and controls facilities for 
the generation, transmission and distribution of electric pow-
er in Quebec.  In November 1997 the Federal Energy Regu-
latory Commission authorized H.Q. Energy to sell power 
within the United States at market-based rates rather than 
under the traditional cost-based rate ceilings.  H.Q. Energy 
Services (U.S.) Inc., 81 FERC p 61,184 (1997) ("Order").  
Petitioners, the Grand Council of the Crees (of Quebec) (the 
"Grand Council" or the "Crees") and the New England 
Coalition for Energy Efficiency and the Environment (the 
"Coalition"), sought rehearing;  they argued mainly that H.Q. 
Energy and Hydro-Quebec had market power in the genera-
tion and transmission of electricity in the United States--
market power that was insufficiently mitigated to permit the 
approval.  The Commission denied the petition for rehearing, 
82 FERC p 61,234 (1998) ("Rehearing Order"), and the Crees 
and the Coalition petitioned for review here.  We dismiss the 
petitioners' appeal for want of standing.

                             *  *  *

     Pursuant to s 205(c) of the Federal Power Act ("FPA"), 16 
U.S.C. s 824d(c) (1994), a power marketer that seeks to 

engage in electricity sales under the jurisdiction of the Feder-
al Energy Regulatory Commission must place its rate sched-
ule on file with the Commission.  H.Q. Energy requested the 
Commission to accept for filing a rate schedule authorizing it 
to sell power at market-based rates.

     In reviewing such applications, the Commission demands 
that the power marketer establish that it, and its affiliates, 
either do not have, or have adequately mitigated, market 
power in both generation and transmission.  The applicant 
must also establish that it cannot erect barriers to entry, and 
that there is no evidence of other behavior perceived as 
anticompetitive, such as affiliate abuse or reciprocal dealing.  
See H.Q. Energy Services (U.S.) Inc., 79 FERC p 61,152 at 
61,651 (1997).

     In response to H.Q. Energy's application, several entities, 
including the Grand Council and the Coalition, moved to 
intervene.  The Grand Council is a political and governmental 
entity, representing about 10,000 indigenous people of North-
ern Quebec.  The Coalition is "an association of American 
consumers, customers, birders, recreational canoeists, energy 
activists and environmental organizations which has actively 
intervened in regulatory proceedings in Vermont since 1989."

     The Commission initially addressed the issue of transmis-
sion, finding H.Q. Energy's market power adequately mitigat-
ed.  79 FERC at 61,653.  Its approach was substantially 
similar to that which it applies to utilities owning transmission 
facilities within the United States, namely a requirement that 
the firm file an open access tariff, with adjustments to 
account for the different national context.  Id. at 61,652.  
Here it found that H.Q. Energy mitigated adequately by 
submitting proposed transmission tariffs, to be enforced by 
Quebec's regulatory body, the Regie de l'energie, instead of 
FERC, and with Canadian rather than U.S. commercial law 
providing the relevant background rules.  The Commission 
also found that H.Q. Energy satisfied its other requirements 
for market-based rates except for failing to provide the 
proper analysis of market power in generation.

     H.Q. Energy then made a supplemental filing on genera-
tion.  The Commission found that the firm's market shares, 
in the thirteen United States markets analyzed, would range 
from 27.8% to 35% of installed capacity, and from 31.8% to 
38% of uncommitted capacity.  81 FERC p 61,184 (1997).  
These figures exceeded those of all applications for market-
based rates that the Commission had previously accepted.  
But the Commission identified three factors that in its view 
adequately reduced the attendant risks.  See id. at 61,810.  
In light of our holding on standing we need not explore these.  
In their petition for review, petitioners challenge the Commis-
sion's reasoning, and also allege that the Commission's failure 
to prepare an environmental impact statement was contrary 
to its duty under the National Environmental Policy Act 
("NEPA").

                             *  *  *

     Petitioners have failed to demonstrate standing to raise 
their claims.  Although the claims arise under different stat-
utes--and we address their standing to bring each claim in 
turn--they nevertheless both rest primarily on an allegation 
of environmental harm.  The Grand Council alleges that the 
Commission's license will "devastate the lives, environment, 
culture and economy of the Crees."  The Crees' reasoning is 
that H.Q. Energy's license to sell power at market-based 
rates will lead to an increase in Hydro-Quebec's exports, 
which will in turn lead to the construction of new hydro-
electric facilities, which "will destroy fish and wildlife upon 
which Cree fishermen, trappers and hunters depend."  The 
Coalition alleges an environmental harm one step further 
removed in the causal and geographic chain:  many species of 
migratory birds that are found in New York and New Eng-
land during parts of the year rely on the habitat of Northern 
Quebec;  these birds, including one species that has been 
classified as endangered, are threatened by development of 
hydro-electric projects in that region.

     We first consider petitioners' claims under the FPA.  Al-
though there are very serious doubts whether petitioners 

have satisfied Article III standing, their more straightforward 
deficiency is in "prudential standing."  Article III standing 
must be established before any decision is made on the 
merits.  See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Environment, 
118 S. Ct. 1003, 1012 (1998).  Under the Supreme Court's 
recent pronouncement in Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon Oil Co., 
119 S. Ct. 1563 (1999), however, it is entirely proper to 
consider whether there is prudential standing while leaving 
the question of constitutional standing in doubt, as there is no 
mandated "sequencing of jurisdictional issues."  Id. at 1570 
("It is hardly novel for a federal court to choose among 
threshold grounds for denying audience to a case on the 
merits.").  (We return to this issue later, when our reasoning 
on the substance of prudential standing has been made clear.)

     To establish prudential standing, plaintiffs generally must 
show that "the interest sought to be protected by the com-
plainant is arguably within the zone of interests to be protect-
ed or regulated by the statute."  Association of Data Pro-
cessing Serv. Orgs., Inc. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 153 (1970).  
Because prudential standing is an invention of the courts, 
Congress has the power to dispense with the requirement by 
statute.  See Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 163 (1997) 
("Congress legislates against the background of our pruden-
tial standing doctrine, which applies unless it is expressly 
negated.").

     Petitioners argue that here Congress has dispensed with 
prudential standing by providing that "[a]ny person ... ag-
grieved by an order issued by the Commission in a proceed-
ing under this chapter" may apply to have the order reheard, 
16 U.S.C. s 825l(a).  Petitioners rely on FEC v. Akins, 118 
S. Ct. 1777 (1998), in which the Court stated:  "History 
associates the word 'aggrieved' with a congressional intent to 
cast the standing net broadly--beyond the common law inter-
ests and substantive statutory rights upon which 'prudential' 
standing traditionally rested."  Id. at 1783.  But the purpose 
of this pronouncement was evidently only to recognize "per-
son aggrieved" as a congressional means of dispensing with 
traditional requirements of "legal right," see, e.g., Perkins v. 
Lukens Steel Co., 310 U.S. 113, 125 (1940), for the Court went 

on to cite standard applications of the "aggrieved" language 
to allow standing for competitors, see Scripps-Howard Radio, 
Inc. v. FCC, 316 U.S. 4 (1942);  FCC v. Sanders Bros. Radio 
Station, 309 U.S. 470 (1940), or for obviously intended benefi-
ciaries, see Office of Communication of the United Church of 
Christ v. FCC, 359 F.2d 994 (D.C. Cir. 1966) (allowing listen-
ers standing to object to licensing of firm that regularly 
broadcast programs promoting racial segregation);  Associat-
ed Indus. of New York State v. Ickes, 134 F.2d 694 (2d Cir. 
1943) (allowing consumers standing to challenge order that 
fixes prices and prevents competition among sellers).

     Petitioners also rely upon Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154 
(1997), in which the Court, construing the Endangered Spe-
cies Act of 1973 ("ESA"), expressed a "readiness to take the 
term 'any person' at face value."  See id. at 164-65 (finding 
that the citizen-suit provision allowing that "any person may 
commence a civil suit" "negate[d] the zone-of-interests test 
(or, perhaps more accurately, expand[ed] the zone of inter-
ests)").  But the Court in Bennett emphasized the breadth of 
the ESA's "any person" formula compared to other "more 
restrictive formulations" that Congress had employed (rather 
like the "aggrieved" person language here), id. at 164-65, 
pointing to such statutes as the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 
s 1365(g) (defining "citizen" for purposes of the citizen-suit 
provision in s 1365(a) as "[any person] having an interest 
which is or may be adversely affected"), and the Ocean 
Thermal Energy Conversion Act, 42 U.S.C. s 9124(a) (provid-
ing that "any person having a valid legal interest which is or 
may be adversely affected may commence a civil action").  In 
addition, the Bennett Court noted that the subject matter of 
the ESA was the environment, "a matter in which it is 
common to think all persons have an interest," 520 U.S. at 
165;  this cannot be said of the FPA, even if environmental 
concerns played a role in motivating Congress to enact some 
of its portions.

     Petitioners argue that even if the statute imposes pruden-
tial standing requirements, the harms they allege clearly fall 

within the statute's zone-of-interests.  The "zone" test is "not 
meant to be especially demanding," Clarke v. Securities In-
dus. Assoc., 479 U.S. 388, 399 (1987);  in fact, a plaintiff who is 
not itself the subject of the agency action is outside the zone 
of interests only if its interests are "so marginally related to 
or inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it 
cannot reasonably be assumed that Congress intended to 
permit the suit."  Id.  Petitioners rely on the Second Cir-
cuit's holding in Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. 
Federal Power Commission, 354 F.2d 608, 616 (2d Cir. 1965), 
that "to insure that the Federal Power Commission will 
adequately protect the public interest in the aesthetic, conser-
vational, and recreational aspects of power development, 
those who by their activities and conduct have exhibited a 
special interest in such areas, must be held to be included in 
the class of 'aggrieved' parties under s 313(b)."  But the 
substantive authority exercised by the Commission and under 
review in Scenic Hudson was quite different, and seemed to 
invite environmental considerations.  It had promulgated an 
order licensing the construction of a pumped storage hydro-
electric plant under FPA s 10, 16 U.S.C. s 803(a), which 
requires that to be approved a project must be "best adapted 
to a comprehensive plan for improving or developing a water-
way or waterways" for uses including "interstate or foreign 
commerce" as well as "other beneficial public uses, including 
recreational purposes."  The court interpreted "recreational 
purposes" to encompass "the conservation of natural re-
sources, the maintenance of natural beauty, and the preserva-
tion of historic sites."  Scenic Hudson, 354 F.2d at 614.

     The order at issue in this case, however, merely allows 
H.Q. Energy to broker energy at market-based rather than 
cost-based rates.  Although the Second Circuit found that 
environmental concerns motivated Congress in enacting the 
FPA, and are "undoubtedly" within the zone of interests 
protected when the agency acts to authorize construction, id., 
the agency here acts only in its ratemaking capacity.  And as 
the Supreme Court has said, "the meaning of the zone-of-
interests test is to be determined not by reference to the 
overall purpose of the Act in question ..., but by reference to 

the particular provision of law upon which the plaintiff relies."  
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. at 175-76;  see also Lujan v. 
National Wildlife Fed'n, 497 U.S. 871, 883 (1990) ("[T]he 
plaintiff must establish that the injury he complains of ... 
falls within the 'zone of interests' sought to be protected by 
the statutory provision whose violation forms the legal basis 
for his complaint.").  Congress's purposes in enacting the 
overall statutory scheme are relevant only insofar as they 
may help reveal its purpose in enacting the particular provi-
sion.  See Mova Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Shalala, 140 F.3d 
1060, 1074 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  We thus focus on the provision 
under which the Commission acted here, s 205(a) of the 
Federal Power Act, which controls the Commission in its 
exercise of ratemaking authority:

          All rates and charges made, demanded, or received by 
     any public utility for or in connection with the transmis-
     sion or sale of electric energy subject to the jurisdiction 
     of the Commission, and all rules and regulations affecting 
     or pertaining to such rates or charges shall be just and 
     reasonable....  
     
16 U.S.C. s 824d(a).

     In interpreting the statutory provision, "just and reason-
able," the Supreme Court has emphasized that "the Commis-
sion [is] not bound to the use of any single formula or 
combination of formulae in determining rates."  FPC v. Hope 
Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S. 591, 602 (1944).  But the Court has 
articulated the interests that must be protected through such 
a determination:  "[T]he fixing of 'just and reasonable' rates[ ] 
involves a balancing of the investor and the consumer inter-
ests."  Id. at 603.  Both interests are economic and tied 
directly to the transaction regulated:  "the investor interest 
has a legitimate concern with the financial integrity of the 
company whose rates are being regulated," id., while there is 
a "consumer interest in being charged non-exploitative rates."  
Jersey Central Power & Light Co. v. FERC, 810 F.2d 1168, 
1178 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  Where (as here) the grant of ratemak-
ing authority stems from congressional concern over market 
power (which justifies the agency's relaxing its grip when 

such power is absent), see, e.g., Tejas Power Corp. v. FERC, 
908 F.2d 998, 1004 (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("In a competitive market, 
where neither buyer nor seller has significant market power, 
it is rational to assume that the terms of their voluntary 
exchange are reasonable, and specifically to infer that price is 
close to marginal cost, such that the seller makes only a 
normal return on its investment."), the object may be stated 
as to set "prices equal to those that the firm would set if it 
did not have monopoly power;  that is, to replicate a 'competi-
tive price.' "  Stephen G. Breyer, Richard B. Stewart, Cass R. 
Sunstein & Matthew L. Spitzer, Administrative Law & Regu-
latory Policy 228 (4th ed. 1999).  Unsurprisingly, the Su-
preme Court has never indicated that the discretion of an 
agency setting "just and reasonable" rates for sale of a 
simple, fungible product or service should, or even could, 
encompass considerations of environmental impact (except, of 
course, as the need to meet environmental requirements may 
affect the firm's costs).

     Following the judicial lead, the Commission has affirma-
tively forsworn environmental considerations.  In PSI Ener-
gy, Inc., 55 FERC p 61,254 (1991), it reviewed an interconnec-
tion agreement and rates to be charged thereunder.  Certain 
petitioners raised various "siting, health, safety, environmen-
tal [and] archaeological problems" associated with the line 
through which the power would flow, but the Commission said 
that such factors were "beyond the Commission's authority to 
consider under sections 205 and 206 of the Federal Power 
Act."  Id. at 61,811.  "In a case such as this one, the 
Commission's authority is limited to review of the rates, 
terms and conditions of jurisdictional agreements to ensure 
that they are just and reasonable and not unduly discrimina-
tory or preferential."  Id.;  see also Monongahela Power Co., 
39 FERC p 61,350 at 62,096 (1987) ("Congress has not grant-
ed the Commission authority to reject rate filings on environ-
mental grounds.").

     The Commission's understanding of its duty under s 205(a) 
leads us toward a resolution of the zone-of-interests test.  
The test embraces interests " 'arguably ... to be protected' 
by the statutory provision at issue," National Credit Union 

Admin. v. First Nat'l Bank & Trust Co., 118 S. Ct. 927, 935 
(1998) (quoting Data Processing, 397 U.S. at 153), which in 
turn is inherently linked to the question of what interests the 
statute actually protects.  Thus, if the Commission's view of 
s 205(a) is valid, it would appear that persons asserting 
interests excluded under that view could be "arguably" within 
the requisite zone only if those interests were so congruent 
with actually protected interests as to make their possessors 
"suitable challenger[s]" of the agency's purported exercise of 
its authority.  Mova Pharmaceutical Corp., 140 F.3d at 1075.  
Thus, the petitioners are outside the relevant zone of inter-
ests if (1) FERC's refusal to consider environmental issues 
under s 205(a) is valid, and (2) environmental interests are 
not "congruent" with the issues that are pertinent under 
s 205(a).

     FERC's exclusion of environmental claims is valid.  In the 
face of congressional silence we defer to an agency's reason-
able interpretation of statutes it is charged with administer-
ing.  Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 
(1984).  Although rates have environmental consequences 
(increases in the price of electricity, for instance, may at the 
margin lead to substitution of fuel oil), it seems pointless to 
weave such issues into setting "just and reasonable" rates for 
electric power.  The environmental issues posed by construc-
tion and operation of energy facilities will invariably be 
reviewed under other provisions;  if those reviews (or other 
forces such as liability risks or firm commitment to environ-
mental quality) cause the utility to incur costs, such costs 
would feed into the Commission's normal rate calculation.  
See Iroquois Gas Transmission System, L.P. v. FERC, 145 
F.3d 398 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (remanding to the Commission for a 
finding whether utility's legal defense costs resulting from a 
federal investigation into environmental violations were "pru-
dently incurred," and thus could be included within the rate 
base);  cf. NAACP v. Federal Power Commission, 425 U.S. 
662, 668 (1976) (finding that the Federal Power Commission 
was authorized to exclude from rates those costs that result 
from discriminatory practices of regulatees, just like "any 
other illegal, duplicative, or unnecessary labor costs").  Be-

yond that, additional focus on environmental elements would 
seem to complicate an already complex process, with little or 
no offsetting benefit to the public.  So, at least, FERC could 
reasonably decide.

     Petitioners driven by environmental interests might still be 
"suitable challengers" if their interests were "congruent" with 
the pertinent interests.  But ratemaking under s 205(a) is, as 
our cases have made clear, an effort to balance the interests 
of power consumers and producers.  Environmental interests 
appear orthogonal to both.  Thus litigation by persons whose 
interests are such is "more likely to frustrate than to further 
... statutory objectives," Mova Pharmaceutical Corp., 140 
F.3d at 1075, and they are not the appropriate parties to 
"police the interests that the statute protects," id.  Hence we 
find that the environmental interests of the petitioners are 
insufficient to afford them prudential standing to press their 
claims under s 205(a) of the FPA.1

     For the Coalition, environmental impacts are not the sole 
basis for asserting claims that the Commission misapplied 
s 205(a).  Its members, residents of New York and Vermont, 
are also power consumers.  (The Coalition does not say that 
they buy power originating with H.Q. Energy or Hydro-
Quebec, a possible deficiency in their Article III standing.)  
But the Coalition does not claim that FERC's Order will 
directly injure them as power buyers, as might be the case in 
the normal interstate transaction.  Even without the market-
ing order Hydro-Quebec is entitled to sell into border 

__________
     1 We do not consider the further question whether environmental 
injuries experienced abroad by foreign nationals (e.g., the Crees) 
are ever within the zone of interests of federal statutes.  Compare 
Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991) 
(finding that Canadian workers, affected by the loss of sales due to 
the EPA's ban on asbestos, pursuant to the Toxic Substances 
Control Act, did not have standing to challenge the action because 
of the Act's "national emphasis").

states--as it concededly has been doing--without any subjec-
tion to FERC ratemaking.  See Rehearing Order, 82 FERC 
at 61,898 n.9.  Rather, the Coalition argues only that the 
Order will preempt state regulation of which its members 
have hitherto been beneficiaries.  Vermont, for instance, cur-
rently subjects all significant wholesale purchases of out-of-
state power by Vermont utilities to a prudency determination.  
See 30 Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 30, s 248(a)(1) (1998).

     The Coalition's fear that such state regulation would be 
preempted is unfounded.  The Federal Power Act explicitly 
provides that state regulation of energy sold between a state 
and a foreign country is only preempted when it conflicts with 
the Commission's statutory requirements relating to the ex-
port of energy.  See 16 U.S.C. s 824a(f).  State regulation of 
imports does not present such a conflict, and therefore would 
not be preempted by the Order at issue here.  Thus, this 
additional interest does not even constitute an "injury-in-
fact," necessary for Article III standing.  Lujan v. Defenders 
of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992).

                             *  *  *

     We now turn to petitioners' NEPA claim.  Their alleged 
injury, once again, is to their environmental interests;  the 
Commission's failure to perform an environmental assessment 
made its grant of the Order more probable, thus increasing 
the likelihood of their suffering the environmental injuries 
that they claim.  See Lujan, 504 U.S. at 572-73 nn.7 & 8. 
Once again we find that petitioners have not demonstrated 
prudential standing.

     This of course turns on the purposes of the provision that 
petitioners invoke--NEPA's requirement that agencies in-
clude an environmental impact statement ("EIS") with every 
"major Federal action[ ] significantly affecting the quality of 
the human environment."  NEPA s 102(2)(C), 42 U.S.C. 
s 4332(2)(C).  The requirement is said to serve at least two 
congressional purposes.  First, it ensures that the agency will 
have access to "detailed information concerning significant 
environmental impacts."  Robertson v. Methow Valley Citi-

zens Council, 490 U.S. 332, 349 (1989).  Second, it serves the 
"informational role" of assuring the public "that the agency 
'has indeed considered environmental concerns in its decision-
making process,' " id. (quoting Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. 
v. NRDC, 462 U.S. 87, 97 (1983)) and, "perhaps more signifi-
cantly, provid[ing] a springboard for public comment."  Id.

     Looked at broadly, the EIS requirement obviously seeks to 
protect environmental interests.  United States v. Students 
Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures ("SCRAP"), 412 
U.S. 669, 686 n.13 (1973).  Much as in the case at hand, 
petitioners in SCRAP challenged a ratemaking on the basis 
that the agency did not prepare an EIS, and the Court found 
prudential standing.  Id.  The case was decided, however, 
prior to several cases making clear that s 102(2)(C) is a 
purely procedural requirement that "does not impose sub-
stantive duties mandating particular results, but simply pre-
scribes the necessary process for preventing uninformed--
rather than unwise--agency action."  Robertson, 490 U.S. at 
333;  see also Strycker's Bay Neighborhood Council, Inc. v. 
Karlen, 444 U.S. 223, 228 (1980) (holding that the agency 
merely had to "consider[ ] the environmental consequences of 
its decision" but that "NEPA requires no more");  Vermont 
Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. NRDC, 435 U.S. 519, 558 
(1978) ("NEPA does set forth significant substantive goals for 
the Nation, but its mandate to the agencies is essentially 
procedural.").

     Because s 102(2)(C) does not impose any additional sub-
stantive requirements on FERC, but merely serves to ensure 
that FERC consider those environmental concerns that it is 
already authorized to consider, the zone-of-interests of the 
EIS requirement can be examined only in conjunction with 
the relevant substantive provision.  Because we have decided 
that the Commission properly does not consider environmen-
tal concerns in the exercise of its ratemaking authority under 
FPA s 205, NEPA's procedural requirements (if they even 
apply to FERC's ratemaking decisions, which we do not 
decide) do not further petitioners' environmental interests in 
this instance.  Accordingly, given the absence of any allega-
tion by petitioners of an "informational injury," compare FEC 

v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1786, they are not "suitable challeng-
ers" of FERC's failure to prepare an EIS.  Mova Pharma-
ceutical Corp., 140 F.3d at 1075.  We thus find that the 
petitioners' environmental interests are not within 
s 102(2)(C)'s NEPA's zone-of-interests as applied to FPA 
s 205.

     We stress that although our decision here has involved an 
interpretation of FPA s 205(a) and NEPA s 102(2)(C), we do 
not purport to decide the merits of the case--in particular 
petitioners' claim that FERC violated NEPA by refusing to 
perform an environmental assessment and, in the alternative, 
that even if FERC's regulation, 18 CFR s 380.4(a)(15) (1996), 
provides a valid categorical exclusion for all electric rate 
filings pursuant to FPA s 205, the agency cannot rely on this 
justification without having invoked it during the proceedings. 
To the extent that we have broached merits issues concomi-
tant to resolving prudential standing, Steel Co. clearly con-
templates that courts may do so even before resolving Article 
III standing.  It explicitly notes that "a statutory standing 
question can be given priority over an Article III question," 
118 S. Ct. at 1013-14 n.2, and even justifies the occasional 
deciding of merits questions before statutory standing ques-
tions on precisely the grounds that the two may overlap:

     The question whether this plaintiff has a cause of action 
     under the statute, and the question whether any plaintiff 
     has a cause of action under the statute are closely 
     connected--indeed, depending upon the asserted basis 
     for lack of statutory standing, they are sometimes identi-
     cal, so that it would be exceedingly artificial to draw a 
     distinction between the two.
     
Id.  Unlike the "doctrine" or practice of "hypothetical juris-
diction," which Steel Co. emphatically rejected, such treat-
ments of prudential standing do not carry a risk of plunging a 
court into issuing advisory opinions.  Id. at 1016;  see also 
United States ex rel. Long v. SCS Business & Technical 

Institute, Inc., 173 F.3d 890, 896 (D.C. Cir. 1999), modifying, 
173 F.3d 870 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     Accordingly, the petition is

                                                       Dismissed.

                                                                            