                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 3, 2000    Decided January 12, 2001 

                           No. 99-1481

                     DIC Entertainment, LP, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

            International Alliance of Theatrical and 
                   Stage Employees Local 839, 
                            Intervenor

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Jonathan M. Turner, pro hac vice, argued the cause for 
the petitioner.  Lawrence J. Song was on brief.

     Sonya Spielberg, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for the respondent.  Leonard R. 
Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, Associate General Coun-
sel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, 
and Charles Donnelly, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, were on brief.

     Leo Geffner and Ira L. Gottlieb were on brief for the 
intervenor.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Sentelle and Henderson, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  DIC Enter-
tainment, LP (DIC), an animation production company, peti-
tions for review of a decision of the National Labor Relations 
Board (Board or NLRB) finding that DIC committed an 
unfair labor practice when it failed to bargain with Local 839 
of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees 
and Moving Pictures Operators (Union), the newly certified 
bargaining representative of DIC's production employees.  
DIC Entertainment, LP, Case 31-CA-23986 (Oct. 19, 1999) 
(Decision and Order).  DIC contends the Board's selection of 
voting eligibility criteria for the union representation election, 
see DIC Entertainment, LP, Case 31-RC-7705 (May 28, 
1999) (order denying review) (Review Dec.), is inconsistent 
with past Board decisions.  Because we conclude the Board 
did not deviate from its precedent, we deny DIC's petition for 
review.  We further grant the Board's cross-application for 
enforcement.

     DIC produces cartoons for videos and for television series.  
Its employees are hired for a fixed term and perform "pre-
production" work for the actual animation.  At the time of the 
representation proceeding DIC employees were working on 
"Sabrina," a 65-episode television cartoon series.  During the 
proceeding DIC urged the Board's Acting Regional Director 
(Director) to limit voting eligibility to employees who worked 
on at least two productions for a minimum of 5 days during 
the year preceding the election, the eligibility criteria the 

Board had used for film production employees in Medion, 
Inc., 200 N.L.R.B. 1013 (1972).  The Director rejected DIC's 
suggestion and instead applied an eligibility formula which 
permitted voting by any employee who during the previous 
year had worked either for a minimum of five days on two 
productions or for a minimum of 15 days regardless of the 
number of productions.  The Director emphasized that the 
Board had previously modified the Medion criteria in Ameri-
can Zoetrope Prods., Inc., 207 N.L.R.B. 621 (1973), to permit 
voting by any television production employee who had worked 
on two productions in the past year, regardless of the number 
of days, and pointed out that the Board there "not[ed] its 
'obligation to tailor [its] general eligibility formulas to the 
particular facts of the case,' [207 N.L.R.B.] at 623, as well as 
its 'responsibility to devise an eligibility formula which will 
protect and give full effect to the voting rights of those 
employees who have a reasonable expectancy of further em-
ployment.'  Id. at 622."  Review Dec. 3.  Finding that "the 
record clearly establishes that the current employees have 
worked and will continue to work on the Sabrina project for a 
significant period of time," while "[i]n American Zoetrope and 
Medion, the employees worked for short-term, sporadic, and 
intermittent periods of time," the Director concluded that 
here a more inclusive formula was "necessary to avoid disen-
franchising employees who have worked for a significant 
period of time, but only on one production."  Id.

     On review, the Board upheld the Director, concluding that 
DIC "ha[d] not shown that the [Director's] added alternative 
of requiring a minimum of 15 days work in the year prior to 
his decision is unreasonable under the circumstances present 
in this case."  Review Dec. 1.  In doing so, the Board 
stressed that it sought in its voting eligibility decisions "to be 
flexible in devising various formulas suited to unique condi-
tions in the different entertainment industries where employ-
ees are often hired to help on a day-by-day or production-by-
production basis, to afford employees with a continuing inter-
est in employment the optimum opportunity for meaningful 
representation."  Id. (citations omitted).

     A union certification election was held on June 4, 1999, in 
accordance with the Board's eligibility formula.  On June 25, 
1999 the Union was certified as exclusive bargaining agent of 
DIC's production staff.  In order to challenge the election, 
DIC refused to bargain with the Union and, as a result, the 
Board General Counsel issued a complaint on August 6, 1999, 
charging DIC with violating section 8(a)(1) and (5) of the 
National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (5).*  As 
its defense DIC challenged the validity of the certification and 
the election.  On October 29, 1999 the Board granted sum-
mary judgment to the NLRB's General Counsel on the 
grounds that the certification issue could have been and was 
litigated in the representation proceeding and that DIC nei-
ther offered newly discovered, previously unavailable evi-
dence nor alleged any special circumstances that justified 
revisiting the certification.  DIC petitioned the court for 
review.

     The Board exercises broad discretion when determining 
bargaining unit composition and we overturn the Board's 
exercise of discretion only if its action is unreasonable, arbi-
trary or unsupported by the evidence.  B B & L, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 52 F.3d 366, 369 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  So long as the 
Board's decision is rational and in accord with past precedent, 
it will be upheld.  Id.  DIC contends that in choosing the 
eligibility formula here the Board impermissibly deviated 
from its precedent.  We disagree.

     "Ordinarily the Board uses a simple formula to determine 
who is eligible to vote in a representation election:  Employ-
ees in the bargaining unit are eligible to vote if they were 
employed on the date of the election and 'during the payroll 
period ending immediately prior to the Decision and Direction 
of Election.' "  Sitka Sound Seafoods, Inc. v. NLRB, 206 F.3d 

__________
     * These two provisions make it an unfair labor practice for an 
employer "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the 
exercise of the rights [of employees as to organization, collective 
bargaining, etc.]," 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), and "to refuse to bargain 
collectively with the representatives of his employees," id. 
s 158(a)(5).

1175, 1181 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (quoting Saltwater, Inc., 324 
N.L.R.B. 343, 343 n.1 (1997);  citing American Zoetrope, 207 
N.L.R.B. at 622).  When employees are temporary or season-
al, however, the Board has devised alternative formulae which 
are calculated "to permit optimum employee enfranchisement 
and free choice, without enfranchising individuals with no real 
continuing interest in the terms and conditions of employ-
ment offered by the employer."  Trump Taj Mahal Casino 
Resort, 306 N.L.R.B. 294, 296 (1992). In such cases the Board 
has generally applied a standard eligibility formula, limiting 
voting to those who "average four or more hours of work per 
week during the quarter preceding the election eligibility 
date."  B B & L, Inc. v. NLRB, 52 F.3d at 369.  Neverthe-
less, because of its acknowledged "obligation to tailor [its] 
general eligibility formulas to the particular facts of the case," 
American Zoetrope Prods., Inc., 207 N.L.R.B. 621, 623 (1973), 
the Board has on occasion fashioned a variant formula which 
takes into account the nature of work performed in a particu-
lar industry or facility, as it did in American Zoetrope and 
Medion.  See generally B B & L, Inc., 52 F.3d at 370-71.  
The Board did so here consistently with those past cases.  In 
fact, in Juilliard School, 208 N.L.R.B. 153 (1974), the Board 
devised for temporary stage production personnel a similar, 
yet more inclusive, formula, authorizing voting by any em-
ployee who had worked two productions for a total of 5 days 
over one year or at least 15 days over a 2-year period.  Cf. 
Sitka Sound Seafoods, Inc., 327 N.L.R.B. No. 55, 1998 WL 
876891 (Nov 30, 1998), affirmed, Sitka Sound Seafoods, Inc. 
v. NLRB, 206 F.3d 1175, 1182-83 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (seasonal 
production workers at seafood processing plant deemed eligi-
ble if they worked 120 hours (15 8-hour shifts) in each of two 
of preceding three years).

     Further, to the extent that the criteria used in Medion and 
Zoetrope indicate likelihood of future employment of "short-
term, sporadic, and intermittent short term employees," the 
Director reasonably concluded that the longer-term DIC em-
ployees would have a greater expectation of continued em-
ployment.  See Review Dec. at 3.  We admit considerable 
doubt that the formula in any of these cases effectively 

identifies those employees "who have a reasonable expectancy 
of further employment with the Employer," as the Board has 
so repeatedly declared.  See, e.g., Review Dec. at 1-2;  Me-
dion, 200 N.L.R.B. at 1014;  American Zoetrope, 207 
N.L.R.B. at 622-23;  National Opinion Research Ctr., 187 
N.L.R.B. 583, 585 (1970).  Certainly the record below fails to 
demonstrate that DIC employees who worked 15 days in the 
previous year possessed an expectation of employment at 
DIC after their work on Sabrina concludes.  Nevertheless, 
the validity of the Board's presumption of such expectation is 
not before us.  DIC challenged the Board's decision on the 
sole ground that it deviates from Board precedent and did not 
question the rationale underlying the line of cases on which 
the Board relied.  As we explained above, the Board's deci-
sion here squares with that line of cases, be they correctly 
decided or no.  We therefore reject DIC's claim that the 
Board deviated from precedent.

     For the reasons set forth above, DIC's petition for review 
is denied and the Board's cross-application for enforcement is 
granted.

                                                                 So ordered.

        