                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 8, 2000     Decided June 30, 2000 

                           No. 99-7090

       United States of America ex rel. Joseph T. Siewick, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

         Jamieson Science and Engineering, Inc., et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 92cv00045)

     Joseph J. Aronica argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs was Robert B. Norris.

     Gary Howard Simpson argued the cause and filed the brief 
for appellees.

     Before:  Williams, Henderson and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  Any person can initiate a lawsuit 
in the name of the United States for substantive violations of 
the False Claims Act (the "Act" or "FCA").  See 31 U.S.C. 
s 3730(b) (authorizing action by a "person").  Such violations 
include presenting to the government "a false or fraudulent 
claim for payment or approval."  See id. s 3729(a) (establish-
ing liability).  Here the non-government person (known as 
the relator), Dr. Joseph T. Siewick, a physicist hired by 
Jamieson Science and Engineering, Inc. ("JSE") in May 1990 
but laid off in December 1991, presses a claim against JSE 
and two of its officers at the relevant time, Vincent T. 
O'Connor and Dr. John A. Jamieson.  He argues that the 
monthly invoices that JSE submitted to the government for 
payment under government contracts were false claims.  
They were false, in his view, because JSE filed them notwith-
standing alleged violations by O'Connor of a criminal statute 
aimed at "revolving door" abuses by former government 
employees, 18 U.S.C. s 207.

     Siewick proposes two theories to support the alleged falsi-
ty.  First, he says, the certified invoices implicitly declared 
"compliance with applicable law, including Section 207," and 
thus were "impliedly false."  Appellant's Br. at 11.  Second, 
Siewick argues that a violation of s 207 renders a govern-
ment contract unenforceable.  From this supposed unenforce-
ability he reasons that both O'Connor and Jamieson knew 
that JSE was not entitled to the payments JSE requested, so 
JSE's invoices claiming that JSE was entitled to payment 
were false.

     Neither of Siewick's theories convinces us that the alleged 
s 207 violations transformed JSE's invoices into the type of 
false claims made actionable by the qui tam provisions of the 
FCA.  We affirm the district court's grant of partial sum-
mary judgment.

                             *  *  *

     In 1986, the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization 
("SDIO") sought proposals for a project assessing its infrared 
sensors and related technology.  O'Connor was the contract 

officer assigned to the project and consequently received the 
proposal submitted by JSE.  Although he didn't have the 
power to choose the winning bidder, he was assigned the task 
of negotiating JSE's fee and the final contract price.  After a 
day of negotiations, the contract was signed on December 8, 
1986 by O'Connor for the United States and Jamieson for 
JSE.  O'Connor retained some role in administering the 
contract, but the parties disagree as to its scope.

     In the summer of 1987, O'Connor decided to leave govern-
ment service.  He filed the requisite notice indicating his 
intention to retire and began discussing employment opportu-
nities with government contractors.  A technical representa-
tive within SDIO, Peter Franklin, mentioned to Jamieson that 
O'Connor was retiring and that he would be a helpful addition 
to JSE's staff.  And after Jamieson and O'Connor met, 
Jamieson offered O'Connor the job of Executive Vice Presi-
dent of JSE, which he accepted as of November 1, 1987.

     JSE bid on and received a second and third contract as the 
previous contracts expired.  Siewick alleges that in represent-
ing JSE in matters related to these contracts, O'Connor 
repeatedly violated 18 U.S.C. s 207.  According to Siewick, 
these violations began even before O'Connor had fully parted 
company with the Navy (he had been on terminal leave from 
November 1, 1987 to January 1, 1988) and continued through 
to the period covered by the third contract.  Siewick claims 
that these violations taint nearly every invoice submitted on 
the three contracts.

     The district court granted summary judgment in favor of 
the defendants on the claims premised upon s 207 violations.  
The court found both that Siewick's evidence was insufficient 
as a matter of law to prove a violation of s 207 and that even 
if s 207 had been violated, the violation did not transform the 
invoices into false claims.  But it denied the defendants' 
motion for summary judgment on Siewick's claims premised 
upon padding and falsification of timesheets;  those claims 
remain before the district court.  Siewick requested that the 
district court enter final judgment pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 
54(b) on his s 207 claims, and the district court granted this 

request after explicitly finding no just reason for delay.  
Siewick filed a timely appeal.

     After hearing oral argument we ordered this case held in 
abeyance pending the Supreme Court's decision in Vermont 
Agency of Natural Resources v. United States ex rel. Stevens, 
___ U.S. ____, 120 S. Ct. 1858 (2000);  the Court had ex-
pressed interest in standing in qui tam actions generally, 
Stevens, 120 S. Ct. at 523 (expanding cert. grant).  As the 
Court ultimately found no generic lack of standing, Stevens, 
120 S. Ct. at 1863, 1865, and as we see no particular infirmity 
here, we turn to the merits.

                             *  *  *

     We review a district court's grant of summary judgment de 
novo;  a party is not entitled to summary judgment if a 
reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving 
party.  See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 
248 (1986);  Aka v. Washington Hosp. Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 
1288 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (en banc).  We assume in favor of 
Siewick that his case could withstand summary judgment on 
the proposition that JSE violated s 207.  But we find that 
s 207 violations would not in themselves render JSE's in-
voices "false claims" covered by the Act.

     The Act establishes liability for anyone who "knowingly 
presents, or causes to be presented, to an officer or employee 
of the United States Government ... a false or fraudulent 
claim for payment or approval."  31 U.S.C. s 3729(a)(1).  
Siewick's problem is that because of defects in his theories 
and the evidence, a reasonable jury could not find that JSE 
knowingly presented a false or fraudulent claim.

     For both theories it is essential that the vouchers and 
invoices at issue here constitute "claims" within the meaning 
of the Act.  They do.  A "claim" is "any request or demand, 
whether under a contract or otherwise, for money or property 
which is made to a contractor, grantee, or other recipient."  
Id. s 3729(c).  Indeed, any request for payment is properly 
considered a claim for purposes of the FCA.  See United 
States v. Neifert-White Co., 390 U.S. 228, 233 (1968);  see also 

United States ex. rel. Schwedt v. Planning Research Corp., 59 
F.3d 196, 203 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

     Siewick's first theory--that the vouchers made an "implicit 
certification" of non-violation of s 207--is a non-starter.  It is 
doomed by the rule, adopted by all courts of appeals to have 
addressed the matter, that a false certification of compliance 
with a statute or regulation cannot serve as the basis for a 
qui tam action under the FCA unless payment is conditioned 
on that certification.  As the Ninth Circuit said,

     Violations of laws, rules, or regulations alone do not 
     create a cause of action under the FCA.  It is the false 
     certification of compliance which creates liability when 
     certification is a prerequisite to obtaining a government 
     benefit.
     
United States ex rel. Hopper v. Anton, 91 F.3d 1261, 1266 
(9th Cir. 1996) (second emphasis added).  Courts have been 
ready to infer certification from silence, but only where 
certification was a prerequisite to the government action 
sought.  See, e.g., Harrison v. Westinghouse Savannah River 
Co., 176 F.3d 776, 793 (4th Cir. 1999) ("[The FCA] claim fails 
on the pleadings because [the relator] has never asserted that 
such implied certifications were in any way related to, let 
alone prerequisites for, receiving continued funding.").  See 
also United States ex rel. Weinberger v. Equifax, Inc., 557 
F.2d 456, 461 (5th Cir. 1977);  compare United States ex rel. 
Thompson v. Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., 125 F.3d 899, 
902 (5th Cir. 1997) (seeming to require that the certification 
be a prerequisite to receiving funds before liability under the 
FCA can attach, even where the certification is express:  
"false certifications of compliance create liability under the 
FCA when certification is a prerequisite to obtaining a gov-
ernment benefit.").  Siewick points to nothing suggesting that 
JSE was required to certify compliance with s 207 as a 
condition of its contract.  Thus his claim of implied certifica-
tion fails.

     The assessment of Siewick's second theory--that JSE's 
invoices contained "expressly false" statements--turns in part 
on the FCA's definition of "knowingly."  It says that a 

defendant acts "knowingly" if he "(1) has actual knowledge of 
the information;  (2) acts in deliberate ignorance of the truth 
or falsity of the information;  or (3) acts in reckless disregard 
of the truth or falsity of the information."  Id. s 3729(b).  
The key issue, then, is whether (assuming violations of s 207) 
JSE's claims were knowingly false or fraudulent.

     The invoices in the record request that the U.S. Govern-
ment pay JSE "the sums owing for all work performed" 
under the relevant contract and certify that (1) "all these 
charges are for work authorized and performed under the 
referenced contract and that payment has not been received," 
(2) "all claims are consistent with this clause," and (3) "the 
required deliveries ... have been made to the distribution 
specified in the contract."  The parties agree that these 
statements "inform[ ] the government that work which enti-
tles JSE to reimbursement has been performed."  See Appel-
lee's Br. at 27.  Siewick's argument is that JSE knew that the 
contract was void or voidable (Siewick flips back and forth 
between these characterizations), and thus knew that it was 
not entitled to be paid.

     A void contract is one under which the promisor has no 
duty of performance.  See Restatement (Second) of Contracts 
s 7 cmt. a.  (Indeed, some purists say that a "void contract" 
is a contradiction in terms, because the word contract always 
includes some element of enforceability.  See 1 Joseph M. 
Perillo, Corbin on Contracts s 1.7 (rev. ed. 1993)).  A voida-
ble contract is one under which a party, usually a victim of 
some wrong by another party, may "elect" to avoid any legal 
obligations.  Restatement (Second) of Contracts s 7.1 The 
first category is generally reserved for a handful of contracts 
that are seen as being in fundamental violation of public 
policy, such as agreements to do acts that both parties know 

__________
     1 Siewick most commonly argues that the contracts at issue 
here were "unenforceable," a legal status that appears to encompass 
voidable contracts but is often treated separately.  See Restate-
ment (Second) of Contracts s 8 & cmts. a & b;  1 Corbin on 
Contracts s 1.8.  In context, however, his claims are best under-
stood as alleging either voidness or voidability.

will constitute a felony, see Corbin on Contracts s 1.7, or 
wagering agreements made in jurisdictions where gambling is 
illegal, see 7 Richard A. Lord, Williston on Contracts s 17:22 
(4th ed. 1997).  See generally id. at s 12:1 (examining kinds 
of agreements usually considered void).

     We can safely rule out any suggestion that s 207 violations 
could, alone, have voided the contracts (let alone that JSE 
could have "known" of the voiding).  In United States v. 
Mississippi Valley Generating Co., 364 U.S. 520 (1961), de-
cided in an era when Supreme Court readiness to infer 
remedies from criminal statutes was at a high point, the 
Court found that violations of a predecessor of s 207's statu-
tory neighbor criminalizing certain conflicts of interest, 18 
U.S.C. s 208, gave the government the right to "disaffirm a 
contract which is infected by an illegal conflict of interest."  
364 U.S. at 566.  There is no suggestion in the opinion that 
the contract self-destructed into voidness, depriving the gov-
ernment of its election.  The decision assumes (without dis-
cussion, to be sure) that the government would want to retain 
the option to treat the contract as fully in effect.  See id. at 
563 ("This protection [from corrupting influences] can be fully 
accorded only if contracts which are tainted by a conflict of 
interest ... may be disaffirmed by the Government." (em-
phasis added)).  Reasons why the government would wish to 
preserve that election abound:  the officials authorized to 
decide might regard the violation as minor;  they might think 
that the criminal penalties provide ample punishment of the 
present violation and deterrence of future ones;  they might 
be concerned that disaffirmance would unduly impede future 
transactions with the contracting firm (possibly in possession 
of skills or other resources of exceptional value to the govern-
ment) or with other potential contractors.  Longrun interests 
often argue against pushing legal rights to the hilt.

     We note that the Federal Circuit has said that government 
contracts "tainted by fraud or wrongdoing" are "void ab 
initio."  In the first such case, J.E.T.S., Inc. v. United States, 
838 F.2d 1196, 1200 (Fed. Cir. 1988), nothing turned on the 
characterization.  In the second, Godley v. United States, 5 
F.3d 1473, 1476 (Fed. Cir. 1993), the consequences were 

obscure, and the opinion in any event disregarded the lan-
guage of Mississippi Valley Generating that supports voida-
bility and pointed to none supporting voidness.  Read for all 
their worth, these opinions would vastly expand the normally 
minute group of contracts treated as void.

     But the issue is open whether s 207 violations in the 
securing or execution of a contract might render it voidable.  
Of course the revolving door at which s 207 is aimed may 
seem less problematic than the sort of actual conflict of 
interest at stake in s 208 and in Mississippi Valley Generat-
ing.  And in concluding that the voidability issue was open, 
the court in United States v. Medico Indus., Inc., 784 F.2d 
840 (7th Cir. 1986), noted that at the time of Mississippi 
Valley Generating the Court "was freer [than currently] with 
the creation of additional remedies."  Id. at 845.  But the 
Medico court went on to point out that remedies created in 
that era had generally survived and that the Mississippi 
Valley Generating viewpoint was the one prevailing at the 
time of s 207's enactment.  Id.  In the end the Seventh 
Circuit left the issue open because Medico had dropped the 
issue in the district court.  Id. at 844-45.  We also leave the 
issue open;  its resolution is unnecessary to today's case.

     Whatever the ultimate answer to that question, the obsta-
cles to a conclusion that JSE "knowingly" misrepresented the 
validity of the contract obligations are legion.  First, if the 
panel in Medico was uncertain whether a s 207 violation 
created voidability, it is hard to see how Jamieson or O'Con-
nor could--with respect even to voidability, let alone validi-
ty--have satisfied even the loosest standard of knowledge, 
i.e., acting "in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of the 
information."  31 U.S.C. s 3729(b)(3).  While a faulty esti-
mate or opinion can qualify as a false statement where the 
speaker knows facts "which would preclude such an opinion," 
Harrison, 176 F.3d at 792 (emphasis added), the "facts" of 
which the Harrison court spoke are those that the speaking 
party could reasonably classify as true or false, see id.  Here 
there is only legal argumentation and possibility.

     Moreover, a final decision that s 207 violations may allow 
the government to disaffirm a contract would leave other 
legal uncertainties.  Assuming that O'Connor and Jamieson 
had some reason to think that s 207 had been violated, and 
that a contract tainted with such a violation could become 
voidable, they would also have had to know whether voidabili-
ty requires materiality, i.e., whether the s 207 violations must 
have affected the terms of the contracts.  In most circum-
stances, the party seeking to avoid the contract must prove 
that the defect had a material effect on the transaction in 
question.  See Restatement (Second) of Contracts ss 7 cmt. 
b (fraud, mistake, or duress);  15 cmt. b (mental illness);  16 
cmt. b (intoxication);  but see id. s 7 cmt b (materiality 
presumed when one party is an infant).

     Second, even assuming that JSE's contracts were voidable, 
invalidity is a distinct issue.  Siewick's theory is concededly 
and necessarily that JSE knew that the contracts were 
invalid.  But even if voidable they would have become invalid 
only on a contingency--the contingency that the government 
would exercise the assumed right to disclaim.

     Third, a court that found contracts invalid in a qui tam 
action where the government has not joined the plaintiff 
would have unilaterally divested the government of the oppor-
tunity to exercise precisely the discretion that is among the 
key differentiations of voidness from voidability:  the discre-
tion to accept or disaffirm the contract on the basis of 
complex variables reflecting the officials' views of the govern-
ment's longterm interests.

     The implications of Siewick's position are extraordinary.  
Disputes arise between the government and its contractors 
every day.  Contractors do not win every penny they claim.  
On Siewick's theory, any contracting party that misunder-
stands its legal entitlements and therefore fails to recover on 
an invoice in full would be liable under the False Claims 
Act--except in instances where it was unaware of the facts 
that led to its failure to recover in full.  This is not a 
prescription for fair or efficient contracting.

     Accordingly, we find a want of evidence from which a jury 
could reasonably infer that JSE knowingly asserted a falsity 
in its claims for payment under the contracts.

     The district court's grant of partial summary judgment is

                                                                                                 Affirmed.

                                                       