                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 22, 2000     Decided April 21, 2000 

                           No. 99-7103

                        Emmanuel Bailey, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

             Federal National Mortgage Association, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv03095)

     Juanita A. Crowley argued the cause for appellant.  With 
her on the briefs was John Payton.

     Kelly J. Davidson argued the cause for appellee.  With her 
on the brief was Pamela J. White.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Tatel and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  The instant litigation involves a 
claim of employment discrimination filed by the appellee, 
Emmanuel Bailey, against the appellant, Federal National 
Mortgage Association ("Fannie Mae" or "employer").  In 
response to Mr. Bailey's complaint, Fannie Mae filed a motion 
to stay litigation pending arbitration.  The District Court 
denied the motion to stay, and Fannie Mae now appeals.

     This case presents a new twist to an old problem.  In Cole 
v. Burns Int'l Sec. Servs., 105 F.3d 1465 (D.C. Cir. 1997), we 
held that, if certain conditions are met, an employer may 
compel an employee to use arbitration in lieu of litigation to 
pursue a statutory claim of employment discrimination if the 
employee signed an arbitration agreement as a condition of 
hire.  In this case, however, Fannie Mae seeks to compel 
arbitration pursuant to a "Dispute Resolution Policy" that 
was unilaterally promulgated by the employer after Mr. 
Bailey was hired.  There is a serious question under Cole 
whether an employer may impose a condition of employment 
requiring a current employee to use arbitration before seek-
ing to litigate statutory employment discrimination claims for 
no consideration save the employee's continued employment.

     Fortunately, we do not have to decide this troublesome 
question.  The issue was not raised before the trial court, 
because Fannie Mae disclaimed any intention of terminating 
Mr. Bailey if he persisted in his refusal to arbitrate the 
instant dispute.  Fannie Mae contends only that its motion to 
stay should be granted because Mr. Bailey implicitly agreed 
to arbitrate statutory claims of employment discrimination 
when he continued to work for the employer after the issu-
ance of the Dispute Resolution Policy.  Mr. Bailey, in turn, 
claims that he never gave his assent to be bound by the 
employer's new arbitration policy.  Mr. Bailey claims further 
that he made it clear to Fannie Mae that he did not subscribe 
to the employer's new arbitration policy.

     The District Court denied Fannie Mae's motion to stay, 
finding that, because there was no meeting of minds between 
the parties, there was no arbitration agreement to enforce.  

We can find no error in the judgment of the District Court.  
Accordingly, we affirm.

                          I. Background

     On March 12, 1998, Mr. Bailey filed a memorandum with 
Fannie Mae's Office of Corporate Justice requesting an inves-
tigation of various allegations of race and gender discrimina-
tion.  In this memorandum, labeled a "Formal Complaint," 
Mr. Bailey stated:

     Pursuant to the Fannie Mae Employee Handbook, I 
     hereby submit a Formal Complaint with respect to the 
     aforementioned violations of all applicable United States 
     and District of Columbia Laws and the Fannie Mae 
     Affirmative Action Plan.  Further, I hereby retain all 
     redress options available to me under the Equal Employ-
     ment Opportunity Commissions (EEOC) [sic] and the 
     United States and/or Local Court System.
     
Request for Formal Investigation, reprinted in Joint Appen-
dix ("J.A.") 39.

     Fannie Mae had announced in January 1998 that it would 
issue a new arbitration policy on March 16, 1998.  Subse-
quently, on March 16, 1998, as promised, Fannie Mae issued a 
Dispute Resolution Policy, which required employees to pur-
sue job-related claims internally, through arbitration, before 
such claims could be presented to a court of law.  In particu-
lar, the Dispute Resolution Policy stated that, as of March 16, 
1998,

     the Policy becomes a condition of employment for all 
     Fannie Mae employees.  This means that, by starting or 
     continuing work for Fannie Mae on or after that date, 
     each employee is indicating that he or she accepts the 
     Policy as a condition of employment and agrees to be 
     bound by it.
     
Dispute Resolution Policy at 1, reprinted in J.A. 106.

     Mr. Bailey never said anything to any official at Fannie 
Mae to indicate that he acceded to the Dispute Resolution 

Policy, and he never signed any agreement to that effect.  
And Mr. Bailey never did or said anything to withdraw the 
position stated in his March 12 complaint, in which he re-
served the right to pursue statutory claims with the EEOC 
and in federal or state court.  Indeed, on March 30, 1998, 
after the Policy was issued, Mr. Bailey's counsel sent a letter 
to Fannie Mae asserting that

     Mr. Bailey's [March 12] Complaint was directed to [the 
     employer] on that date specifically to avoid the effective 
     date on March 16 of a new corporate policy that might 
     have mandated arbitration of Mr. Bailey's issues.
     
Letter from Pamela J. White to Stasia Kelly (Mar. 30, 1998), 
reprinted in J.A. 70-71.  On May 8, 1998, after an exchange 
of correspondence between the parties over Mr. Bailey's 
refusal to be bound by the new arbitration policy, Mr. Bailey's 
counsel sent another letter to Fannie Mae to reiterate her 
client's position:

     Mr. Bailey retained "all redress options" available to him 
     with the courts or EEO administrative agencies and, 
     thus, rejected Fannie Mae's new mandatory arbitration 
     policy effective March 16, 1998.  Furthermore, with or 
     without regard to the filing date and pendency of his 
     Complaint, Mr. Bailey does not agree to be bound by the 
     new "Dispute Resolution Policy."
     
Letter from Pamela J. White to Dawn P. Marcelle (May 8, 
1998), reprinted in J.A. 186.  In response to this last letter, 
Fannie Mae's counsel sent a letter to Mr. Bailey's attorney, 
reiterating the employer's position and reassuring Mr. Bailey 
that he was in no threat of losing his job:

     Fannie Mae had not previously understood that Mr. 
     Bailey had already decided that he would not be bound 
     by the Dispute Resolution Policy.  As you know, Fannie 
     Mae considers Mr. Bailey to be bound by that Policy 
     with respect to the complaint that he made on March 12, 
     1998.  In the event that an employee disregards the 
     Policy, Fannie Mae would enforce it by seeking appropri-
     ate judicial relief.  As Fannie Mae previously told em-
     
     ployees, it will not terminate them for failing to follow 
     the Policy.
     
Letter from Fannie Mae to Pamela J. White, reprinted in 
J.A. 190.

     On August 6, 1998, Fannie Mae rejected Mr. Bailey's 
complaint as unmeritorious.  On December 14, 1998, Mr. 
Bailey filed a lawsuit in the Superior Court of the District of 
Columbia, alleging discrimination and retaliation in violation 
of 42 U.S.C. s 1981 (1994), discrimination and retaliation in 
violation of the D.C. Human Rights Act s 1-2501, and breach 
of implied contract in violation of 42 U.S.C. s 1981.  Fannie 
Mae removed Mr. Bailey's lawsuit to the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia on December 18, 
1998.  Fannie Mae then moved, pursuant to 9 U.S.C. s 3 
(1994), to stay litigation pending arbitration of Mr. Bailey's 
claims.  Because Mr. Bailey had rejected the policy of man-
datory arbitration as a condition of his continued employment, 
he opposed the motion to stay.

     On May 21, 1999, the District Court denied Fannie Mae's 
motion, finding that Mr. Bailey had effectively rejected the 
possibility of arbitration when he filed his complaint with 
Fannie Mae on March 12, 1998.  Fannie Mae then filed this 
appeal pursuant to 9 U.S.C. s 16(a)(1) (1994).

                          II. Discussion

A.   The Standard of Review

     Normally, the determination of intent is a question of fact.  
See Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 288 (1982).  
Therefore, a district court's findings on intent are subject to 
deferential review under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
52(a), and such findings may not be set aside unless clearly 
erroneous.  See id. at 287-88.  It does not matter whether a 
finding of fact is based on documentary evidence or infer-
ences from other facts;  in either event, an appellate court 
must respect a trial court's finding of fact unless it concludes 
that the finding is clearly erroneous.  See Anderson v. Bes-
semer City, 470 U.S. 564, 574 (1985).  "A finding is 'clearly 

erroneous' when although there is evidence to support it, the 
reviewing court on the entire evidence is left with the definite 
and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed."  
United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 333 U.S. 364, 395 
(1948).  And the burden of establishing a clear error is on the 
appellant.  See, e.g., Case v. Morrisette, 475 F.2d 1300, 1307 
(D.C. Cir. 1973).

     In Pullman-Standard, the Court applied Rule 52(a) to 
review a lower court's determination that the differential 
impact of a seniority system reflected an intent to discrimi-
nate racially.  The Court expressly repudiated the view that 
facts could be put into distinguishable categories (i.e., either 
subsidiary or ultimate) in determining whether Rule 52(a)'s 
clearly erroneous standard of review should apply.  See Pull-
man Standard, 456 U.S. at 287.  However, the Court left 
open the question of the standard of review for "mixed 
questions of law and fact," that is, "questions in which the 
historical facts are admitted or established, the rule of law is 
undisputed, and the issue is whether the facts satisfy the 
statutory standard, or to put it another way, whether the rule 
of law as applied to the established facts is or is not violated."  
Id. at 289 n.19.  It is unclear in this case whether the District 
Court's finding that Mr. Bailey never agreed to arbitration is 
a simple question of fact or a mixed question of law and fact.  
At first blush, the issue appears to raise a question of fact 
regarding the parties' intent.  Unfortunately, the question is 
not so simple.

     In United States v. Microsoft Corp., 147 F.3d 935 (D.C. Cir. 
1998), the court observed that "[i]nterpretation of an ambigu-
ous contract term on the basis of extrinsic evidence is gener-
ally treated as a question of fact, and the district court's 
findings as to the parties' intent are reviewed deferentially, 
i.e., reversed only for clear error."  Id. at 945 n.7.  The 
majority opinion notes, however, that there are a number of 
cases in which the appellate court has engaged in de novo 
review of district court interpretations.  See id.  Microsoft 
assumes that "de novo review of legal analysis is in principle 
compatible with deference to factual findings";  but the opin-
ion then expresses concern that, under a "mixed approach" in 

a case involving a question of intent, "the centrality of intent 
would often make the deference swallow the de novo review, a 
result our cases do not seem to contemplate."  Id.

     The problem here is complicated even more, because this is 
not a case in which the parties disagree over the meaning of 
an existing agreement.  Rather, the legal battle here is over 
the existence of a contract, not its meaning.  In fact, both 
sides seem to agree that if the Dispute Resolution Policy 
constitutes an enforceable agreement, there is no disagree-
ment over the meaning of the arbitration policy.  The District 
Court found that Mr. Bailey never assented to the new 
arbitration policy.  We must now decide whether the District 
Court's decision on this question is subject to deferential 
review under Rule 52(a).

     One of our sister circuits has held that an appellate court 
engages in de novo review when considering a district court's 
order denying a stay of a federal suit pending arbitration 
pursuant to 9 U.S.C. s 3.  See, e.g., Riley Mfg. Co. v. Anchor 
Glass Container Corp., 157 F.3d 775, 779 (10th Cir. 1998).  
According to the Tenth Circuit, such review requires the 
appellate court to evaluate "whether the district court cor-
rectly found that no valid and enforceable agreement to 
arbitrate the parties' dispute exists."  Id.  The Second Cir-
cuit, on the other hand, has held that a determination as to 
whether the parties entered into an enforceable agreement to 
arbitrate raises a mixed question of law and fact.  See 
Chelsea Square Textiles, Inc. v. Bombay Dyeing and Mfg. 
Co., 189 F.3d 289, 295 (2d Cir. 1999).  Fannie Mae contends 
that this court is required to review the judgment of the 
District Court de novo.  Mr. Bailey, citing Walker v. J.C. 
Bradford & Co., 938 F.2d 575, 576-77 (5th Cir. 1991), appears 
to suggest that the matter involves a mixed question of law 
and fact.  See Br. of Appellee at 14.

     The D.C. Circuit has yet to address this precise question.  
In Gardner v. Benefits Communications Corp., 175 F.3d 155 
(D.C. Cir. 1999), the court reversed a trial court's decision 
compelling arbitration, holding that the employee had never 

agreed to use arbitration in lieu of litigation.  Gardner is 
inconclusive on the standard of review, however.

     Now that we must squarely face the issue, we hold in 
accord with the Second Circuit

     that the determination that parties have contractually 
     bound themselves to arbitrate disputes--a determination 
     involving interpretation of state law--is a legal conclu-
     sion subject to our de novo review, ... but that the 
     findings upon which that conclusion is based are factual 
     and thus may not be overturned unless clearly erroneous.
     
Chelsea Square, 189 F.3d at 295.  As we noted in Microsoft, 
"the centrality of intent" may in some cases "make the 
deference swallow the de novo review."  147 F.3d at 945 n.7.  
The Second Circuit recognized, however, that cases of this 
genre often involve an interpretation of state law, which is a 
legal conclusion subject to de novo review.  See Chelsea 
Square, 189 F.3d at 295.

B.   The Parties Never Agreed to Contractually Bind Them-
     selves to Arbitrate

     Fannie Mae had announced in January 1998 that it would 
issue the new arbitration policy on March 16, so the District 
Court found that Mr. Bailey "knew this [new] arbitration 
process was coming" when he filed his complaint with Fannie 
Mae on March 12, 1998.  Trial Tr. at 5, reprinted in J.A. 203.  
The District Court therefore found that Mr. Bailey "made a 
timely election against arbitration" when he filed his com-
plaint.  Id. at 2, reprinted in J.A. 200.  And, most important-
ly, the District Court found that Mr. Bailey's internal com-
plaint "clearly signal[ed] ... that he was intending to invoke 
his rights to reject arbitration."  Id. at 5, reprinted in J.A. 
203.  In other words, the District Court found that Fannie 
Mae was "put ... on notice" that Mr. Bailey rejected the new 
arbitration policy.  Id. at 6, reprinted in J.A. 204.  The 
District Court's findings are supported by the record and 
easily survive review under Rule 52(a).

     Fannie Mae, however, claims that Mr. Bailey's determina-
tion to retain his right to pursue statutory claims before the 
EEOC and in the courts was not inconsistent with the 
employer's policy requiring employees to use arbitration.  
This assertion is simply wrong. Absent an agreement to 
arbitrate, an employee is not required to exhaust arbitration 
as a condition precedent to pursuing his statutory remedies 
before the EEOC and the courts.  Therefore, Mr. Bailey's so-
called "redress options" would be dramatically changed--in 
terms of cost, time delays, and, possibly, inadequate adjudica-
tory processes--if he were barred from litigation until after 
he pursued his claims in arbitration.  And, if forced to use 
arbitration, there is always the possibility that a reviewing 
court might give some deference to an arbitrator's findings, 
arguably to the detriment of a litigant like Mr. Bailey.  See 
Cole, 105 F.3d at 1486-87 (discussing the scope of judicial 
review and deference to arbitration);  see also Harry T. 
Edwards, Where Are We Heading With Mandatory Arbitra-
tion of Statutory Claims in Employment?, 16 Ga. St. U. L. 
Rev. 293, 304-06 (2000) (discussing different judicial ap-
proaches to the scope of review and deference to arbitration 
awards).  There are many parties and their advocates who 
abhor arbitration precisely because it often adversely affects 
redress options.  See discussion and citations in Cole, 105 
F.3d at 1477-79.  See generally A Focus Issue on Mandatory 
Arbitration Clauses, The Consumer Advocate (Nat'l Associa-
tion of Consumer Advocates, Washington, D.C.) Sept./Oct. 
1999;  Ethan A. Brecher, Putting the Reins on Employment 
Arbitration:  Courts Safeguard Employee Rights, N.Y. L.J. 
Aug. 24, 1999, at 1;  Harry T. Edwards, Where Are We 
Heading With Mandatory Arbitration of Statutory Claims in 
Employment, 16 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 293;  Morton H. Orenstein, 
Mandatory Arbitration:  Alive and Well or Withering on the 
Vine?, 54 Disp. Resol. J. 57 (Aug. 1999);  Debra Parker, 
Tangled Up in Ticker Tape, 85 A.B.A. J. 44 (1999).

     Quite apart from Mr. Bailey's complaint and what it sig-
naled to Fannie Mae, there are several other telling facts in 
the record of this case.  It is undisputed that Mr. Bailey 
never executed any written agreement with Fannie Mae to 

arbitrate statutory claims of employment discrimination.  In-
deed, it is uncontested that the parties never purported to 
reach an understanding by oral agreement.  It is also unques-
tioned that Mr. Bailey never said or wrote anything after 
Fannie Mae issued its new arbitration policy, either to rescind 
what he had said in his written complaint or to otherwise 
indicate that he subscribed to the Dispute Resolution Policy.  
In fact, after the new policy was issued, Mr. Bailey's counsel 
wrote to officials at Fannie Mae to make it clear that Mr. 
Bailey was not bound to pursue his claims in arbitration.

     In short, there are no disputes between the parties over 
these material facts.  The only remaining question, therefore, 
is whether the District Court erred in concluding that Fannie 
Mae failed to fulfill its burden of proving that there was an 
agreement as to all material terms and that both parties 
intended to be bound by the arbitration policy.  Whether we 
apply a de novo standard of review or "clearly erroneous" 
review under Rule 52(a), it is clear here that the judgment of 
the District Court must be affirmed.

     Fannie Mae persists in arguing that there was an "agree-
ment" between the parties because Mr. Bailey did not un-
equivocally and effectively voice his opposition to the new 
arbitration policy.  There are two problems with this argu-
ment:  First, the District Court found otherwise, and that 
finding is not clearly erroneous.  Second, the argument has a 
false premise.  The question here is not whether Mr. Bailey 
effectively rejected what his employer proposed, for he had 
no obligation even to respond to Fannie Mae's proposal.  The 
issue is whether Mr. Bailey did something to indicate that he 
intended to enter into an agreement with Fannie Mae so as to 
bind himself to pursue his statutory claims of employment 
discrimination in arbitration.

     The Supreme Court has instructed in First Options of 
Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U.S. 938 (1995), that "[w]hen 
deciding whether the parties agreed to arbitrate a certain 
matter, ... courts generally ... should apply ordinary state-
law principles that govern the formation of contracts."  Id. at 
944.  Thus, in this case, we must look to the law of the 

District of Columbia to determine whether the employer's 
Dispute Resolution Policy reflects a binding agreement be-
tween Mr. Bailey and Fannie Mae.

     Under applicable District of Columbia law, "[a]rbitration is 
predicated upon the consent of the parties to a dispute, and 
the determination of whether the parties have consented to 
arbitrate is a matter to be determined by the courts on the 
basis of the contracts between the parties."  Ballard & 
Assocs., Inc. v. Mangum, 368 A.2d 548, 551 (D.C. 1977).  
Furthermore, under District law, an enforceable contract 
does not exist unless there has been a "meeting of the minds" 
as to all material terms.  In other words, a contract is not 
formed unless the parties reach an accord on all material 
terms and indicate an intention to be bound.  See Jack Baker, 
Inc. v. Office Space Dev. Corp., 664 A.2d 1236, 1238 (D.C. 
1995).  With respect to proof of intent, the D.C. Court of 
Appeals has held that "the parties' intention to be bound must 
be 'closely' examined."  Id. at 1239.  The court explained:

     In evaluating contract formation, we also look closely at 
     the parties' intention to be bound.  In order to form a 
     binding agreement, both parties must have the distinct 
     intention to be bound;  without such intent, there can be 
     no assent and therefore no contract.
     
Id. (quoting Edmund J. Flynn Co. v. LaVay, 431 A.2d 543, 
547 (D.C. 1981)).  Finally, the party asserting the existence of 
a contract has the burden of proving its existence.  See 
Ekedahl v. Corestaff, Inc., 183 F.3d 855, 858 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
(per curiam).  In this case, Fannie Mae has not come close to 
satisfying the requirements of District of Columbia law in its 
attempt to prove the existence of an agreement between the 
employer and Mr. Bailey.

     Fannie Mae's principal claim is that Mr. Bailey agreed to 
the new arbitration policy because he did not positively reject 
it.  This is a non sequitur.  Even if we accepted the prem-
ise--which we do not, because the District Court's finding to 
the contrary is not cleary erroneous--it would not follow that 
Mr. Bailey's failure to reject a proposal, without more, evi-
denced his assent to be bound.  District of Columbia law 

clearly requires a "meeting of the minds" as to all material 
terms for a contract to be formed.  There was no "meeting of 
the minds" in this case, because Mr. Bailey did nothing 
whatsoever to embrace the employer's proposal.

     Fannie Mae also claims that when Mr. Bailey continued in 
his job with the employer, this showed that he acceded the 
Dispute Resolution Policy, because the Policy itself was pro-
claimed to be a "condition of employment."  This, too, is a 
flawed argument.  First, as counsel acknowledged at oral 
argument, there is a question as to whether Fannie Mae 
could terminate a current employee solely because of his or 
her refusal to accept the new arbitration policy. The Ninth 
Circuit has held that

     the unilateral promulgation by an employer of arbitration 
     provisions in an Employee Handbook does not constitute 
     a "knowing agreement" on the part of an employee to 
     waive a statutory remedy provided by a civil rights law.
     
Nelson v. Cyprus Bagdad Copper Corp., 119 F.3d 756, 762 
(9th Cir. 1997);  see also Wright v. Universal Maritime Serv. 
Corp., 525 U.S. 70, 79-82 (1998) (holding that a general 
arbitration clause in a collective bargaining agreement does 
not waive an employee's right to judicial forum for claim of 
employment discrimination;  an employee does not waive a 
statutorily protected right unless the undertaking is "explicit-
ly stated," and any such "waiver must be clear and unmistak-
able");  Mohave Elec. Coop. v. NLRB, 2000 WL 287822 (D.C. 
Cir. Mar. 28, 2000) (same);  Cole, 105 F.3d at 1482 (noting 
that the Supreme Court's decision in "Gilmer cannot be read 
as holding that an arbitration agreement is enforceable no 
matter what rights it waives or what burdens it imposes").  
In other words, Mr. Bailey had reason to assume that, under 
existing law, his job was not in jeopardy.  This being the 
case, Mr. Bailey signaled nothing when he remained in the 
employ of Fannie Mae following the issuance of the arbitra-
tion policy.  Furthermore, to be sure that there was no 
confusion on this point, Mr. Bailey's lawyer specifically raised 
the issue with the employer;  in response, Fannie Mae's 
attorney assured Mr. Bailey that he was in no threat of losing 

his job over his refusal to subscribe to the employer's arbitra-
tion policy.  Given these considerations, Mr. Bailey's contin-
ued employment with Fannie Mae surely was not an indica-
tion that he intended to be bound by the arbitration policy.

     In light of the undisputed facts in this case and the 
applicable law of the District of Columbia, we are constrained 
to find that the District Court was correct in rejecting Fannie 
Mae's motion to stay litigation pending arbitration.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the 
District Court.

                                                      So ordered.

                          