                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                        Filed June 6, 2000

                        Division No. 89-5

                  In re:  Samuel R. Pierce, Jr. 
                     (Pierce Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     This matter coming to be heard and being heard before the 
Special Division of the Court upon the petition of Samuel R. 
Pierce, Jr. for reimbursement of attorneys' fees and costs 
pursuant to Section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 
1978, as amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591 et seq. (1994), and it 
appearing to the court for the reasons set forth more fully in 
the opinion filed contemporaneously herewith that the peti-
tion is not well taken, it is hereby

     ORDERED, ADJUDGED, and DECREED that the peti-
tion of Samuel R. Pierce, Jr. for attorneys' fees he incurred 
during the investigation by Independent Counsels Arlin M. 
Adams and Larry D. Thompson be denied.

                                        Per curiam

                                        For the Court:

                                        Mark J. Langer, Clerk

                                   by

                                        Marilyn R. Sargent

                                        Chief Deputy Clerk

                                 

































                         United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                        Filed June 6, 2000

                        Division No. 89-5

                  In re:  Samuel R. Pierce, Jr. 
                     (Pierce Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as Amended


     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                ON APPLICATION FOR ATTORNEYS' FEES

     Opinion for the Special Court filed PER CURIAM.

     PER CURIAM:  Samuel R. Pierce, Jr. petitions this court 
under Section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 
as amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591 et seq. (1994) (the "Act"), for 
reimbursement of attorneys' fees in the amount of $276,580.90 
that he incurred during and as a result of the investigation 
conducted by Independent Counsels ("IC") Arlin M. Adams 
and Larry D. Thompson.  Because we conclude that Pierce 
has not carried his burden of showing that the fees would not 
have been incurred but for the requirements of the Act, we 
deny the petition in its entirety.

                            BACKGROUND

     Samuel R. Pierce, Jr. served as Secretary of the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) from 
1981 to 1989.  HUD administered many housing programs 
during that time period, including the moderate rehabilitation 

("mod rehab") program, which was established by Congress 
in 1978 to encourage developers to upgrade moderately sub-
standard housing units for occupation by low income families.  
Essentially, mod rehab funds were to be distributed to state 
or local Public Housing Authorities ("PHA's"), which, in turn, 
were to enter into mod rehab agreements with owners of low-
income rental properties within their areas.  In 1988, howev-
er, an examination by HUD's Inspector General found, inter 
alia, that the process used by HUD headquarters to allocate 
mod rehab funding to PHA's was undocumented and contrary 
to pertinent regulations;  that former HUD officials and 
employees were actively participating in a large number of 
mod rehab projects as consultants and/or developers;  and 
that there was little assurance that mod rehab units were 
allocated equitably to PHA's or that the projects were select-
ed competitively.  See 1 Arlin M. Adams & Larry D. Thomp-
son, Final Report of the Independent Counsel in Re:  Samuel 
R. Pierce, Jr. 2-3 (1998).

     The examination by HUD's Inspector General triggered 
congressional investigations into abuses, favoritism, and mis-
management at HUD during the 1980s.  Pierce testified 
before Congress in mid-1989 concerning the mod rehab pro-
gram.  Allegations of perjury concerning his testimony arose.  
He asserted his privilege against self-incrimination and re-
fused to testify further.  Subsequently, based on information 
elicited during the congressional investigations, the House 
Judiciary Committee wrote to Attorney General Richard 
Thornburgh seeking the appointment of an independent coun-
sel to investigate the matter.  Following a preliminary inves-
tigation, Attorney General Thornburgh applied to this court 
for appointment of an independent counsel.  On March 1, 
1990, we appointed former United States Circuit Judge Arlin 
Adams1 as independent counsel "to investigate ... whether 
Samuel R. Pierce, Jr., and other [HUD] officials may have 
committed the crime of conspiracy to defraud the United 

__________
     1 Independent Counsel Adams resigned in May of 1995.  This 
court appointed his deputy, Larry D. Thompson of the Atlanta bar, 
to succeed him.

States or any other Federal crimes ... relating to the 
administration of the selection process of the Department's 
Moderate Rehabilitation Program from 1984 through 1988."  
Order Appointing Independent Counsel, March 1, 1990.  The 
IC's mandate was expanded several times thereafter, includ-
ing an expansion to investigate whether perjury and other 
federal crimes may have been committed by Pierce.

     The IC conducted a comprehensive investigation ultimately 
confirming a widespread pattern of corruption at HUD dur-
ing Pierce's tenure.  The investigation ranged well beyond 
the core facts of the original application for appointment of 
independent counsel.  Ultimately, seventeen (17) persons 
were charged with and convicted of federal crimes as a result 
of the investigation.  Pierce himself admitted that "[o]n a 
number occasions, [he] met or spoke privately with personal 
friends who were paid to obtain funding for mod rehab 
projects," and that he "failed to monitor and control ... the 
'mod rehab' program, when it was being operated, at least in 
part, to benefit certain consultants, developers, and ex-HUD 
officials."  Further, Pierce acknowledged that during his 
testimony before Congress his answers to certain questions 
"did not always accurately reflect the events occurring at 
HUD."  Statement by the Honorable Samuel R. Pierce, Jr., 
December 15, 1994, reprinted in Independent Counsel's Eval-
uation of Pierce Fee Application ("IC Eval.") at Tab 1.  
Nevertheless, the IC declined to seek a criminal indictment of 
Pierce, citing as reasons "Secretary Pierce's age and multiple 
health problems, the conflicting evidence regarding the intent 
with which he acted, and the absence of any evidence that he 
or his family profited from his actions at HUD."  Press 
Statement, Office of Independent Counsel, Jan. 11, 1995, 
reprinted in IC Eval. at Tab 2.

     The IC's investigation is now complete.  Pursuant to the 
statute, the IC submitted a final report to this court on 
March 30, 1998.  See 28 U.S.C. s 594(h)(1)(B).  We ordered 
the report made public by order of October 27, 1998.  There-
after, Pierce, pursuant to Section 593(f)(1) of the Act, peti-
tioned this court for reimbursement of his attorneys' fees.  
As directed by Section 593(f)(2) of the Act, we forwarded 

copies of Pierce's fee petition to the Attorney General and the 
IC and requested written evaluations of the petition.  The 
court expresses its appreciation to the IC and the Attorney 
General for submitting these evaluations, which we have 
given due consideration in arriving at the decision announced 
herein.

                             ANALYSIS

     Unique in the criminal law structure of the United States, 
the Ethics in Government Act provides for reimbursement of 
attorneys' fees expended by subjects in defense against an 
investigation under the Act.  Specifically, 28 U.S.C. 
s 593(f)(1) states:

     Upon the request of an individual who is the subject of 
     an investigation conducted by an independent counsel 
     pursuant to this chapter, the division of the court may, if 
     no indictment is brought against such individual pursuant 
     to that investigation, award reimbursement for those 
     reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by that individual 
     during that investigation which would not have been 
     incurred but for the requirements of this chapter.
     
     Because the Act "constitutes a waiver of sovereign immuni-
ty it is to be strictly construed."  In re Nofziger, 925 F.2d 
428, 438 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1991) (per curiam).  Therefore, 
the Act provides only reimbursement for attorneys' fees that 
survive an elemental analysis determining whether the peti-
tioner is the "subject" of the independent counsel's investiga-
tion, incurred the fees "during" that investigation, and would 
not have incurred them "but for" the requirements of the Act.  
The petitioner "bears the burden of establishing all elements 
of his entitlement."  In re North (Reagan Fee Application), 
94 F.3d 685, 690 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1996) (per curiam).  
We conclude that Pierce has not met the "but for" require-
ment.

     As we have held, "[a]ll requests for attorneys' fees under 
the Act must satisfy the 'but for' requirement of" the Act.  In 
re Sealed Case, 890 F.2d 451, 452 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1989) 

(per curiam).  The purpose of awarding only fees that would 
not have been incurred "but for" the Act is to ensure that 
"officials who are investigated by independent counsels will 
be subject only to paying those attorneys' fees that would 
normally be paid by private citizens being investigated for the 
same offense by" federal executive officials such as the Unit-
ed States Attorney.  Id. at 452-53 (citing S. Rep. No. 97-496, 
97th Cong., 2d Sess. 18 (1982), reprinted in 1982 
U.S.C.C.A.N. 3537, 3554 (referring to "fees [that] would not 
have been incurred in the absence of the special prosecutor 
[independent counsel] law")).

     As we have stated, "[t]he most difficult element for a fee 
applicant to establish under the Act is that the fees 'would not 
have been incurred but for the requirements of [the Act].' " 
In re North (Bush Fee Application), 59 F.3d 184, 188 (D.C. 
Cir., Spec. Div., 1995) (per curiam) (quoting In re North 
(Dutton Fee Application), 11 F.3d 1075, 1079 (D.C. Cir., Spec. 
Div., 1993) (per curiam)).  In part this is so because the 
element requires a petitioner to prove a negative and one 
with a high component of speculation.  In part, though, it is 
difficult because the law contemplates that it should be diffi-
cult, that such fees will not be a common thing.  As we stated 
above, the contemplation of the legislation is not that subjects 
of independent counsel investigations will be reimbursed for 
all legal fees, but only that they will be reimbursed for those 
legal fees that would not have been incurred by a similarly-
situated subject investigated in the absence of the Act.

     Pierce puts forth several arguments in support of his 
contention that in the absence of the Act either no investiga-
tion, or a much lesser investigation, would have resulted in 
this matter, and consequently the attorneys' fees incurred by 
him during the IC's investigation would not have come about 
"but for" the Act.  For the reasons stated below, we do not 
find these arguments persuasive.

     Pierce first argues that the "but for" element is satisfied 
where regular prosecutorial practices would not have resulted 
in any investigation.  This is so in his case, Pierce claims, 
because staff prosecutors in the Public Integrity Section of 

the Department of Justice had concluded prior to the appoint-
ment of an independent counsel that no investigation of him 
was necessary.  For evidence of this position by the Public 
Integrity Section, Pierce references certain contemporaneous 
newspaper articles reporting that staff prosecutors had rec-
ommended that the investigation of Pierce be shut down for 
lack of evidence.  See, e.g., Philip Shenon, Criminal Inquiry 
Is Opened Into Ex-H.U.D. Chief's Acts, N.Y. Times, Dec. 5, 
1989, at A20.

     Pierce cites to our decision in In re Olson (Perry Fee 
Application), 892 F.2d 1073 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1990) (per 
curiam), for the proposition that where an IC is appointed to 
investigate a subject despite the Public Integrity Section's 
recommendation to the contrary, the "but for" requirement is 
satisfied.  In Perry we noted that the fee applicant was 
subjected to a duplicative investigation that he would not have 
been subjected to but for the Act because the Public Integrity 
Section had definitively decided not to recommend prosecu-
tion in that matter.  Id. at 1074.  Here, the suggestion that 
"but for" the Act the purported views of unidentified persons 
in the Public Integrity Section would have prevailed is specu-
lative.  As we noted in In re Pierce (Sanders Fee Applica-
tion), 198 F.3d 899 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) (per curiam), 
the information contained in the referenced news articles 
"gives us little guidance in trying to determine what an 
Attorney General will ultimately decide to do in the matter."  
Id. at 905.  We agree with the Department of Justice that the 
kind of pervasive and high-level corruption of a government 
program that occurred here would inevitably have come 
under scrutiny with or without an independent counsel law, 
and any investigation would necessarily have concerned itself 
with Pierce's involvement.

     Pierce further argues that since the IC's original jurisdic-
tion was expanded from investigation of one program over a 
four-year period to several programs over an eight-year 
period, and the investigation itself went on for almost five 
years, then he satisfies the "but for" element because he was 
subjected to a more rigorous application of the criminal law 
than he would have been in the absence of the Act.  He relies 

on In re Sealed Case, 890 F.2d at 452-53, and In re Meese, 
907 F.2d 1192, 1196-97 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1990) (per 
curiam), which held that when an independent counsel's inves-
tigation exposes a subject to a more rigorous examination 
than the ordinary citizen is likely to receive, the "but for" 
element is satisfied.

     In Sealed Case we held that the fee applicant was subjected 
to a more rigorous application of the criminal law in part 
because his tax returns and financial dealings were examined 
for a period of nine years.2  We noted in that case that the 
ordinary examination of a taxpayer would have been substan-
tially less probing.  See 890 F.2d at 454.  No such less 
probing examination would have been made of Pierce's con-
duct in the absence of the Act.  As we stated elsewhere 
referring to this same investigation, "[t]he convoluted nature 
of the corruption involved and the high profile identity of the 
suspects and defendants would no doubt have resulted in a 
complex and lengthy investigation with or without the ap-
pointment of an independent counsel."  In re Pierce (Kisner 
Fee Application), 178 F.3d 1356, 1361 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 
1999) (per curiam).

     Similarly, in Meese, we held that Attorney General Edwin 
Meese III was subjected to a more rigorous application of the 
criminal law, and satisfied the "but for" requirement, in part 
because the investigation concerning him as initially referred 
was greatly expanded and continued for fourteen months.  
We noted, however, that Meese also fulfilled the "but for" 
requirement in part because no preliminary investigation 
pursuant to the Act was conducted prior to referral of the 
matter to the independent counsel by the Acting Attorney 
General;  the referral "did not eliminate the necessity for 
compliance with the requirement ... that there be a prelimi-
nary investigation and finding of reasonable grounds to be-
lieve that further investigation or prosecution of [Meese] ... 

__________
     2 We also based our holding that the fee applicant was subjected 
to a more rigorous application on the Attorney General's reference 
in his application for an independent counsel to the limitations 
placed upon him by the Act.  See infra.

was warranted."  907 F.2d at 1197.  Meese was subjected to 
a more rigorous application of the criminal law, then, because 
of both "the extreme expansion of the resulting investigation" 
and "the basis upon which the referral was made."  Id. at 
1201.  Here, although the investigation was expanded beyond 
its original mandate and lasted for a number of years, the 
expansion occurred because the investigation itself revealed 
further evidence of fundamental corruption of a federal hous-
ing program and such crimes as perjury, bribery, and ob-
struction of justice.  We are convinced that this matter would 
have been investigated for a significant period of time by any 
professional or politically appointed public prosecutor.  Pierce 
was not, therefore, subjected to a more rigorous application of 
the criminal law than would have been applied to ordinary 
citizens.

     Finally, Pierce contends that he was prejudiced by the 
provisions of the Act which prevented the Department of 
Justice from following its normal procedures.  He notes that 
the Attorney General in his application for appointment of an 
independent counsel stated that he could not use grand juries, 
subpoenas, or grants of immunity to obtain evidence, and so 
was "constrained to conclude that further investigation may 
be warranted."  Application of Attorney General, at 5, Feb-
ruary 1, 1990.  Citing to In re Donovan, 877 F.2d 982 (D.C. 
Cir., Spec. Div., 1989) (per curiam), and In re Sealed Case, 
Pierce argues that the "but for" test is satisfied where the 
Act's restrictions interfere with the Attorney General's ability 
to conduct a proper preliminary inquiry, and that if the 
Attorney General had not been so limited here then Pierce 
would have been subjected to a less thorough and extensive 
investigation.

     In Donovan we found the "but for" requirement fulfilled 
where the Deputy Attorney General's application for the 
appointment of an independent counsel stated that " '[t]he 
Department of Justice's efforts to pursue this matter has 
been hampered by the limitations in the Act that preclude the 
Attorney General from convening grand juries, plea bargain-
ing, granting immunity, or issuing subpoenas.' "  877 F.2d at 
988.  Had the Department of Justice not been so limited by 

the Act, then it could have found "that the principal witnesses 
were not credible and that there were no facts provable 
beyond a reasonable doubt that justified a prosecution," and 
the fee applicant would have been subjected to a much lesser 
investigation.  Id. at 989.

     In Sealed Case the Attorney General in his application for 
an independent counsel also cited to the limitations imposed 
on him by the Act, specifically stating that one of his reasons 
for requesting the appointment of an independent counsel 
was the Department of Justice's " 'inability to use compulsory 
process during a preliminary investigation.' "  890 F.2d at 
453.  We noted in that case:

     Not that the mere existence of these statutory restric-
     tions satisfies the "but for" requirement in every case.  
     But where, as here, the Attorney General in his applica-
     tion represents that the statutory restrictions have inter-
     fered with his ability to conduct an adequate preliminary 
     investigation, and the circumstances of the alleged of-
     fense indicate that, if the Attorney General were not so 
     limited, [the] applicant might have been subjected to a 
     lesser investigation, or perhaps exonerated at this early 
     stage, the statutory limitations are factors that the court 
     may rely upon in determining that the "but for" factor is 
     satisfied.
     
Id. (emphasis added).  In both Donovan and Sealed Case, 
then, if there had been no statutory restrictions on the 
Attorney General in his preliminary investigation, there 
would have either been no further investigation or a much 
smaller investigation of the fee applicant.  Pierce argues that 
if the Attorney General had not been so constrained in his 
case, then he likewise would have been subjected to a quicker, 
less thorough, and less extensive investigation.  We cannot 
agree.

     Although the Attorney General noted the constraints im-
posed upon him by law in deciding whether to seek an 
independent counsel in this matter, nothing in the Attorney 
General's filing or in any of the surrounding circumstances 
suggests that, absent those constraints, this investigation 

would have resulted in a lesser and speedier investigation of 
those involved.  To the contrary, the Attorney General made 
specific reference to the "breadth of the allegations and the 
fact that a number of the figures central to the alleged 
conspiracy, including Secretary Pierce ... have declined to 
be interviewed."  Application of Attorney General, at 5.  As 
we stated in Kisner, if the IC had not investigated this 
matter, then "the Attorney General or other investigative 
authority would have pursued allegations of corruption as 
deep and widespread as those occasioning the Independent 
Counsel's investigation."  178 F.3d at 1360;  see also In re 
Pierce (Olivas Fee Application), 178 F.3d 1350, 1355 (D.C. 
Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) (per curiam).

                            CONCLUSION

     The petition of Samuel R. Pierce, Jr. for reimbursement of 
attorneys' fees is denied for failure to comply with the "but 
for" requirement of 28 U.S.C. s 593(f)(1).

      