                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 11, 2002     Decided March 29, 2002 

                           No. 01-5035

          American Federation of Government Employees, 
                        AFL-CIO, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

        Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of the U.S. Department 
                     of Agriculture, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (98cv00893)

     Anne M. Wagner argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellants.  With her on the briefs was Mark Roth.

     Charles W. Scarborough, Attorney, U.S. Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellees.  With him on the 
briefs were Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, Mark B. 

Stern and Colette G. Matzzie, Attorneys, U.S. Department of 
Justice. Barbara C. Biddle, Assistant Director, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  This case returns to us after 
proceedings on remand from Am. Fed'n of Gov't Employees 
v. Glickman, 215 F.3d 7 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("AFGE I").  The 
United States Department of Agriculture ("USDA") had at-
tempted to test a new inspection model at several hog and 
poultry processing plants.  AFGE I held that, as implement-
ed, the model program violated the Federal Meat Inspection 
Act ("FMIA"), 21 U.S.C. s 604, and the Poultry Products 
Inspection Act ("PPIA"), 21 U.S.C. s 455.  While the case 
was on remand in the district court, the USDA modified its 
model program.  The question now is whether the revised 
model program complies with these statutes.

     Both statutes seek to ensure that all meat and poultry 
products processed for human consumption are wholesome 
and unadulterated.  See 21 U.S.C. s 602;  21 U.S.C. s 451.  
The FMIA requires USDA inspectors to conduct a post-
mortem "examination and inspection of the carcasses and 
parts thereof of all cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, mules 
and other equines."  21 U.S.C. s 604.  The PPIA requires 
USDA inspectors to conduct a "post mortem inspection of the 
carcass of each bird processed."  21 U.S.C. s 455(b).

     The USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service ("FSIS") 
traditionally assigned federal inspectors to processing lines 
where they conducted "organoleptic" inspections of carcasses, 
relying on sight, touch and smell in examining the head, 
viscera, and exterior of the carcasses to detect signs of 
adulteration, such as tumors, parasites and other diseases.  
See AFGE I, 215 F.3d at 8, 10.  In "the mid-1990s, FSIS 
embarked on a comprehensive food safety initiative targeting 
the agency's resources at what it perceived as a serious 
health risk--foodborne pathogens, such as salmonella and 

E. coli, which cannot be detected by organoleptic inspection.  
At the same time it determined to make changes in the 
current inspection process to combat these microbial causes 
of foodborne illness, FSIS addressed what it considered to be 
another failure of the present regulatory system--that it 
provides processing plants with little incentive to detect and 
eliminate unacceptable carcasses before presenting them for 
inspection."  AFGE I, 215 F.3d at 9.

     "In July 1996, FSIS took the first step in implementing its 
new initiative by promulgating the Pathogen Reduction/ 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points ('HACCP') final 
rule.  See 61 Fed. Reg. 38,806 (1996)."  215 F.3d at 9.  The 
rule required meat and poultry plants to develop and install a 
system of preventive controls to ensure the safety of their 
products.  See 61 Fed. Reg. 38,814;  see also 9 C.F.R. 
s 417.2(a). Because the HACCP rule gave processing plants 
greater control over production decisions, FSIS determined 
that changes in its traditional organoleptic inspection methods 
would be necessary to realign the roles of federal inspectors 
with the new HACCP philosophy.  See 61 Fed. Reg. 38,818.  
Accordingly, in 1997 FSIS published a notice in the Federal 
Register explaining that as a result of the HACCP final rule, 
"[e]very aspect of traditional FSIS methods of inspection for 
slaughter and processing needs to be reconsidered."  62 Fed. 
Reg. 31,553.  The notice said the agency was launching the 
Inspection Models Development Project (the "Models Pro-
ject"), through which it would design and test various new 
inspection models in a series of trials in volunteer meat and 
poultry slaughter establishments.  See 62 Fed. Reg. 31,558.  
If--after gathering data on the various test models and 
preparing a final report analyzing the different models--the 
FSIS decided that its traditional inspection methods needed 
to be changed, then it pledged to initiate rulemaking to alter 
existing inspection procedures.  62 Fed. Reg. 31,558.

     The first new inspection approach, tested at several volun-
teer processing plants under the Models Project, gave indus-
try personnel the task of separating normal from abnormal 
carcasses and parts.  Federal inspectors had two limited 
roles:  oversight and verification.  Oversight inspectors ob-

served establishment personnel as they processed carcasses 
and removed unacceptable products from the food supply;  
verification inspectors randomly sampled carcasses to deter-
mine if the plant was complying with relevant performance 
standards.  See AFGE I, 215 F.3d at 10.

     In 1998, the plaintiffs in this action sought to enjoin imple-
mentation of the new inspection model, arguing that it violat-
ed the FMIA and PPIA because federal inspectors were not 
personally inspecting each carcass.  The district court, find-
ing the program in compliance with the statutes, granted 
summary judgment for the government.  We reversed and 
remanded.  See AFGE I, 215 F.3d at 7.  Because the model 
program had federal employees "inspecting people not car-
casses," the USDA was not fulfilling its statutory duty to 
conduct post-mortem inspections of carcasses.  See id. at 11.

     On remand, plaintiffs moved for entry of an order consis-
tent with AFGE I declaring that the USDA's inspection 
model violated the FMIA and PPIA.  The government op-
posed the motion and moved for a declaratory judgment, 
arguing that it had modified its Models Project in response to 
the AFGE I decision.  Only the declaration of Michael Gras-
so, the project manager of the FSIS's inspection program, 
offered a comprehensive written description of the modifica-
tion, which was accomplished without a new rulemaking.  
Grasso's declaration explained that in the eleven poultry 
establishments voluntarily participating in the Models Pro-
ject, the new program called for federal inspectors to play 
two roles:  (1) "carcass inspectors" stationed at the end of 
slaughter lines would examine each poultry carcass for adul-
teration after the carcasses were eviscerated, sorted, washed 
and trimmed by establishment employees but before the 
carcasses were put into the chiller;  and (2) "verification 
inspectors" would oversee the poultry establishment's inspec-
tion efforts.  See Grasso Declaration at 5.  In the three 
participating hog plants, the modified program called for 
federal carcass inspectors located at up to three fixed loca-
tions along the slaughter lines:  in the area where the carcass 
and head were separated;  where the carcass and viscera 
were separated;  and at the pre-wash verification location.  

See id. at 8.*  These inspectors would be responsible for 
examining the carcass, head, and viscera of all hogs.  See id. 
Other inspectors would also be assigned to hog plants to 
verify the effectiveness of the plant's process control systems.

     The USDA told the district court that it would begin 
implementing the modified inspection system in two of the 
eleven poultry plants on September 18, 2000, and that it 
would complete implementation in all fourteen participating 
plants no later than November 6, 2000.  Plaintiffs objected on 
the grounds that the modified program violated the FMIA, 
PPIA, and conflicted with AFGE I because it did not require 
federal inspectors to subject each carcass to a close and 
critical appraisal.  The government defended on the basis 
that the main error in the prior program had been remedied 
because federal inspectors would be directly observing each 
carcass to determine whether or not it was adulterated.

     The district court granted plaintiffs' motion for a remedial 
order, declaring that the first model program violated the 
FMIA and PPIA.  See Am. Fed'n of Gov't Employees v. 
Glickman, 127 F. Supp. 2d 243 (D.D.C. 2001).  As to the 
modified program, the court determined that Congress had 
not unambiguously expressed its intent about how much 
"inspection" is required by the statutes.  Relying on Chevron, 
U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837 (1984), 
the court concluded that the modified program reflected 
USDA's reasonable interpretation of the statutes.

     In the first appeal in this case, we were faced with the issue 
"whether the statutes permit federal inspectors to step back 
from the processing lines and perform their inspection duties 
by overseeing inspections conducted by plant employees."  
215 F.3d at 8.  Both the FMIA and PPIA yielded a certain 

__________
     * Due to the physical configuration of the slaughter line in some 
hog establishments, fewer than three inspectors may be used 
because "it may be possible for one inspector to inspect both the 
head and viscera or the viscera and carcass."  Grasso Declaration at 
8 (explaining that, for example, "the chain that carries the head may 
be adjacent to the viscera pans, which may enable one inspector to 
examine both the head and viscera").

solution:  the statutes require federal inspectors to inspect 
animal carcasses not people.  The issue in this second appeal 
is of a different sort.  Federal inspectors are now examining 
carcasses, but are they properly performing "inspections," as 
the statutes require?

     Courts pronouncing on the meaning of a word or phrase in 
a statute often declare generally that the meaning is "plain" 
or that it is "ambiguous."  Such declarations may mask a 
critical analytical step.  A statute can be clear or unclear 
depending on what question we want it to answer.  We may 
borrow H.L.A. Hart's famous hypothetical to illustrate the 
point.  Imagine the following law:  "No vehicle may be taken 
into the park."  H.L.A. Hart, The Concept of Law 125 (1961).  
If one asks whether this prohibits taking baseballs into the 
park, the answer is clearly no.  If one asks whether this 
forbids driving automobiles through the park, the answer is 
clearly yes.  But if the question is whether the law prohibits 
riding a bicycle or a skateboard in the park or pushing a baby 
carriage there, uncertainties arise.

     So it is with the FMIA and PPIA.  Both statutes delineate 
what must be inspected and by whom, see AFGE I, 215 F.3d 
at 10-11, but neither statute tells the reader exactly what an 
"inspection" entails. The district court, citing Chevron, there-
fore deferred to the USDA's view of "inspection" as reflected 
in the modified program.  The parties, following the district 
court's lead, assume Chevron applies.  But it would be plain 
error for us to rely on the case.  United States v. Mead 
Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 226-27 (2001), decided after the district 
court ruled, held that Chevron applies only when "Congress 
delegated authority to the agency generally to make rules 
carrying the force of law, and ... the agency interpretation 
claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that 
authority."  The modified program described in the Grasso 
declaration was not the product of a statutorily-created 
decision-making process, such as formal adjudication or 
notice-and-comment rulemaking.  Nor does the modified pro-
gram itself contain any indication that the USDA "ever set 
out with a lawmaking pretense in mind," Mead, 533 U.S. at 
233.  The USDA announced that the Models Project would 

serve as a temporary test project rather than as its final say 
on the matter.  See 62 Fed. Reg. 31,558 (explaining that after 
testing various inspection models, the agency will write a final 
report and "initiate rulemaking, as appropriate, to change 
existing inspection procedures").  Because the USDA did not 
intend to act with the force of law when it promulgated the 
modified program, the program has no more status than 
opinion letters, policy statements, agency manuals, and en-
forcement guidelines, all of which are undeserving of Chevron 
deference.  See Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576, 
587 (2000);  Mead, 533 U.S. at 234.  Still, as the reasoned 
judgment of the federal agency charged with administering 
our federal meat and poultry inspection laws, the USDA's 
view about the scope of inspection required by the FMIA and 
PPIA constitutes "a body of experience and informed judg-
ment" to which we may properly resort for guidance.  Skid-
more v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944).

     The USDA determined that its modified inspection pro-
gram, which calls for one carcass and one verification inspec-
tor per slaughter line at poultry plants, and one verification 
inspector and up to three carcass inspectors at hog plants, 
would be sufficient to allow its employees to detect adulterat-
ed meat and poultry.  With admirable candor, plaintiffs con-
cede that the statutes do not require organoleptic inspections.  
They believe the modified program is nevertheless flawed 
because federal inspectors examine poultry carcasses only 
after industry employees have eviscerated, sorted, trimmed 
and rinsed the carcasses.  As to the statute, the PPIA states 
that federal inspectors must conduct a "post mortem inspec-
tion of the carcass of each bird processed."  21 U.S.C. 
s 455(b).  Another subsection states that "[a]ll poultry car-
casses and parts thereof ... found to be adulterated shall be 
condemned," 21 U.S.C. s 455(c).  Plaintiffs wonder how fed-
eral inspectors can fulfill their duty to condemn adulterated 
"parts" if all they are checking for adulteration are poultry 
carcasses.  The USDA has a ready response, one we find 
convincing.  Inspection of the viscera "is not necessary to 
determine whether a poultry carcass is adulterated."  Brief 

for Appellees at 23.  With only one exception, all generalized 
poultry diseases and conditions can be readily discerned by 
inspecting the carcasses alone and therefore are adequately 
addressed by the practice, incorporated in the modified pro-
gram, of condemning all viscera that correspond to carcasses 
found to be adulterated.  The one disease that cannot be 
detected by inspecting the carcasses alone--avian visceral 
leukosis--is adequately dealt with under the modified pro-
gram by having an FSIS inspector examine the viscera from 
the initial 300 birds slaughtered from each flock.  If avian 
visceral leukosis is present, it will be present throughout the 
flock and therefore will be detected.

     Plaintiffs also assert that the line speeds used in the 
modified program at both hog and poultry plants are too fast 
to allow federal inspectors to make a critical appraisal of each 
carcass.  But as the USDA points out, higher line speeds are 
appropriate.  Fewer adulterated poultry carcasses and hog 
parts and carcasses will be presented for federal inspection 
under the modified program because employees of the pro-
cessing plants will sort out carcasses before they reach 
federal inspectors.  Neither the PPIA nor the FMIA prohib-
its establishment employees from paring down the overall 
number of carcasses by removing some adulterated carcasses 
before they get to FSIS inspectors.  Furthermore, as the 
USDA tests its models project, it plans to monitor whether a 
second inspector is necessary in establishments operating at 
high line speeds.  See Grasso Declaration at 6.

     We therefore hold that the USDA's current modified in-
spection model, as described in the Grasso declaration, does 
not violate the FMIA or the PPIA.  Because the modified 
program calls for federal inspectors in participating poultry 
plants to personally examine each poultry carcass leaving the 
slaughter line, the USDA is complying with the PPIA's 
requirement that "the carcass of each bird processed" be 
inspected for adulteration.  21 U.S.C. s 455.  The modified 
program also satisfies the FMIA because the program calls 
for federal inspectors in participating hog plants to inspect all 
hog carcasses, heads and viscera, as the statute demands.  
See 21 U.S.C. s 604.

     We have reviewed only the USDA's implementation of its 
current, modified inspection model.  This is a test program, a 
temporary measure intended as an experiment.  If the USDA 
undertakes a rulemaking to adopt as a permanent change 
something along the lines of the modified program, experi-
ence with the program's operation and its effectiveness will 
doubtless play a significant role.  For this and other reasons, 
our opinion today may not necessarily foreshadow the out-
come of judicial review of such future regulations.

                                              Judgment affirmed.

   