                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 7, 2001      Decided June 12, 2001 

                           No. 00-1241

                      Douglas Foods Corp., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                 Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Theodore R. Opperwall argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for petitioner.

     David A. Seid, Attorney, National Labor Relations Board, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief were 
Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, John H. Ferguson, Asso-
ciate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associ-

ate General Counsel, and Peter Winkler, Supervisory Attor-
ney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Douglas Foods Corporation 
("DFC") petitions for review of an order of the National 
Labor Relations Board ("NLRB") finding that it committed 
several unfair labor practices and ordering substantial relief.  
We uphold the bulk of the NLRB's unfair labor practice 
findings with the exception of those related to the alleged 
"sham" sales of catering trucks and routes.  The NLRB's 
findings in relation to these transactions are inadequate, and 
the accompanying restoration order is beyond the scope of 
the Board's remedial authority.  We also vacate the NLRB's 
bargaining order, and remand to the NLRB for further 
proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

                          I. Background

A.   Relevant Facts

     Petitioner DFC, a mobile food catering business in Garden 
City, Michigan, runs a "wholesale" operation that supplies 
catering trucks operated by other firms.  Throughout much 
of its history, DFC also operated as a "retail" caterer, owning 
and operating catering trucks which sold prepackaged foods 
to employees at local businesses along designated catering 
routes.

     In mid-1995, DFC operated approximately twelve "hot" 
trucks and twelve "cold" trucks.  "Hot" trucks serve hot and 
cold food and are operated by a driver and a cook.  Cold 
trucks do not have cooks and sell only cold food.  Each truck 
services a prearranged route on a regular schedule.  At the 
time, DFC also supplied several catering trucks run by 
independent owner-operators.  All of the trucks--DFC's and 
those of the owner-operators that operated out of DFC's 
facility--sold food prepared by Ezzo's Food, another company 

owned by DFC president and founder Douglas George and 
his wife.

     At the time, DFC's drivers and cooks were divided between 
designated employees and lease operators.  The former re-
ceived hourly wages and operated off of a time clock.  The 
latter payed daily lease fees to DFC and would keep their net 
revenues.  Lease fees ranged between $0 and $150 per day.  
George expressed a preference for lease operators over em-
ployees because he believed that they had a greater financial 
stake in satisfying their customers.  It was difficult to retain 
lease operators, however, which prompted DFC to hire more 
drivers as employees.  Whether drivers were lease operators 
or employees, as a general rule their trucks were emblazoned 
with the DFC logo and housed at the DFC facility.  DFC also 
controlled the menus, retail prices, and catering routes, and 
imposed a dress code on drivers.

     For a variety of reasons, some of which are disputed, 
George decided in 1995 to extricate DFC from the "retail" 
side of the catering business and expand operations on the 
"wholesale" side.  Pursuant to this plan, in October 1995 
George sold all twelve of DFC's cold trucks to JK Food 
Service, LLC, a company established by John Schemanske, 
George's brother-in-law and then-General Manager of DFC.  
While under new ownership, these trucks maintained the 
DFC logo and menu.  DFC contends that it also sought 
buyers for its twelve hot trucks and routes at this time, but 
without any success.

B.   The Unionization Effort

     In December 1995, DFC hired Debra Beck as a driver.  
Shortly thereafter, Beck contacted the Local 876 of the 
United Food and Commercial Workers Union ("Union") about 
organizing a campaign for representation.  Over the next 
several months, Beck, her cook Michelle Benkert, and a 
handful of other DFC employees distributed union authoriza-
tion cards and encouraged DFC members to sign them.

     In June 1996, George learned of "problems" among his 
employees.  Around that time, DFC's sales manager, William 

Tofilski, questioned Beck about union activities.  Over the 
next month, Tofilski had several conversations with DFC 
employees in which he disparaged union organizational ef-
forts, asked who had signed authorization cards, and implied 
that George would retaliate in some form were the employees 
to unionize because DFC could not afford to meet likely union 
demands.  Douglas Foods Corp., 330 NLRB No. 124, slip op. 
at 7-9 (Mar. 13, 2000).  Tofilski recounted that in the 1970s, 
when DFC was first unionized, George sold off routes to 
prevent unionization, and suggested George would do so 
again.

     By July 3, the Union had nineteen signed authorization 
cards and filed a petition with the NLRB seeking to repre-
sent the employees of "Douglas Foods/J&K Foods."  The 
Union sought recognition from DFC, but DFC refused.  At a 
subsequent NLRB representation hearing, DFC informed the 
Union that the unionization efforts would not forestall its 
plans to sell the twelve hot trucks and routes.  In response to 
this and Tofilski's prior remarks, the Union filed unfair labor 
practice charges against DFC.

     On July 22, before the complaints were filed, DFC agreed 
to an election covering all DFC hourly and lease drivers, 
cooks, mechanics, maintenance and store employees.  Prior to 
the election, George held several mandatory-attendance meet-
ings with DFC drivers.  At one meeting, George explained 
that lease operators would "have a problem" maintaining 
their relationship with DFC should the company unionize.  
Douglas Foods, 330 NLRB No. 124, slip op. at 11.  Prior to 
the election George also met with a cook, Ebtisam Kassouma, 
said he would raise her salary, and encouraged her to vote 
against union representation.

     The election was held on August 23.  Sixteen employees 
voted against the Union, twelve voted in favor with two 
challenged ballots.  The Union also lost the election at JK 
Foods, 11-1.  Id. at 12.  Upon learning of the results, two 
DFC employees who had actively supported the Union quit, 
and the Union filed an additional unfair labor practice charge 

against DFC and requested that the NLRB issue a bargain-
ing order.

     Shortly after the election, George resumed his efforts to 
sell DFC hot trucks and routes.  According to DFC, George 
was now willing to sell trucks and routes individually or in 
small groups, rather than in large groups or as a whole (as he 
had done with the cold trucks).  In September, George 
announced that Tofilski and Mary Jo Merollis, Tofilski's sister 
and a prior DFC employee, had each agreed to purchase 
three hot trucks and routes.  George informed his employees 
that this did not threaten their jobs, and that they would 
likely be retained as were the cold truck workers when they 
were sold to JK Food Service.  Id.  Although the announce-
ment was made in late September, Tofilski and George did 
not sign the formal papers (dated October 21, 1996) until 
January 1997.  Under the agreement, DFC financed the 
truck purchases and Tofilski was required to make weekly 
payments and sign a security agreement.  He also had to 
guarantee that he would purchase 75 percent of his food from 
DFC.  So long as Tofilski's trucks were operated in accor-
dance with DFC guidelines, DFC agreed not to compete with 
his new business along its routes.  Merollis executed similar 
agreements with DFC on January 31, 1997, but was later 
excused from the supply agreement.

     In early October, DFC revised its time clock policy after it 
was fined by the Department of Labor for violating the Fair 
Labor Standards Act.  Id. at 5.  That month, on two separate 
occasions, Michelle Benkert punched out late in violation of 
the policy.  Benkert received a warning after the first viola-
tion.  After the second she was fired.  DFC cited the time 
clock violations and other performance issues about which she 
also had been warned.  Benkert and the NLRB claim that 
the time clock violations were a pretext for firing her due to 
her union activity.

     On November 22, Pam Cummins, an independent operator 
of a cold truck route purchased in 1995, purchased the hot 
truck and hot truck route driven by Debra Beck.  DFC 
financed the purchase in much the same manner as the prior 

hot truck sales, though Cummins was required to purchase 
food exclusively from DFC.  That day, George informed Beck 
that the truck and route had been sold and that she would be 
laid off.  George did not inform her that JK Food Service was 
advertising for catering route operators.  Id. at 14, 16.  Cum-
mins hired a new driver for the truck and retained the cook 
who worked with Beck.  Cummins returned the truck and 
route in February 1997 because she was unable to make a 
profit on it, but DFC then resold it to another route operator.  
By mid-1997, DFC had sold all of its hot trucks and routes 
and was completely out of the "retail" catering business.  
Most of the trucks were sold to present route drivers with 
financing arrangements and supply agreements similar, but 
not identical, to those adopted by Tofilski and Cummins.

C.   Proceedings Below
     On March 6, 1998, an NLRB Administrative Law Judge 
("ALJ") ruled on the Union's complaints.  The ALJ found 
that DFC had committed numerous unfair labor practices in 
violation of sections 8(a)(1) and (3), and sections 2(6) and (7) 
by:
     .    creating the impression that DFC was surveilling 
          employee union activities;
          
     .    threatening employees for engaging in union activi-
          ties;     
     .    interrogating employees about their union activities;
          
     .    suggesting that unionization would "be futile";
          
     .    threatening to retaliate against employees who testi-
          fied about unfair labor practices;
          
     .    giving an employee a pay raise prior to the election 
          while suggesting that she should vote against the 
          Union;
          
     .    intimidating, disciplining, retaliating against, and lay-
          ing off Beck;
     .    firing Benkert;
          
     .    closing/selling off the hot truck operations;  and
          
     .    terminating the employment of some or all of the hot 
          truck drivers and cooks.
          
Id. at 24.  The ALJ further found that DFC's truck and route 
sales were "sham" transactions motivated by anti-union ani-
mus. Id.

     The ALJ concluded that "[a]t all times since July 3, 1996" 
the Union was the exclusive and appropriate representative of 
DFC employees because a majority of DFC employees had 
signed union authorization cards.  Id.  The ALJ held that 
DFC's unfair labor practices were "so serious and substantial 
in nature" that there could not be a fair union election relying 
solely on traditional remedies.  Id.  Based on this conclusion, 
the ALJ ordered DFC to cease and desist from its unfair 
labor practices, offer to reinstate Beck and Benkert with back 
pay, "reestablish" its hot truck operations, offer reinstate-
ment to all hot truck drivers and cooks who were terminated 
when their routes were sold, and recognize and bargain with 
the Union as the exclusive bargaining representative of DFC 
employees.  Id. at 24-25.

     DFC appealed.  The NLRB upheld the ALJ's findings in 
all major respects.  The Board was unanimous that DFC 
engaged in numerous unfair labor practices, including the 
intimidation of its employees and other efforts to discourage 
unionization.  Member Hurtgen dissented with regard to four 
findings.  First, Hurtgen found "no threat" in George's com-
ment to lease operators that their relationship with DFC 
would change upon unionization, as this was based on his 
good faith belief that the lease operators were independent 
contractors.  Id. at 4 (Member Hurtgen, dissenting).  Second, 
he found nothing unlawful about the "interrogation" of Lisa 
Bowman about signing a union authorization card as she 
initiated the discussions with management and concluded that 
nothing George said was threatening or coercive.  Id.  Third, 
Hurtgen did not find the termination of Benkert to be 
unlawful, particularly because she had received warnings and 
the new time clock policy was prompted by a Labor Depart-
ment enforcement action that cost DFC several thousand 
dollars.  Id. at 4-5.  Fourth, Hurtgen did not agree with the 
majority of the Board that DFC committed the sort of 
"hallmark" violations that would justify a bargaining order 
under NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co.  Id. at 5.  Hurtgen did 

not dispute the finding that the hot truck and route sales 
were "sham" transactions.

     The Board unanimously adopted the bulk of the ALJ's 
ordered remedies, including the order that DFC reestablish 
its hot truck operations and reinstate the laid-off hot truck 
drivers and cooks.  The Board was split on the bargaining 
order.  A majority upheld the order, while Member Hurtgen 
dissented, arguing that "traditional remedies" and a cease 
and desist order would be sufficient to remedy the situation 
and allow for a fair union election to take place.  Id.

                    II. Unfair Labor Practices

     Petitioner DFC challenges several of the NLRB's unfair 
labor practice findings and other factual determinations.  
Specifically, DFC contests the findings that it violated Na-
tional Labor Relations Act ("NLRA") section 8(a)(3) by firing 
Benkert and laying off Beck, and that, through George and 
Tofilski, it violated NLRA section 8(a)(1) by monitoring and 
investigating employees' union-related activities, making dis-
couraging or threatening statements about the potential im-
pact of unionization, and interfering with the exercise of 
NLRA-protected rights by giving an employee a pay raise 
just prior to the unionization vote.

     Under section 8(a)(1) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), it 
is an unfair labor practice for an employer "to interfere with, 
restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise" of their rights 
guaranteed under NLRA section 7, 29 U.S.C. s 157.  Under 
NLRA section 8(a)(3), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(3), it is an unfair 
labor practice "to encourage or discourage membership in any 
labor organization" through discriminatory employment deci-
sions.  As interpreted by the NLRB and federal courts, 
section 8(a) prohibits various anti-union conduct including, 
among other things, coercively interrogating employees about 
union activities, Perdue Farms, Inc. v. NLRB, 144 F.3d 830, 
835 (D.C. Cir. 1998), threatening retaliation or other adverse 
actions in response to union organizing activity, Allegheny 
Ludlum Corp. v. NLRB, 104 F.3d 1354, 1364-66 (D.C. Cir. 
1997), and seeking to influence union activities by granting 

benefits to employees, General Electric Co. v. NLRB, 117 
F.3d 627, 636-37 (D.C. Cir. 1997).

     Judicial review of NLRB unfair labor practice findings is 
limited.  See, e.g., Avecor, Inc. v. NLRB, 931 F.2d 924, 928 
(D.C. Cir. 1991).  The NLRB's conclusions of fact are conclu-
sive if "supported by substantial evidence on the record 
considered as a whole."  29 U.S.C. s 160(e).  "If there is 
substantial evidence to support the Board's conclusions, we 
will uphold the Board's decision even if we would have 
reached a different result had we considered the question de 
novo."  Synergy Gas Corp. v. NLRB, 19 F.3d 649, 651 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994).  An ALJ's credibility determinations, once 
adopted by the Board are due particular deference, and 
"must be accepted by this court 'unless they are patently 
insupportable.' " Parsippany Hotel Mgmt. Co. v. NLRB, 99 
F.3d 413, 425 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (quoting Exxel/Atmos, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 28 F.3d 1243, 1246 (D.C. Cir. 1994) ("Exxel/Atmos 
I")).

     Applying this highly deferential standard of review, we 
uphold the bulk of the Board's unfair labor practice findings.  
Petitioner raises questions about several of the ALJ's conclu-
sions, and presents evidence that could well justify contrary 
conclusions by a finder of fact.  Nonetheless, the Board's 
unfair labor practice findings are supported by substantial 
evidence in the record, which is all that the law requires.  
The NLRB's only findings which are notably deficient are 
those related to the alleged "sham" sales of catering trucks 
and routes discussed below.

            III. "Sham" Sales & Reestablishment Order

     Petitioner DFC specifically objects to the NLRB's finding 
that all of its sales of hot trucks and catering routes were 
"sham" sales motivated by an intent to prevent DFC union-
ization.  DFC also challenges the restoration order issued by 
the NLRB to redress this alleged unfair labor practice.  
While anti-union animus may well have motivated the decision 
to sell the hot trucks and routes, there is not substantial 
evidence to support the NLRB's conclusion that the sales 

were "sham" transactions.  The Board's findings are incom-
plete and there is inadequate attention to aspects of the sales 
which cast doubt on the "sham" characterization.  Even were 
the NLRB's findings adequate in this regard, we have grave 
doubts that the restoration order could be upheld.  We have 
no doubt, however, that this portion of the Board's remedy 
cannot be justified on the current record and must be vacat-
ed.

     This Court generally defers to the factual findings of the 
NLRB, as discussed above.  See supra Part II.  However, 
this Court does not "merely rubber-stamp NLRB decisions," 
Avecor, 931 F.2d at 928, as we must "consider not only the 
evidence supporting the Board's decision but also 'whatever 
in the record fairly detracts from its weight,' " Schaeff, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 113 F.3d 264, 266 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (quoting Universal 
Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 488 (1951)).  Where 
the NLRB adopts a conclusion that is without support in the 
record, or which conflicts with the record "considered as a 
whole," we may reverse.  See 29 U.S.C. s 160(e) (Board 
conclusions of fact are conclusive if "supported by substantial 
evidence on the record considered as a whole").

     DFC sold all of the hot trucks and routes between October 
1996 and March 1997.  Douglas Foods, 330 NLRB No. 124, 
slip op. at 16.  Although neither the ALJ nor the Board 
catalogs all of the sales, the ALJ's decision reports that all of 
the trucks were initially sold to former DFC employees or 
supervisors.  All of the truck drivers and cooks employed on 
the trucks at the time of the sales, save for Debra Beck, were 
hired by the truck purchasers.  Id.  The timing of the sales, 
DFC management's anti-union sentiments, and "the nature of 
the transactions themselves" led the ALJ to conclude that all 
of the sales "were not arms-length transactions and were 
'shams' motivated in large part by DFC's desire to thwart the 
Union's efforts to overturn the results of the August 1996 
election and obtain a bargaining order from the NLRB."  Id.  
On this basis the ALJ ordered DFC to reacquire the sold 
trucks and routes, and reinstate those employees who were 
terminated from DFC as a result of the sales. Reacquisition 
would not be difficult, the ALJ reasoned, because it would 

only require "paper transactions."  Id. at 25.  The Board 
adopted this conclusion without comment.

     Reviewing the "sham" sale determinations is difficult, as an 
initial matter, due to the ALJ's incomplete treatment of the 
subject.  The ALJ discusses several of the truck and route 
sales at length.  Others, the ALJ does not discuss at all.  
According to the ALJ, DFC had twelve hot trucks and routes, 
and sold all of them as part of "one plan to eliminate the 
bargaining unit."  Id. at 18.  Yet the ALJ does not identify 
the basis for this conclusion with respect to all of the truck 
sales, leaving us to wonder what it was about "the nature of 
the transactions themselves" that led the ALJ to its conclu-
sion that all of the sales were "sham transactions."

     The incomplete analysis is significant because, despite their 
similarities, the sales were not identical, cookie-cutter trans-
actions.  Different trucks and routes were sold on different 
terms.  As with lease operators, different purchasers paid 
different monthly installments.  While most purchasers 
signed supply agreements with DFC, Sheila Thomas did not, 
id. at 18 & n.37, and Merollis was also released from the 
supply agreement covering the three trucks she purchased as 
well, id. at 18.  With further respect to Merollis the ALJ 
found and the Board affirmed that she "has her own workers 
compensation insurance, product liability insurance, accoun-
tant, tax identification number, and other indicia of indepen-
dence from DFC."  Without further reasoning or explanation, 
the ALJ proceeded to conclude, and the Board to affirm, 
"that the totality of the record indicates that the sale to her 
was a sham transaction motivated in large part by DFC's 
desire to thwart the Union."  Id.  We are not required to 
rubberstamp a conclusory reference to "totality of the record" 
without some further expressed reasoning or other record 
support for the otherwise inexplicable conclusion.  See Peo-
ples Gas Sys., Inc. v. NLRB, 629 F.2d 35, 42 (D.C. Cir. 1980).

     The present case is easily distinguishable from prior in-
stances in which we have upheld NLRB findings of "sham" 
transactions motivated by anti-union animus.  In Fugazy 

Continental Corp. v. NLRB, 725 F.2d 1416 (D.C. Cir. 1984) 
and O'Dovero v. NLRB, 193 F.3d 532 (D.C. Cir. 1999), we 
affirmed NLRB findings of "sham transactions" motivated by 
anti-union animus.  In each of these cases, the transactions 
occurred between the employer and an "alter-ego" that al-
lowed the "disguised continuance" of the employer's opera-
tions.  Fugazy, 725 F.2d at 1419.  Such a finding of "alter-
ego" status can be based upon "substantial identity of man-
agement, business purpose, operation, equipment, customers, 
supervision and ownership between the old entity and its 
successor."  Fugazy, 725 F.2d at 1419.  While "common 
ownership is not an absolute prerequisite to a finding of alter 
ego status," id. at 1420, it weighs heavily in the alter ego 
determination.  In O'Dovero, for example, the employer con-
trolled two companies and closed one to prevent unionization, 
while shifting its business to the other.

     Neither the ALJ nor the Board found that the trucks and 
routes were purchased by an "alter ego" of DFC.  On the 
present record, such a finding could not be sustained.  Sever-
al factors point strongly against such a finding.  In both 
Fugazy and O'Dovero, there was little evident purpose to the 
transaction other than to rid the employer of pro-union 
employees without altering the employer's underlying busi-
ness.  Here, however, DFC's employees retained their jobs--
albeit with different employers--and DFC altered the nature 
of its business, eliminating "retail" functions.

     While it is likely that the lack of a record-supported alter-
ego finding would alone render the NLRB's restoration order 
reversible, the Board's failure to consider the feasibility and 
impact of the remedial order makes it certain.  While the 
ALJ and NLRB are convinced that the truck and route sales 
were no more than paper transactions, a review of the 
transactional documents makes clear that ownership and 
control of the trucks changed hands.  The ALJ notes that 
"[o]ne must assume that the purchasers received something 
of value in exchange for [their] weekly payments."  Douglas 
Foods, 330 NLRB No. 124, slip op. at 25.  Precisely.  It is 
called "title."  Whatever the motivation for the sales, it is 
uncontestable that title has passed to new owners for at least 

some of the sold trucks.  This alone suggests the sales, or at 
least some of them, were not "sham transactions."  Cf. Na-
perville Ready Mix, Inc. v. NLRB, 242 F.3d 744, 753 (7th Cir. 
2001) (noting Board did not invoke "sham transaction" doc-
trine where legal transfer of title was undisputed).  It is also 
sufficient to require remand of the restoration order.

     Neither the ALJ nor the NLRB ever considered whether 
reacquisition of the sold trucks and routes is factually possi-
ble, nor whether an order for their reacquisition is within the 
legal authority of the Board--a proposition which we frankly 
doubt.  The NLRB's casual treatment of the implications of 
its order is startling.  Even if the truck sales were motivated 
by anti-union animus, title passed to the truck purchasers, 
many of whom were among the employees the Board is 
purporting to protect.  Be that as it may, we return to the 
more fundamental question of the Board's lawful authority to 
enter the remedy at all.

     When the NLRB orders an employee to be reinstated, its 
order typically requires that the company offer reinstatement, 
as DFC is required to do here for those employees laid off as 
a result of the sales.  This is the limit of the NLRB's 
equitable power--it may order the employer to reinstate a 
former employee, but it cannot order the employee to take 
back the position and return to work.  It seems that the 
analogous result here would be for the NLRB at most to 
order DFC to offer to repurchase trucks and routes, not to 
require restoration of the status quo ante.  Here, the NLRB 
ordered DFC to "restore and resume [its] hot truck catering 
operations as they existed prior to October 1, 1996" within 
fourteen days of the order, Douglas Foods, 330 NLRB No. 
124, slip op. at 6, without any explanation of its authority to 
enter such order or DFC's ability to carry it out.

     In its brief, the NLRB argues for the first time that the 
contracts contained boiler-plate language excusing either par-
ty from obligations due to intervening circumstances, such as 
actions or proceedings against one of the parties or the 
enactment of regulation.  Brief for the NLRB at 58.  We do 
not consider this argument as it was not relied upon by the 

Board or ALJ.  "We cannot sustain agency action on grounds 
other than those adopted by the agency in the administrative 
proceedings."  MacMillan Publ'g Co. v. NLRB, 194 F.3d 165, 
168 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Even were this language referred to in 
either the ALJ or NLRB opinion, it would seem insufficient 
to allow for the forced sale of trucks and routes to DFC.  
Even in its brief, the NLRB cites no authority for this 
proposition.

     The NLRB portrays this part of its order as a run-of-the-
mill requirement that the employer undo the effects of dis-
criminatorily motivated changes.  Yet the NLRB cites no 
case in which similar relief was ordered in similar circum-
stances.  In O'Dovero, there was no dispute that the closed 
business was never formally dissolved and "could resume a 
project 'tomorrow' if it so chose."  193 F.3d at 537.  As this 
Court concluded, "the Board's order require[d] no more than 
a return to the status quo ante with respect to 'work assign-
ment decisions.' "  Id. at 539 (citation omitted).  This is 
hardly analogous to the forced repurchase of independently 
owned assets.  With the exception of Beck, all of DFC's 
former drivers and cooks are now either truck owner-
operators or their employees, Douglas Foods, 330 NLRB No. 
124, slip op. at 16, and the NLRB has substantial authority to 
address DFC's unfair labor practices through more tradition-
al forms of relief.  For these reasons, we vacate the Board's 
finding that the truck and route sales were "sham" transac-
tions along with the Board's restoration order.

                 IV. Relief for Beck and Benkert

     Petitioner specifically challenges the award of relief to 
Beck and Benkert due to their alleged dishonesty during the 
unfair labor practice proceedings.  In his decision, the ALJ 
found that some of Beck and Benkert's testimony was inaccu-
rate and "suspicious."  See id. at 13 n.23, 21 n.41.  Due to 
these findings, DFC maintains that Beck and Benkert should 
not be entitled to any relief, let alone reinstatement and 
backpay.  While we share DFC's concern that NLRB pro-
ceedings not be tainted with false or misleading testimony, we 

find no basis for vacating the Board-ordered remedies on this 
account.

     As in ABF Freight Sys., Inc. v. NLRB, the issue presented 
by DFC's petition "is not whether the Board might" bar relief 
to employees who offer false testimony, "but whether it must 
do so."  510 U.S. 317, 323 (1994).  In ABF, the Supreme 
Court answered in the negative.  While the Board may be 
under an obligation to consider the veracity of witnesses in an 
unfair labor practice proceeding, it is under no obligation to 
foreclose relief to all those who offer inaccurate testimony or 
otherwise compromise the integrity of Board proceedings.  
Whether to penalize a party for such misconduct, rather than 
defer to other potential civil and criminal remedies, is a 
matter committed to the Board's "broad discretion."  Id. at 
325.  Therefore, this portion of DFC's petition for review is 
denied.

                       V. Bargaining Order

     The NLRB concurred with the ALJ that a bargaining 
order was "appropriate and necessary" to remedy the severe 
unfair labor practices committed by DFC. Douglas Foods, 
330 NLRB No. 124, slip op. at 3.  This Court generally gives 
the NLRB a wide berth in determining whether given actions 
constitute unfair labor practices or are severe enough to 
constitute "hallmark violations" of the Act that would justify 
such an order.  However, "a bargaining order is not a snake-
oil cure for whatever ails the workplace;  it is an 'extreme 
remedy.' "  Avecor, 931 F.2d at 938-39 (citation omitted).  
This Court does not--indeed cannot--excuse the Board's 
failure to fulfill its legal requirements to consider certain 
elements and provide a reasoned explanation for its decision.  
See, e.g., Peoples Gas, 629 F.2d at 45.  Where the Board fails 
to discharge its obligation to consider the proper factors and 
provide a reasoned explanation, this Court has no choice but 
to remand to the Board for further proceedings, if not simply 
invalidate the offending portions of the Board's order.  Such 
is the case here.

     Before entering this extreme remedy, the NLRB must 
carefully weigh several factors.  Specifically,

     an affirmative bargaining order ... must be justified by 
     a reasoned analysis that includes an explicit balancing of 
     three considerations:  (1) the employees' s 7 rights;  (2) 
     whether other purposes of the Act override the rights of 
     employees to choose their bargaining representatives;  
     and (3) whether alternative remedies are adequate to 
     remedy the violations of the Act.
     
Vincent Indus. Plastics, Inc. v. NLRB, 209 F.3d 727, 738 
(D.C. Cir. 2000).  Failure to conduct this analysis provides 
sufficient grounds to vacate and remand a bargaining order, 
regardless of whether substantial evidence supports the 
NLRB's conclusions that DFC engaged in "hallmark" unfair 
labor practices and a majority of DFC employees indicated 
their support of the Union by signing union authorization 
cards.

     While the NLRB devotes the lion's share of its opinion to 
defending the bargaining order, it still fails to conduct the 
necessary analysis.  Of the three factors the Board must 
consider, the Board and ALJ devote a reasonable amount of 
space to the third, and some implicit consideration of the 
second.  The Board provides little else of substance.  It 
mentions the first factor--whether the bargaining order im-
pinges upon the employees' s 7 rights--and claims to consid-
er it, but nothing resembling consideration follows.  Cf. Ave-
cor, 931 F.2d at 938 (a "promising topic sentence" without 
more does not constitute reasoned explanation).

     In the place of analysis, the NLRB substitutes extensive 
quotation from NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 
(1969).  Douglas Foods, 330 NLRB No. 124, slip op. at 3 
(quoting Gissel, 395 U.S. at 612-13).  Rather than follow this 
Court's repeated guidance on the proper analysis, the Board 
majority merely asserts that consideration of employees' s 7 
rights is inherent in any Gissel-inspired analysis.  Id. ("In 
sum, the Gissel opinion itself reflects a careful balancing of 
the employees' Section 7 rights 'to bargain collectively' and 'to 
refrain from' such activity.").  This cannot do.  The NLRB 

cannot discharge its obligation merely by citing the appropri-
ate authority and averring that it gave proper consideration.  
It actually must consider the factors as they apply to the 
instant case, and explain the basis for its conclusions.  In the 
instant case the Board may have devoted greater effort to 
satisfying this Court's demand for a reasoned explanation 
than in prior decisions, but it has yet to clear the bar--it is 
not even close.

     The Board further errs by failing to account for the 
changes at DFC following the 1996 union election.  By the 
time of the NLRB proceedings, DFC no longer maintained 
"retail" operations, and fewer than five of the employees 
listed on the voting list for the union election in 1996 were 
still in DFC's employ.  Some of this turnover was no doubt 
due to the truck and route sales.  Some also resulted from 
other factors unrelated to DFC's unfair labor practices.  As 
things stand now, we question whether DFC has a labor force 
that would allow for the reasonable imposition of such an 
order, and the Board's order provides us with no answer.

     The law is clear that the Board is not free to disregard 
employee turnover when issuing a bargaining order "unless it 
finds that the employer's practices are particularly flagrant."  
Avecor, 931 F.2d at 937.  The alleged abuses must be far 
more drastic than those merely required to justify a bargain-
ing order in the first place--so-called "category I" abuses as 
opposed to "category II" abuses.  In cases, such as this, 
where only category II abuses are found, "the Board must 
carefully consider employee turnover."  Id. (emphasis added).  
The mere assertion that DFC should not profit from its own 
unfair labor practices does not amount to consideration of 
employee turnover, let alone "careful consideration."

     The NLRB attempts to justify its failure to consider the 
changed circumstances on the grounds that many of the 
changes resulted from the unfair labor practices at issue in 
this case.  The NLRB opposes taking such changes into 
account because an employer should not be able to rely upon 
unlawful, anti-union acts to defeat a bargaining order.  
NLRB v. Gordon, 792 F.2d 29, 34 (2nd Cir. 1986) ("It would 

defy reason to permit an employer to deflect a Gissel bargain-
ing order on the ground of employee turnover when that 
turnover has resulted from the employer's unlawful dis-
charge[s]").  Be this as it may, the NLRB was required to 
consider changed circumstances no matter what their cause.  
As Gissel instructs, "effectuating ascertainable employee free 
choice [is] as important a goal as deterring employer misbe-
havior."  Gissel, 395 U.S. at 614.  Moreover, in selecting a 
remedy for NLRA violations, the NLRB must select "a 
course that is remedial rather than punitive, and [choose] a 
remedy which can fairly be said to effectuate the purposes of 
the Act."  Caterair Int'l v. NLRB, 22 F.3d 1114, 1120 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) (quoting Peoples Gas, 629 F.2d at 42).  The Board 
cannot allow its desire to stop a company from profiting from 
an unfair labor practice to eclipse a concern for effectuating 
employees' right to choose their representation.

     In remanding the NLRB's decision to impose a bargaining 
order, we cannot help but feel a sense of dEjA vu.

     The Board, inexplicably, has once again defied the law of 
     this circuit and failed to offer an adequate justification 
     for the bargaining order sanction imposed against [DFC].  
     We therefore find ourselves in the all-too-familiar posi-
     tion of having to remand this case to the Board for 
     adequate justification of the proposed affirmative bar-
     gaining order, thus further delaying relief for the em-
     ployees the Board purports to protect.
     
Vincent Indus. Plastics, 209 F.3d at 731. On no fewer than 
seven occasions in the past seven years alone we have re-
manded inadequately justified bargaining orders. Id.;  Flam-
ingo Hilton-Laughlin v. NLRB, 148 F.3d 1166 (D.C. Cir. 
1998);  Exxel/Atmos, Inc. v. NLRB, 147 F.3d 972 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) ("Exxel/Atmos II");  Lee Lumber & Building Material 
Corp. v. NLRB, 117 F.3d 1454 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (per curiam);  
Skyline Distrib. v. NLRB, 99 F.3d 403 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  
Charlotte Ampitheater Corp. v. NLRB, 82 F.3d 1074 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996);  Exxel/Atmos I, 28 F.3d at 1243. "Eight is 
enough." Exxel/Atmos II, 147 F.3d at 979 (Sentelle, J., con-
curring).  See also Caterair, 22 F.3d at 1123 ("Five times in 

the past fourteen years this court has remanded such orders 
to the Board with a request for explanation as to why....  
This case makes it an even half-dozen. We must assume the 
Board will deign to provide the necessary explanation at some 
point in order to obtain enforcement.").

     Time and again this Court has been required to overturn 
NLRB orders that violate the explicit requirements of our 
precedent.  "Case law in our circuit is as clear as it could be 
on this question.  The Board, however, continues to ignore 
us.  We continue to reverse."  Lee Lumber, 117 F.3d at 1462.  
"We persist not out of pique but from a sense that it is our 
duty to ensure that the Board adheres to its statutory 
mandate."  Caterair, 22 F.3d at 1123.  The Board's consis-
tent refusal to fulfill its legal obligation to provide sufficient 
justification for its bargaining orders will not prevent us from 
fulfilling our obligation to apply the law.  So long as the 
Board persists on its current course we have no choice but to 
remand each offending order.  "We reiterate [this] sentiment 
here, hopefully for the final time."  Exxel/Atmos I, 28 F.3d at 
1249.

                          VI. Conclusion

     For the reasons above, we grant the petition for review in 
part, and deny in part.  We vacate the Board's conclusion 
that DFC committed unfair labor practices by selling catering 
trucks and routes.  We also vacate the accompanying restora-
tion order and bargaining order, and remand to the Board for 
further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.  With 
respect to all other issues, including those not discussed 
expressly herein, the petition for review is denied and the 
cross-petition for enforcement is granted.

                                