                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 22, 2001   Decided February 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-3039

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                        Brad K. Edmonds, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00207-01)

     Sandra G. Roland, Assistant Federal Public Defender, 
argued the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was 
A. J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender.  Teresa Alva, Assis-
tant Federal Public Defender, entered an appearance.

     Suzanne Grealy Curt, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. 

Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Thomas J. Tourish, Jr. 
and Adam L. Rosman, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Williams, Ginsburg and Sentelle, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Based on evidence that police 
officers discovered during a Terry stop and subsequent 
searches, appellant Brad K. Edmonds was convicted of pos-
sessing cocaine base within 1,000 feet of a school in violation 
of 21 U.S.C. s 860(a).  Edmonds appeals that conviction, 
arguing that the evidence introduced against him was ob-
tained in violation of the Fourth Amendment's guarantee 
against unreasonable searches and seizures.  Because we 
conclude that, considering the totality of the circumstances, 
the police officer reasonably suspected that appellant was 
engaged in criminal activity, we hold that he obtained the 
evidence lawfully.  However, the United States introduced no 
evidence that the school near which appellant was arrested 
was one of the specific types of schools enumerated in the 
statute, and we therefore vacate his conviction and remand 
with instructions that his conviction for a lesser included 
offense be reinstated.

                          I. BACKGROUND

     A.   Factual background
          
     In the early evening of May 24, 1999, a group of Washing-
ton Metropolitan Police Department officers was patrolling 
the 4600 block of Livingston Road, SE in Washington, DC.  
The officers included Sergeant Bruce Feirson, a 21-year 
veteran who had worked in that neighborhood intermittently 
for some 14 years.  Livingston Road is notorious as one of 
the many "open air drug markets" infesting the nation's 
capital and is additionally, in Feirson's words, home to "a 
series of murders" and the site of "hundreds of arrests and 
hundreds of incidents, violent incidents."  Transcript of Mo-
tions Hearing at 6 ("Motion Tr.").

     On that particular day, Feirson and his companions were 
dressed in plainclothes and driving an unmarked car.  But 
according to his testimony, their vehicle--a black Crown 
Victoria--is regularly used to patrol the neighborhood and is 
easily identifiable by residents as a police cruiser.  As the 
officers made their way down Livingston Road, Feirson ob-
served a man (later identified as Antonio McFadden) standing 
on the curb.  When McFadden noticed the Crown Victoria, 
"his eyes got pretty big, and he immediately pivoted, turned 
away and he began to walk"--rapidly--towards a van located 
in the parking lot of the nearby Patricia Harris school.  Id. at 
9.  McFadden entered the van and seated himself in the front 
passenger's seat.  Appellant Edmonds occupied the driver's 
seat.

     McFadden had left the curb, Feirson believed, because he 
had recognized him and his companions as police officers.  
The sergeant's suspicions were further aroused because, he 
testified, "it is not proper for--it would be illegal for cars to 
be on school property after hours unless they have some 
business at the school."  Id. at 48.  Moreover, the parking lot 
to which McFadden retreated is well-known to officers as the 
location of numerous drug transactions.

     Sergeant Feirson decided to investigate.  Exiting the 
Crown Victoria, he approached Edmonds's van through the 
parking lot with his police badge prominently hanging from 
his neck.  Id. at 21.  Feirson could see both Edmonds and 
McFadden through the van's windshield.  As he drew nearer, 
Edmonds began to make furtive movements:  He "lean[ed] 
forward in the vehicle, move[d] about in the car, and then 
s[a]t upright, straight back upright in the vehicle."  Id. at 11.  
Feirson believed that Edmonds was attempting to hide some-
thing--he particularly suspected a weapon or drugs--under 
the driver's seat.

     After reaching the driver's-side door of the van, Feirson 
asked Edmonds to show him his driver's license and vehicle 
registration.  Edmonds appeared to Feirson to be "extremely 
nervous," as he was fidgeting in his seat and rapidly blinking 
his eyes.  Id. at 11-12.  When he failed to produce his 

registration, Feirson asked him to step out of the van.  
Edmonds did so--and promptly began sprinting away.  As he 
fled, one of Sergeant Feirson's fellow officers spotted a pistol 
lying in plain view on the van's floorboard, and shouted out 
"gun" or "he has got a gun."  Id. at 13.

     Feirson, who after catching Edmonds by the waistband of 
his pants was dragged several feet, finally tackled him with 
the assistance of another officer.  Because he noticed "a 
bulge in Mr. Edmonds' left-front-pants pocket" and conse-
quently believed that he was armed, id., Feirson conducted a 
pat-down search that yielded 40 ziploc bags of crack cocaine 
and a fully loaded 9mm clip.  Officers also recovered a fully 
loaded 9mm pistol "sticking out" from underneath the van's 
driver's seat.  Id. at 16.

     B.   Procedural background
          
     Edmonds stood trial on a five-count indictment, charging 
him with:  (1) unlawful possession of a firearm by a convicted 
felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 922(g);  (2) unlawful posses-
sion of ammunition by a convicted felon in violation of 18 
U.S.C. s 922(g);  (3) unlawful possession with intent to dis-
tribute five grams or more of cocaine base in violation of 21 
U.S.C. s 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(B)(iii);  (4) unlawful possession 
with intent to distribute cocaine base within 1,000 feet of a 
school in violation of 21 U.S.C. s 860(a);  and (5) carrying and 
possessing a firearm during a drug trafficking offense in 
violation of 18 U.S.C. s 924(c)(1).

     Before trial, Edmonds moved to suppress the evidence on 
the grounds that it had been seized during an unconstitutional 
search.  The United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia heard Edmonds's motion on September 2, 1999, and 
several days later denied it, concluding that the officers' stop 
of Edmonds was supported by a reasonable suspicion and 
hence was justified under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968).  
The court found, as a general matter, that the testimony of 
Sergeant Feirson, who was the United States' principal wit-
ness, was credible.  It also found that neighborhood residents 
could easily identify the officers' unmarked Crown Victoria as 
a police cruiser.  See Transcript of Pretrial and Voir Dire, 
9/13/99, at 15 ("9/13/99 Tr.").

     The court concluded that Edmonds was "seized" within the 
meaning of the Fourth Amendment at the moment Feirson 
asked him for his license and registration.  See id. at 17.  It 
further held that the seizure was a reasonable one.  Consid-
ering the totality of the circumstances, it was reasonable for 
an experienced police officer to have suspected that criminal 
activity was afoot when (1) he was patrolling a neighborhood 
known for drug trafficking;  (2) a man observed him and then 
fled to a parked van;  (3) the van was parked in a school 
parking lot after school hours;  and (4) another person in the 
van made "furtive gestures" while the officer approached him.  
See id. at 15-17.  Because the initial seizure was lawful, the 
court held, Feirson was entitled to order Edmonds to exit the 
van after he failed to produce his vehicle registration.  And 
the officers had probable cause to arrest Edmonds, and to 
conduct a search incident to arrest, because they discovered a 
gun lying in plain view of the floor of the van.  See id. at 20-
21.  All evidence therefore was deemed admissible.

     Edmonds's trial commenced on September 13, 1999.  On 
September 20, the jury returned a guilty verdict on counts 
three and four (possessing and intending to distribute cocaine 
base, and possessing and intending to distribute within 1,000 
feet of a school, respectively).  Because the jury was unable 
to reach a verdict on counts one, two, and five, the court 
declared a mistrial as to those counts.  At the close of the 
evidence, Edmonds had moved for judgment of acquittal on 
count four, arguing that the government had not proved that 
the school near which he was arrested was one of the types 
enumerated in 21 U.S.C. s 860(a).  See Transcript of Testi-
mony, 9/15/99, at 170, 196.  His motion was denied but, on 
March 7, 2000, the court vacated his conviction under count 
three, finding that it was a lesser, included offense of count 
four. The court then sentenced Edmonds to a 60-month jail 
term, from which he now appeals.

                          II. DISCUSSION

     Edmonds's appeal presents two issues, but only one of 
them is contested:  whether a police officer has a reasonable 

suspicion sufficient to support a Terry stop when (1) he is 
patrolling a neighborhood known for narcotics trafficking;  (2) 
a man observes him, flees, and enters a van in which the 
suspect is seated;  (3) the van is parked in a school parking 
lot--where drugs often are sold--after school hours;  and (4) 
the suspect makes "furtive gestures," apparently attempting 
to conceal an item under the driver's seat, while the officer 
approaches the van.  As to the second issue, whether a 
defendant can be convicted of violating 21 U.S.C. s 860(a), 
which criminalizes the distribution of drugs within 1,000 feet 
of, among others, "a public or private elementary, vocational, 
or secondary school," when the government fails to introduce 
any evidence that the school near which he was arrested was 
one of the specific types of schools enumerated in the statute, 
the parties are in accord.  Edmonds's conviction on count 
four must be vacated and his case remanded with instructions 
that his conviction on count three--a lesser included of-
fense--be reinstated.

     A.   Constitutionality of the search
          
     We define the scope of our inquiry.  Edmonds does not 
challenge the district court's determination that he was not 
seized until Sergeant Feirson asked to see his license and 
registration.  Nor does he contend that the seizure of the 
pistol lying in plain view on the van's floorboard and of the 
cocaine and 9mm clip found during a pat-down was unlawful 
on any other ground than the asserted unconstitutionality of 
the initial Terry stop.  Edmonds's entire appeal hangs on the 
proposition that, in light of the circumstances on the evening 
of May 24, 1999, it was unreasonable for Sergeant Feirson to 
suspect that criminal activity was afoot.  It was not.

     In Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), the Supreme Court 
carved out an exception to the warrant requirement of the 
Fourth Amendment.  The Fourth Amendment's prohibition 
on unreasonable searches and seizures ordinarily requires all 
such encounters to be conducted pursuant to a judicially 
issued warrant--that is, the criterion by which the reason-
ableness of a given search or seizure typically is measured is 
whether it was authorized by a warrant.  See California v. 

Acevedo, 500 U.S. 565, 582 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring in the 
judgment) ("Although the Fourth Amendment does not ex-
plicitly impose the requirement of a warrant, it is of course 
possible to consider that implicit within the requirement of 
reasonableness.").  But the Terry Court made an exception 
for "brief encounter[s] between a citizen and a police officer 
on a public street," Illinois v. Wardlow, 120 S. Ct. 673, 675 
(2000), which involve "necessarily swift action predicated upon 
the on-the-spot observations of the officer on the beat."  
Terry, 392 U.S. at 20.

     In the same way that such encounters--"Terry stops," as 
they have come to be known--need not proceed pursuant to a 
warrant, neither must they be supported by probable cause.  
Instead, an officer may briefly detain a citizen if he has a 
reasonable, articulable suspicion that "criminal activity may 
be afoot."  Id. at 30.  "The officer need not be absolutely 
certain that the individual" is engaged in an unlawful enter-
prise;  "the issue is whether a reasonably prudent man in the 
circumstances would be warranted in his belief" that the 
suspect is breaking, or is about to break, the law.  Id. at 27.  
As the Supreme Court recently explained, reasonable suspi-
cion "is a less demanding standard than probable cause and 
requires a showing considerably less than preponderance of 
the evidence."  Wardlow, 120 S. Ct. at 675-76.  Hence a 
Terry stop requires only a "minimal level of objective justifi-
cation," INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 217 (1984), and an 
officer may initiate one "based not on certainty, but on the 
need to 'check out' a reasonable suspicion."  United States v. 
Clark, 24 F.3d 299, 303 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

     When determining whether a Terry stop was supported by 
reasonable suspicion, this Court does not separately scruti-
nize each factor relied upon by the officer conducting the 
search.  See United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 8-9 (1989).  
An officer on the beat does not encounter discrete, hermeti-
cally sealed facts.  Rather, as we repeatedly have cautioned, 
the question of whether reasonable suspicion existed can only 
be answered by considering the totality of the circumstances 
as the officer on the scene experienced them.  See Clark, 24 
F.3d at 301-02 ("The evidence giving rise to suspicion must 

not be 'dissected and viewed singly,' but taken as a whole;  
and it must be 'viewed through the eyes of a reasonable and 
cautious police officer on the scene, guided by his experience 
and training.' " (quoting United States v. Hall, 525 F.2d 857, 
859 (D.C. Cir. 1976))).  An officer's training and experiences 
enable him to "draw[ ] inferences and make[ ] deductions" 
from seemingly innocuous facts--"inferences and deductions 
that might well elude an untrained person."  United States v. 
Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 418 (1981).  Hence even though a single 
factor might not itself be sufficiently probative of wrongdoing 
to give rise to a reasonable suspicion, the combination of 
several factors--especially when viewed through the eyes of 
an experienced officer--may.

     In this case, the district court identified four factors that, 
when considered in their totality, established the reasonable-
ness of Sergeant Feirson's suspicion that Edmonds was en-
gaging in criminal activity:  (1) Livingston Road's notoriety as 
an "open air drug market";  (2) Edmonds's presence in a van 
parked after hours in a school lot known to be the site of 
numerous drug transactions;  (3) the "furtive gestures" made 
by Edmonds as Feirson approached the van;  and (4) the 
perception that McFadden, Edmonds's companion, began to 
flee when he noticed the officers' unmarked car.  We find 
that the first three factors are sufficient to amount to reason-
able suspicion, especially in light of McFadden's apparent 
attempt to evade the officers.

     As for the first factor, the probative value of a neighbor-
hood's reputation as a high-crime area is firmly established.  
Of course, the fact that a given locale is well known for 
criminal activity will not by itself justify a Terry stop;  but it 
is among the various factors that officers may take into 
account.  See, e.g., Wardlow, 120 S. Ct. at 676 (emphasizing 
that an "individual's presence in an area of expected criminal 
activity, standing alone, is not enough to support a reason-
able, particularized suspicion that the person is committing a 
crime," but stressing that "officers are not required to ignore 
the relevant characteristics of a location in determining 
whether the circumstances are sufficiently suspicious to war-
rant further investigation");  United States v. Johnson, 212 

F.3d 1313, 1316 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("While obviously insufficient 
by itself to amount to reasonable suspicion, this is among the 
relevant contextual considerations in a Terry analysis." (cita-
tion omitted)).  Edmonds simply misstates the law when he 
asserts that Livingston Road's disproportionately high crime 
rate "adds little" to the reasonable-suspicion calculus.  Brief 
for Appellant at 21.

     In this case, the United States submitted evidence to the 
district court that the 4600 block of Livingston Road suffers 
from a high incidence of crime.  Sergeant Feirson testified 
that, in the last five years, he has been involved in "15 or 20 
arrests" in the neighborhood, and described it as "an ex-
tremely high crime area."  Motion Tr. at 6.  The government 
introduced evidence that the neighborhood is particularly 
known for its prevalence of narcotics trafficking and violent 
crime.  Feirson more than once described Livingston Road as 
an "open air drug market[ ]," and elaborated that "[p]rimarily 
cocaine, but marijuana is also sold up there."  He also 
testified that "there has been a series of murders that I am 
familiar with up in that area and shootings.  There have been 
hundreds of arrests and hundreds of incidents, violent inci-
dents up there."  Id.  In other words, the government estab-
lished not just that Livingston Road suffers from general, 
undifferentiated "crime," but that it is home to the precise 
type of infractions--drug and firearm offenses--that Feirson 
suspected Edmonds of committing.

     The second factor is equally probative of criminal activity 
as courts recognize that a car parked in the lot of a closed 
establishment can contribute to an officer's reasonable suspi-
cions.  For example, in an Eighth Circuit case closely paral-
leling this one, United States v. Dawdy, 46 F.3d 1427 (8th Cir. 
1995), an officer "observed Dawdy and his passenger parked 
after 10:00 pm on a Sunday night at the back of the otherwise 
deserted pharmacy parking lot," a pharmacy that was known 
to have been burglarized several times in the recent past.  Id. 
at 1430.  That court held that "the presence of two men 
sitting in a parked automobile at night," when coupled with 
the possibility that the suspect may have attempted to drive 
away, "was sufficient to lead a trained law enforcement officer 

to suspect that a crime was being committed and to justify 
the initial stop."  Id.

     We need not--and do not today--adopt the Dawdy court's 
apparent suggestion that the parked car scenario is by itself 
sufficient to justify a Terry stop.  See id. at 1432 (Lay, J., 
dissenting) ("This Court has now, for the first time in this or 
any other circuit, determined that police can seize, detain, and 
question an individual (or individuals) knowing nothing more 
than the fact that the person's car is parked legally in a 
mixed commercial/residential area at night.").  But we do 
recognize that a car parked in the lot of a then-closed 
establishment that is the site of occasional criminal activity is 
a factor that may strongly support an officer's reasonable 
suspicions.

     In this case, Sergeant Feirson observed Edmonds and 
McFadden parked in the school's lot at around 7:00 PM, a 
time when the school was known to be closed, as was the 
pharmacy in Dawdy.  And, again as in Dawdy, Sergeant 
Feirson knew that crimes--in this case, drug transactions--
often were committed in the school's parking lot.  It is 
unclear whether vehicles in addition to Edmonds's van were 
parked at the school.  As Edmonds points out, Feirson 
initially testified that it is "unusual" for cars to park in the 
school lot after hours, but admitted on cross-examination that 
"I am sure that there are [other] cars that park on that 
parking lot after hours, yes."  Motion Tr. at 10, 49.  But it is 
difficult to see why this matters.  What triggered Feirson's 
suspicion was not simply the after-hours presence of a parked 
van, but of a parked van with two men sitting in it--one of 
whom had already drawn the officer's notice by his suspicious 
behavior.  There is no evidence that any of the other cars 
parked at the school--if indeed other cars were parked at the 
school--also contained passengers.  The presence of other 
cars would not inherently have led Feirson to be any less 
suspicious of Edmonds's van, especially given the approach by 
its passenger from the street rather than from the direction 
of the school, which could reasonably heighten the suspicion 
that the occupants had no legitimate after-hours business 
with the educational institution.

     Third, this Court recognizes that "furtive" gestures in 
response to the presence of the police can serve as the basis 
of an officer's reasonable suspicion.  In United States v. 
Green, 465 F.2d 620 (D.C. Cir. 1972), we held that officers 
were justified in conducting a Terry stop when they halted a 
car for a traffic infraction and "observed the driver making 
furtive movements as though pulling something out of his belt 
and placing it under his seat."  Id. at 623.  Here, Sergeant 
Feirson testified that he could see Edmonds through the 
van's windshield as he approached the vehicle, and that he 
noticed Edmonds reaching under the driver's seat as though 
he were attempting to conceal something.  "I saw the Defen-
dant lean all of the way forward," he recalled, "almost duck-
ing out of my sight.  I could see his head above the dash-
board, and then I saw him lean back, up, seated upright in 
the vehicle."  Motion Tr. at 11.

     Of course, a suspect's movements are not by themselves 
enough to support a reasonable suspicion of criminal wrong-
doing;  furtive gestures "are significant only if they were 
undertaken in response to police presence."  Johnson, 212 
F.3d at 1316.  And a suspect can respond to the presence of a 
police officer only if he has recognized him as an officer.  In 
this case, there can be no serious doubt that Edmonds 
recognized Sergeant Feirson as an officer.  Feirson testified 
that he was prominently wearing his police badge on his 
chest.  Motion Tr. at 21.  Since Feirson further testified that 
he could observe Edmonds through the van's windshield, it is 
a fair inference that Edmonds in turn saw Feirson, perceived 
his badge, recognized him as a police officer, and reacted by 
making furtive gestures.  Indeed, during cross-examination, 
in an attempt to establish that Edmonds was "seized" before 
Feirson demanded his license and registration, Edmonds's 
attorney asked the officer "And it was a police badge, anyone 
could tell that you were a police officer with a badge;  right?"  
To which Feirson replied "Right."  Id. at 22.

     This case thus is easily distinguishable from Johnson, in 
which we doubted that the suspect's initial attempt to conceal 
an object under his car seat gave rise to a reasonable 
suspicion of wrongdoing (although we held that his later 

movements did).  See Johnson, 212 F.3d at 1316 ("If the 
seizure had taken place at that point, we doubt very much 
whether it would have been valid.").  The reason why John-
son's first round of furtive gestures did not justify a Terry 
stop was because "[i]t is not clear that Johnson was aware 
that [the observing officer] was a police officer;  [the officer] 
was after all in an unmarked car."  Id.  In this case, by way 
of crucial contrast, Feirson had his police badge prominently 
displayed on his chest as he approached the van.

     These three factors, when considered in their totality and 
through the eyes of an experienced police officer on the 
street, are sufficient to have led Sergeant Feirson reasonably 
to suspect that Edmonds was engaged in unlawful activity.  
Moreover, it was reasonable for Feirson's suspicions to be 
aroused in the first instance by McFadden's apparent flight 
and retreat to Edmonds's van.  As we noted above, the 
district court found that Feirson was aware that his Crown 
Victoria was readily recognizable as a police vehicle.  That 
McFadden, immediately upon observing that vehicle, has-
tened to the van to join its driver, could at least raise a 
suspicion that whatever was going on in the van had nothing 
to do with legitimate presence in the parking lot, raising the 
strong possibility, given the other facts discussed above, that 
it was criminal activity.

     The Supreme Court recently held that "[h]eadlong flight 
... is not necessarily indicative of wrongdoing, but it certain-
ly is suggestive of such."  Wardlow, 120 S. Ct. at 676;  see 
also California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. 621, 623 n.1 (1991) 
(" 'The wicked flee when no man pursueth.' " (quoting Prov-
erbs 28:1)).  This case is not like United States v. Johnson, 
496 A.2d 592 (D.C. Ct. App. 1985), in which the Court of 
Appeals of the District of Columbia stated that "one person's 
flight is imputable to another only if other circumstances 
indicate that the flight from authority implies another per-
son's consciousness of guilt as well," before holding that three 
suspects' joint presence in a vehicle enabled officers to "con-
clude that all three were associated in a venture of some 
sort."  Id. at 597.  Rather, in this case the flight of McFad-
den to the van contributed to a reasonable suspicion that 

criminal activity might be afoot in the vehicle.  This case 
involves direct, not transferred, suspicion.  Acting upon that 
reasonable suspicion, the investigating officer approached the 
van and observed the other factors which we have enumerat-
ed above, further contributing to his reasonable suspicion and 
supporting his Terry stop of Edmonds.

     In sum, it was reasonable for Sergeant Feirson to suspect 
that Edmonds was engaged in illegal activity.  Because Feir-
son had a reasonable suspicion that "criminal activity may 
[have] be[en] afoot," Terry, 392 U.S. at 30, the initial stop was 
justified, and the evidence the officers subsequently obtained 
was lawfully introduced.  The district court did not err in 
refusing to suppress the evidence.

     B.   Sufficiency of the evidence
          
     Besides challenging the Terry stop, Edmonds argues alter-
natively that the United States introduced no evidence at trial 
that the school near which he committed a drug offense was 
one of the specific types of schools enumerated in 21 U.S.C. 
s 860(a).  Both parties agree that the government failed to 
lay a factual foundation that would have enabled the jury to 
conclude that "the Patricia Harris school," Opening State-
ments and Testimony, 9/14/99, at 36, was one of the statutori-
ly specified schools.  They further agree that Edmonds's 
conviction on count four--possessing and intending to distrib-
ute cocaine base within 1,000 feet of a school--must be 
vacated, and that the case should be remanded with instruc-
tions to reinstate his conviction on count three--possessing 
and intending to distribute cocaine base--a lesser included 
offense.

     21 U.S.C. s 860(a) makes it unlawful for a person to 
participate in a drug transaction within 1,000 feet of an 
"elementary, vocational, or secondary school or a ... college, 
junior college, or university."  Section 860(a) does not apply 
to all types of schools, but only to the ones that are specifical-
ly enumerated in the statute's text.  Hence to prove a viola-
tion of s 860(a), the United States must establish beyond 
reasonable doubt that the school near which the defendant 
committed a drug crime is one of the statutorily specified 

types.  Cf. United States v. Hawkins, 104 F.3d 437, 440 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997) (holding that s 860(a) is not violated where a drug 
offense is committed within 1,000 feet of a "school building 
that is no longer (or not yet) in use as a school").

     In other words, the character of the school is an element of 
the offense that, like all elements, must be proved beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 
506, 510 (1993) (stressing that the Sixth and Fourteenth 
Amendments guarantee a criminal defendant the right to "a 
jury determination that [he] is guilty of every element of the 
crime with which he is charged, beyond a reasonable doubt");  
see also Apprendi v. New Jersey, 120 S. Ct. 2348, 2368 (2000) 
(Thomas, J., concurring) (arguing that "every fact that is by 
law a basis for imposing or increasing punishment" is an 
element of the offense).

     Here, the only evidence the United States submitted at 
trial was that Edmonds had committed a drug offense in the 
vicinity of "the Patricia Harris school."  9/13/99 Tr. at 36.  
During the pretrial hearing on Edmonds's motion to sup-
press, a government witness had described the school alter-
nately as "a local high school" and a "junior high school," 
Motion Tr. at 9--either of which seemingly would meet 
s 860(a)'s definition of a "secondary school."  But during the 
trial itself, the government made no effort to show that "the 
Patricia Harris school" is indeed one of the types of schools 
specified in 21 U.S.C. s 860(a).  Because the United States 
failed to introduce any evidence that Edmonds committed 
that element of the offense, no jury properly could have found 
beyond a reasonable doubt that he violated s 860(a).

     A similar issue was presented in United States v. Smith, 13 
F.3d 380 (10th Cir. 1993), where the Tenth Circuit applied a 
statute making it unlawful to sell drugs within 1,000 feet of a 
"playground."  The statute further defined "playground" as 
"any outdoor facility ... intended for recreation, open to the 
public, and with any portion thereof containing three or more 
separate apparatus intended for the recreation of chil-
dren...."  21 U.S.C. s 860(d).  At trial, the only evidence 
introduced by the government was that Crawford Park, the 

location of defendant's drug sale, had "playgrounds, walking 
paths, [and] gazebos."  Smith, 13 F.3d at 382.  It produced 
no evidence that Crawford Park had three or more recreation 
apparatus.  "Because the testimony does not meet the re-
quirements of the definition of a playground set forth in 21 
U.S.C. s 860(d), a reasonable jury could not convict Mr. 
Smith beyond a reasonable doubt of an offense which requires 
activity 'within 1,000 feet of a ... playground' as an element."  
Id.  Just so here.

     We therefore vacate Edmonds's conviction for violating 21 
U.S.C. s 860(a), and remand with instructions that the dis-
trict court reinstate his conviction for violating 21 U.S.C. 
s 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(B)(iii), a lesser included offense.  The 
prosecution might well have avoided this additional stage of 
litigation by doing before the jury what it did at the suppres-
sion hearing:  simply asking its witness to fully describe "the 
Patricia Harris school."

                         III. CONCLUSION

     The district court properly concluded that the police offi-
cers had a reasonable suspicion to conduct a Terry stop of 
Edmonds, since they were patrolling in a high-crime area, 
observed Edmonds sitting in a van parked after hours in a 
school lot, and saw him conceal an object under his seat.  
Because the initial stop was lawful, the evidence obtained in 
subsequent searches need not be suppressed.  However, the 
district court erred in refusing to grant Edmonds's motion for 
judgment of acquittal, as the United States introduced no 
evidence that the school near which he was arrested was one 
of the specific types of schools enumerated in 21 U.S.C. 
s 860(a).  Edmonds's conviction on count four therefore is 
vacated, and the case is remanded with instructions that his 
conviction on count three be reinstated.

                                  