                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 15, 2002    Decided July 2, 2002 

                           No. 01-1110

                     New World Radio, Inc., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

                Birach Broadcasting Corporation, 
                            Intervenor

                    Appeal of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Lawrence Roberts argued the cause for the appellant.  
Jared S. Sher was on brief.

     Thomas E. Chandler, Counsel, Federal Communications 
Commission, argued the cause for the appellee.  Jane E. 
Mago, General Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-

sion, and Daniel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, 
Federal Communications Commission, was on brief.

     Stephen Diaz Gavin was on brief for the intervenor.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  New World 
Radio, Inc. (New World), licensee of AM radio station WUST, 
located in Washington, D.C., appeals an order of the Federal 
Communications Commission (Commission or FCC) granting 
the application of Birach Broadcasting Corporation (Birach) 
to renew its license for WDMV(AM) located in Pocomoke 
City, Maryland.  In re Application of Birach Broadcasting 
Corporation for Renewal of License of Station WDMV(AM), 
Pocomoke City, Maryland, 16 FCC Rcd 5015 (2001) (Renewal 
Application).  New World contends the FCC erred in approv-
ing the Renewal Application because Birach failed to satisfy 
the "public interest, convenience, and necessity" standard of 
47 U.S.C. s 309(k)(1) by failing to broadcast for thirty-two 
months.  Because we conclude that New World lacks stand-
ing, we dismiss its appeal.

                                I.

     Birach acquired the license for WDMV from Five Star 
Broadcasting, Inc. (Five Star) on January 15, 1993.  Earlier, 
on May 8, 1992, Birach had applied to the Commission for 
both a construction permit to change WDMV's community of 
license from Pocomoke City to Brinklow, Maryland (Brinklow 
Application)1 and for assignment of the WDMV broadcast 
license from Five Star to Birach (Assignment Application).  

__________
     1 Birach sought to move the station to Brinklow because Poco-
moke City already had two local stations, WDMV was losing money 
because of the competition, WDMV was likely to go off the air if it 
was not sold and Brinklow did not have a local station.  FCC Br. 4 
(citing Birach's Br. in Support of Grant of Brinklow Application at 
3-5).

The Assignment Application advised the Commission that 
Birach's obligations under the purchase agreement were con-
tingent on the Commission's approval of the Birach Applica-
tion.  See Assignment Application, Exh. I-5.  On November 
25, 1992 the FCC granted both the Assignment Application 
and the Brinklow Application.  On January 15, 1993, the day 
Birach acquired WDMV, Birach also notified the FCC that it 
and Five Star had completed the assignment and that Five 
Star had taken WDMV off the air as of January 14, 1993.  
See January 15, 1993 Letter from Lauren Colby, counsel for 
Birach, to FCC.  Birch did not purchase Five Star's Poco-
moke City facilities (for WDMV) at that time because it 
planned on resuming operations, after construction, at new 
facilities in Brinklow.  Id.

     On May 6, 1994 Birach applied to the FCC to extend the 
Brinklow construction permit beyond the May 25 expiration 
date, stating that it was unable to obtain the transmitter site 
specified in the Brinklow Application.  New World filed an 
informal objection to the extension request, alleging that 
Birach had engaged in misrepresentations and/or lacked can-
dor in connection with its certification of site availability 
included in the Brinklow Application.  While Birach attempt-
ed to secure an alternate transmitter site in Brinklow, 
WDMV remained off the air pursuant to successive FCC 
special temporary authorizations.  See August 1, 1994 Letter 
from James R. Burtle to Birach (three-month authorization to 
remain silent);  November 9, 1994 Letter from James R. 
Burtle to Birach (same);  February 13, 1995 Letter from 
James R. Burtle to Birach (same);  May 19, 1995 Letter from 
James R. Burtle to Birach (same);  September 11, 1995 Letter 
from James R. Burtle to Birach (same).

     The WDMV license that Birach acquired from Five Star 
was scheduled to expire on October 1, 1995.  Consistent with 
the FCC rule requiring a renewal applicant to file four 
months before the expiration date, see 47 C.F.R. 73.3539, 
Birach filed an application for renewal of broadcast station 
WDMV, Pocomoke City, Maryland dated May 30, 1995 (Re-

newal Application).2  On September 18, 1995 New World filed 
an informal objection, claiming, inter alia, that Birach had 
not operated the radio station during the approximately 32 
months that it held the WDMV license and had no firm plans 
to do so.  On October 2, 1995 Birach filed an opposition, 
arguing that New World's informal objection did not consti-
tute a petition to deny and that, in any event, New World 
lacked standing to file a petition to deny because it could not 
show that it would be injured by granting the Renewal 
Application.  In its Reply, New World acknowledged that "it 
lacks the required standing to maintain a petition to deny," 
which, it explained, was the reason it "filed its pleading as an 
Informal Objection, not a petition to deny."  October 11, 1995 
Reply [to Birach's Opposition to Informal Objection] at 3 p 5.

     On July 15 1996, without having resumed broadcasting 
from WDMV, Birach again applied to change the community 
of license and relocate WDMV's transmission facilities, this 
time from Pocomoke City to Damascus, Maryland (Damascus 
Application).  The Damascus Application was prompted by 
Birach's continuing inability to secure the site specified in the 
Brinklow Application.  Opposing Birach at every step, New 
World filed a petition to dismiss or deny the Damascus 
Application.

     The Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 
110 Stat. 56 (1996) (Telecom Act) became effective on Febru-
ary 8, 1996.  Section 312(g) provides that "[i]f a broadcasting 
station fails to transmit broadcast signals for any consecutive 
12-month period, then the station license granted for the 
operation of that broadcast station expires at the end of that 
period, notwithstanding any provision, term, or condition of 
the license to the contrary."  47 U.S.C. 312(g).  Any station 
silent as of the date of enactment had one year from the 
effective date of the Telecom Act--that is, until February 9, 
1997--to begin broadcasting before the license automatically 
expired.  In order to satisfy the new statutory directive, 
Birach purchased Five Star's Pocomoke City transmission 
facilities (which, as noted earlier, it had not done at the time 

__________
     2 The FCC date stamp has the date as June 8, 1995.

it acquired WDMV from Five Star) and resumed operations 
at the Pocomoke City, Maryland site on November 11, 1996.

     In light of Birach's Damascus Application, on January 14, 
1997 the Audio Services Division of the FCC's Mass Media 
Bureau dismissed as moot Birach's Brinklow extension re-
quest and canceled its Brinklow construction permit.  Janu-
ary 14, 1997 Letter Decision from Linda Blair, Chief, Audio 
Services Division, Mass Media Bureau.3  In addition, the 

__________
     3 On January 4, 2001 the Mass Media Bureau dismissed the 
Damascus Application as not "technically grantable" because of the 
unacceptable overlap of signal strength contours with another sta-
tion (WWCS(AM)) Birach partly owned in Canonsburg, Pennsylva-
nia in violation of 47 C.F.R. s 73.37(a).  Section 73.37(a) provides 
that "no application will be accepted for a change of the facilities of 
an existing station if the proposed change would involve ... overlap 
[of signal strength contours]" with another station as therein de-
scribed.  47 C.F.R. s 73.37(a) (2002).  In 1997 Birach had applied 
for and been granted a construction permit to reduce WWCS's 
daytime power and to change its daytime directional antenna pa-
rameters;  these changes, if implemented, would have cured the 
unacceptable overlap.  See BP-19961015AB.  Birach never filed a 
license modification application to implement the changes, however, 
and its construction permit expired on December 21, 2000.  Janu-
ary 4, 1997 Letter Decision from Linda Blair, Chief, Audio Ser-
vices Division, Mass Media Bureau 1 n.2 .

 On January 9, 2001 Birach filed a new WWCS modification 
application to eliminate unacceptable overlap with the facilities 
proposed in the Damascus Application, apparently curing the defect 
that led to the dismissal of the Damascus Application.  See July 18, 
2001 Letter Decision at 2.  Subsequently, the Mass Media Bureau 
granted Birach's petition for reconsideration and reinstated the 
Damascus Application based on Birach's amendment that made the 
Damascus Application and a new WWCS Application contingent 
applications pursuant to 47 C.F.R. s 73.3517(c) (allowing AM licen-
see to file contingent modification applications if granting contin-
gent applications "will reduce interference to one or more AM 
stations or will otherwise increase the area of interference-free 
service").  New World then petitioned for reconsideration of the 
Mass Media Bureau's reinstatement of the Damascus Application, 
asserting that it improperly relied on the presumed validity of 

letter decision granted Birach's Renewal Application, stating 
that "because New World's allegations in its Informal Objec-
tion ... relate only to the station's silent status, ... we grant 
the pending license renewal application in light of 
WDMV(AM)'s resumption of broadcast operations."  Id.4

     On February 18, 1997, New World petitioned for reconsid-
eration of the January 14, 1997 letter decision granting 
Birach's Renewal Application, reasserting the arguments 
made in its informal objection.  The Audio Services Division, 
by letter, denied New World's petition for reconsideration 
and request for a hearing on November 20, 1997.  November 
20, 1997 Letter Decision from Linda Blair, Chief, Audio 
Services Division, Mass Media Bureau.  New World then 
petitioned for review by the Commission on November 22, 
1997.  Birach opposed New World's petition.  On February 
28, 2001 the FCC denied New World's petition.  See In re 

__________
Birach's new WWCS Application, which New World claims was 
defective because it attempted to revive a construction permit 
automatically forfeited under the Commission's regulations.  See 
August 23, 2001 New World Petition for Reconsideration of Rein-
statement of Damascus Application at 4 p 6 & n.5 (citing 47 C.F.R. 
s 73.3598(e)).  New World also claimed that reinstatement was 
premature because "the Division also needs to address a number of 
other issues related to the [Damascus] Application," (e.g., New 
World's petition to dismiss or deny).  Id. at 4-5 p 7.  A separate 
Audio Services Division letter ruling related to a modification 
application for Station WWTL(AM) filed by Birach's sister compa-
ny, Elijah Broadcasting Corporation, also addressed some Damas-
cus Application issues.  See July 18, 2001 Letter Ruling from Peter 
H. Doyle, Chief, Audio Services Division, to Elijah Broadcasting, 
et al.  That letter ruling is subject to a petition for reconsideration 
filed by New World on August 22, 2001.  As of December 17, 2001 
reinstatement of the Damascus Application remained pending, ap-
parently awaiting resolution of the issues raised in New World's 
petition for reconsideration.

     4 The letter decision also noted the Commission's policy of assis-
tance to those stations facing the statutory deadline.  See January 
14, 1997 Letter Decision from Linda Blair, Chief, Audio Services 
Division, Mass Media Bureau at 3-4.

Application of Birach Broadcasting Corporation for Renewal 
of License of Station WDMV(AM), Pocomoke City, Mary-
land, 16 FCC Rcd 5015 (2001) (Order).  The FCC concluded 
that New World's charge that Birach had made misrepresen-
tations in connection with its filing of the Assignment and 
Brinklow Applications, which charge was first raised by New 
World eighteen months after both applications had become 
final, was untimely.  Id. at p 8.  The FCC further concluded 
that New World's argument was based on the erroneous view 
that Birach was required to make efforts to resume broad-
casting at Pocomoke City while at the same time seeking to 
relocate to Brinklow and then to Damascus.  Id.  Regarding 
any subsequent Birach misrepresentation involving Birach's 
operation of the station at Pocomoke City, the FCC again 
found no merit in New World's allegations.  Id.  In light of 
its longstanding policy to encourage a silent station to resume 
operations, the FCC affirmed the grant of Birach's Renewal 
Application.  Id. at p 11.  In so concluding, it also noted that 
Birach had never been warned that keeping the station silent 
could jeopardize any renewal application.  Id.

     New World filed a timely notice of appeal on March 7, 2001.  
Birach subsequently intervened in support of the Commis-
sion.  New World contends the FCC decision to grant the 
Renewal Application was arbitrary and capricious because 
Birach failed to broadcast any programming for more than 
thirty-one months.  For the same reason, New World con-
tends the FCC's order contravenes the public interest.  Fi-
nally, New World argues that the FCC's failure to examine 
adequately whether Birach made misrepresentations coinci-
dent with its Assignment and Brinklow Applications left 
unresolved questions of fact about Birach's qualifications to 
remain a licensee.  The FCC first challenges New World's 
standing to seek review of Birach's Renewal Application.  
Because we agree that New World lacks standing, we do not 
reach its arguments on the merits.

                               II.

     The FCC challenges New World's standing, asserting New 
World is not injured by the grant of Birach's Renewal Appli-

cation for the Pocomoke City license.  Section 402(b) of the 
Federal Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. ss 151 et seq. (1982) 
(Act), provides that "any ... person who is aggrieved or 
whose interests are adversely affected by any order of the 
Commission granting or denying any application" may seek 
judicial review thereof.  47 U.S.C. s 402(b)(6).  A party is 
"aggrieved" under the statute if it satisfies both the constitu-
tional and prudential requirements of standing.  See Orange 
Park Florida T.V., Inc. v. FCC, 811 F.2d 663, 670 (D.C. Cir. 
1987);  see also City of Orrville v. FERC, 147 F.3d 979, 985 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing Louisiana Energy & Power Auth. v. 
FERC, 141 F.3d 364, 366 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (interpreting "ag-
grieved" party language in Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 
s 825)).5

     To establish Article III standing, a party must allege (1) an 
injury-in-fact that is (2) "fairly traceable" to the defendant's 
conduct and (3) likely to be redressed by a favorable judicial 
decision.  Jersey Shore Broadcasting Corp. v. FCC, 37 F.3d 
1531, 1535 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (citing Lujan v. Defenders of 
Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992)).  To establish "injury-in-
fact," the plaintiff must show "an invasion of a legally protect-
ed interest which is (a) concrete and particularized and (b) 
actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical."  Sun-
Com Mobile & Data Inc. v. FCC, 87 F.3d 1386, 1388 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996) (citations omitted).  The burden is on the party 
seeking judicial review "clearly to allege facts demonstrating 
that he is a proper party to invoke judicial resolution of the 
dispute and the exercise of the court's powers."  SunCom 
Mobile & Data Inc., 87 F.3d at 1388 (quoting Warth v. 
Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 518 (1975)).  Moreover, "when the 
[party] is not himself the object of the government action or 
inaction he challenges, standing is not precluded, but it is 

__________
     5 Despite the FCC's claim to the contrary, New World's acknowl-
edgment at the agency level that it lacked "the required standing to 
maintain a petition to deny" Birach's Renewal Application does not 
decide New World's Article III standing.  Nor is New World's 
participation in the agency proceedings sufficient by itself to sustain 
Article III standing.  See Fund Democracy v. SEC, 278 F.3d 21, 27 
(D.C. Cir. 2002).

ordinarily 'substantially more difficult' to establish."  Lujan, 
504 U.S. at 562 (citations omitted).

     New World claims to be "aggrieved" by the FCC's grant of 
Birach's Renewal Application for Pocomoke City because 
renewal allows Birach to keep its license, moving one step 
closer to competing with, and therefore economically injuring, 
WUST, New World's Washington, D.C. station.  New World's 
claim is not without support;  the United States Supreme 
Court, in the Camp triad, upheld "competitor standing" even 
though the economic injury was latent.  See Ass'n of Data 
Processing Serv. Orgs. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 152 (1970) 
(sellers of data processing services had standing to test ruling 
allowing national banks to sell data processing services be-
cause competition "might entail some future loss of profits" in 
that respondent bank was already preparing to perform such 
services for two of plaintiffs' clients);  Arnold Tours, Inc. v. 
Camp, 400 U.S. 45, 45-46 (1970) (travel agents had "competi-
tor standing" to challenge ruling allowing national banks to 
provide travel services);  Investment Co. Inst. v. Camp, 401 
U.S. 617, 620-21 (1971) (investment companies had "competi-
tor standing" to test regulatory ruling authorizing national 
banks to operate collective investment funds).  Moreover, the 
Supreme Court held long ago that a competing broadcast 
station has "aggrieved" party standing under section 402(b) of 
the Act to challenge the grant of a license to another "on the 
ground that the resulting competition may work economic 
injury to him."  FCC v. Sanders Brothers Radio Station, 309 
U.S. 475, 477 (1940).  Nonetheless, the Camp cases and 
Sanders Brothers are premised on the petitioner's status as a 
direct and current competitor whose bottom line may be 
adversely affected by the challenged government action.

     In Sanders Brothers, the Court reviewed the FCC's deci-
sion to grant, in a consolidated hearing, two applicants (Sand-
ers Brothers and Telegraph Herald) separate licenses to 
broadcast from the same city, Dubuque, Iowa.  Sanders 
Brothers sought to relocate its transmitter and studios to 
Dubuque, Iowa after having for some years held a broadcast 
license for a station in East Dubuque, Illinois, located across 
the Mississippi River from Dubuque, Iowa.  The Telegraph 

Herald, a newspaper published in Dubuque, Iowa, was apply-
ing for a construction permit to erect a broadcasting station 
in that city.  While it found that economic injury to an 
existing station was not "a separate and independent ele-
ment" that the Commission was required to consider in 
determining whether to grant a license, the Court nonetheless 
concluded that Sanders Brothers, as an existing station "like-
ly to be financially injured by issuance of the license," had 
standing to challenge the FCC's finding that the "public 
interest, convenience, and necessity" would be served by 
granting the Telegraph Herald application.  Sanders Broth-
ers, 309 U.S. at 476-77.  In particular, Sanders Brothers 
alleged that there existed insufficient advertising revenue, 
talent and need for an additional station in Dubuque.  The 
Sanders Brothers Court found standing in the circumstance 
of two stations competing for the right to broadcast in one 
city.  In contrast, New World does not, and cannot, allege 
that granting Birach's Renewal Application for Pocomoke 
City will, standing alone, "financially injure" New World's 
position in the Washington, D.C. marketplace.  The FCC's 
decision to grant Birach's Renewal Application merely allows 
Birach to retain its Pocomoke City license.  Instead, New 
World's "competitive injury" will occur, if at all, only if Birach 
subsequently seeks and secures the relocation of its Poco-
moke City broadcast license to the Washington, D.C. pro-
gramming area.

     In Mount Wilson FM Broadcasters, Inc. v. FCC, 884 F.2d 
1462, 1465 (D.C. Cir. 1989), Mount Wilson, an FM station 
licensee, challenged the FCC's decision to allot a new FM 
channel on a nearby frequency, claiming that the mere allot-
ment made the possibility of future competition more likely 
and thereby adversely affected the current market value of 
its station.  Id. at 1463.  In establishing a new FM radio 
station, the FCC first allots the channel or frequency to a 
particular community and then considers applications for a 
license on that channel.  Id. at 1465-67.  In Mount Wilson, 
we found "doubtful" whether the mere allotment, without the 
issuance of a license, could damage Mount Wilson's "concrete, 
economic interest" sufficiently to confer standing.  Id. at 

1465.6  Similarly here, granting Birach's Renewal Application 
by itself does not adequately harm New World to establish 
standing.  In its Reply Brief, New World attempts to distin-
guish Mount Wilson by attaching great significance to Mount 
Wilson's "two bites at the same apple" language,7 pointing 
out that New World, unlike Mount Wilson, will not get two 
bites because it cannot raise "programming issues" in any 
subsequent Damascus Application/license transfer proceed-
ing.8  This distinction, if accurate, nonetheless does not give 
New World Article III standing.  The "injury-in-fact" re-
quirement "serves to distinguish a person with a direct stake 
in the outcome of a litigation--even though small--from a 
person with a mere interest in the problem."  United States 
v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures 
(SCRAP), 412 U.S. 669, 690 n.14 (1973).  New World's inter-
est in raising "programming issues" does not give it a direct 
enough stake in the outcome of Birach's Renewal Application 
to establish its standing here.

     Pointing to Birach's past attempts to relocate WDMV to 
the Washington D.C. area, New World asserts that the FCC's 

__________
     6 The court ultimately dismissed Mount Wilson's appeal as unripe.  
See Mount Wilson, 884 F.2d at 1467.

     7 In its ripeness discussion, the court noted that no prior case had 
held that "allotment of a channel alone results in sufficient economic 
injury to existing license holders to make an appeal ripe."  Mount 
Wilson, 884 F.2d at 1467. The court found that "[a]ll institutional 
interests recognized in the decisions of this and other courts 
militate against immediate review here" because "[e]very issue 
raised by petitioners now can be raised, together with all relevant 
Step 2 issues, in a single appeal after the Commission has ruled on 
the pending license applications."  Id.  While the "two bites at the 
same apple" ripeness issue may not be present here, the court's 
observation that "[t]his or any appeal from a channel allotment 
decision may be made unnecessary by future agency action" fits 
here as well because Birach may never succeed in relocating 
WDMV to the Washington, D.C. area.

     8 New World cites no FCC regulation that would prohibit its 
raising Birach's failure to broadcast in a subsequent license transfer 
proceeding.

decision "is tantamount to renewal of license for a radio 
station competing in the D.C. market."  While there is sup-
port in our court's caselaw for the assertion that a party 
suffers cognizable injury under Article III when an agency 
"lift[s] regulatory restrictions on their competitors or other-
wise allow[s] increased competition," Louisiana Energy and 
Power Auth. v. FERC, 141 F.3d 364, 367 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(citations omitted), this description does not fit the FCC's 
decision here.  We read this holding to apply the "competitor 
standing" doctrine to an agency action that itself imposes a 
competitive injury, i.e., that provides benefits to an existing 
competitor or expands the number of entrants in the petition-
er's market, not an agency action that is, at most, the first 
step in the direction of future competition.  The difference is 
critical because New World will have an opportunity to 
challenge any FCC decision that directly affects it as a 
competitor.  See, e.g., February 18, 1997 New World Petition 
to Dismiss and Deny Damascus Application.  While the court 
is aware of Birach's apparent desire to compete in the 
Washington, D.C. market, New World's "chain of events" 
injury is too remote to confer standing.  We cannot say, as 
we did in Orange Park, that New World has specified a 
"concrete, economic interest that has been perceptibly dam-
aged by the Commission's award."  Orange Park, 811 F.2d at 
673 (emphasis added);  see also Associated Gas Distribs. v. 
FERC, 899 F.2d 1250, 1259 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (competitor had 
standing because "the challenged action authorized allegedly 
illegal transactions that have the clear and immediate poten-
tial to compete with petitioners' own sales" (emphasis add-
ed));  National Treasury Employees Union v. United States, 
101 F.3d 1423, 1427 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (no standing based on 
injury not "certainly impending");  Northwest Airlines, Inc. v. 
FAA, 795 F.2d 195, 201 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (that party can 
"imagine circumstances in which it could be affected by the 
agency's action" insufficient for standing).  In addition, New 
World's "chain of events" argument depends on the indepen-
dent actions of third parties, distinguishing its case from the 
"garden variety competitor standing cases" which require a 
court to simply acknowledge a chain of causation "firmly 

rooted in the basic law of economics."  United Transp. Union 
v. ICC, 891 F.2d 908, 913 (D.C. Cir. 1989).  Moreover, Birach 
has now purchased Five Star's Pocomoke City facilities in 
order to broadcast from that location.  Finally, New World's 
"tantamount" contention assumes that Birach, which has 
failed in past efforts to relocate the license, will now persuade 
the FCC to reverse field.

     For the foregoing reasons, New World's appeal is

                                                                 Dismissed.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  Because the FCC has 
not yet granted the latest application by Birach Broadcasting 
Corporation (the intervenor in this case) to relocate its station 
into the Washington, D.C. radio market, the majority holds 
that New World Radio (the petitioner) does not have standing 
to challenge the FCC's renewal of the very broadcast license 
Birach seeks to relocate.  Economic competitors, the majority 
holds, have only suffered a constitutional injury-in-fact where 
the petitioner is "a direct and current competitor whose 
bottom line may be adversely affected by the challenged 
government action."  Maj. op. at 9.  The license renewal 
"standing alone" is not enough.  Maj. op. at 10.

     I respectfully disagree.  A party need not wait until after 
an allegedly illegal agency action causes injury to bring suit.  
The test for constitutional standing is less severe:  a plaintiff's 
injury needs to be "actual or imminent, not conjectural or 
hypothetical."  Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 167 (1997).  
For almost ten years--its entire term of ownership--Birach 
has sought to move WDMV into the D.C. broadcast market.  
The FCC approved the company's first application to move, 
and Birach is currently attempting to resolve the FCC's 
technical objections to its second request.  WDMV did not 
broadcast for almost four years, further proof that Birach 
sought the WDMV license so it could make money in the 
Washington, D.C. market, rather than in the unprofitable 
Pocomoke City, Maryland, market.  Any competitive injury is 
surely "imminent."

     I would affirm the FCC.  In renewing the license for 
WDMV, the FCC had to decide whether the station had 
served "the public interest, convenience, and necessity."  47 
U.S.C. s 309(k).  We give "substantial judicial deference" to 
the FCC's judgment in this regard.  FCC v. WNCN Listen-
ers Guild, 450 U.S. 582, 596 (1981).  On the "unique facts of 
this case," including the FCC's repeated assurances that the 
station could remain silent as it sought to relocate, the FCC 
renewed WDMV's license despite its failure to broadcast for 
several years.  In re Birach Broad. Corp., No. BR-
950608YB, at 6 (Feb. 22, 2001).  New World Radio's argu-

ments have not convinced me this action was beyond the 
FCC's power, so I would affirm the agency's decision on the 
merits.

                                               