                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 14, 2000      Decided June 23, 2000 

                           No. 99-3088

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                         Michael McCoy, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00423-02)

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs were A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender, and Evelina J. Norwinski, 
Assistant Federal Public Defender.

     Rachel A. Pierson, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. 

Lewis, U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Gregg A. Maisel and 
Mary-Patrice Brown, Assistant U.S. Attorneys,

     Before:  Ginsburg, Henderson and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Michael McCoy pleaded guilty to 
conspiring to distribute and to possess with intent to distrib-
ute cocaine base.  Prior to sentencing, however, McCoy 
moved to withdraw his plea.  The district court denied the 
motion and sentenced McCoy to 262 months in prison, to be 
followed by five years of supervised release.  Upon appeal 
McCoy contends that the district court abused its discretion 
by denying his request to withdraw his plea.

     We find McCoy's plea was not voluntary, and he has 
presented legally cognizable defenses to the charges against 
him.  In addition, the Government has conceded that its 
ability to prosecute him has not been prejudiced.  We hold 
that in these circumstances the district court abused its 
discretion by denying McCoy's motion to withdraw his plea of 
guilty.

                          I. Background

     The grand jury indicted McCoy on one count of conspiracy 
to distribute and to possess with intent to distribute 50 grams 
or more of cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. s 846, and 
on one count of distribution of five grams or more of cocaine 
base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. ss 841 (a)(1) & (b)(1)(B)(iii).  
McCoy and his co-defendant, Bernard Sanders Jr., soon 
began to negotiate a plea agreement with the Government, 
which made the following proposal:  McCoy would (1) plead 
guilty to the conspiracy charge;  (2) be held accountable for 
between 150 and 500 grams of cocaine base;  and (3) be 
sentenced in accordance with the United States Sentencing 
Guidelines.  The Government also informed McCoy that if he 
chose to proceed to trial, then the Government intended to 
file an information pursuant to 21 U.S.C. s 851 regarding his 
previous two felony drug convictions and that, should he be 

convicted after trial, he would be sentenced as a career 
offender to a mandatory term of life imprisonment.  After 
further negotiations with the Government yielded no better 
terms, McCoy signed an agreement substantially identical to 
the Government's original proposal.

     Before McCoy agreed to plead guilty, his counsel had 
determined that he would face from 188 to 235 months in 
prison if he accepted the Government's offer.  Counsel had 
arrived at that conclusion by consulting the drug quantity 
table in U.S.S.G. s 2D1.1(c)(3) and determining that McCoy's 
base offense level would be 34;  after a three point reduction 
to reflect McCoy's acceptance of responsibility, see U.S.S.G. 
s 3E1.1(a) & (b), his total offense level would be 31.  Al-
though the matter is not entirely clear from the record, 
counsel apparently had understood that under s 4B1.1 of the 
Guidelines McCoy would be treated as a "career offender" 
and therefore assigned a criminal history category of VI.  See 
U.S.S.G. s 4B1.1.  Quite clearly, however, counsel did not 
realize that s 4B1.1 also enhances the base offense level of a 
career offender;  because McCoy would be pleading guilty to 
a crime for which the maximum penalty is life imprisonment, 
see 21 U.S.C. ss 841(b)(1)(A)(iii) & 846, his base offense level 
would be 37 rather than 34.  See U.S.S.G. s 4B1.1.  McCoy's 
sentence would therefore be in the range of 262 to 327 
months of imprisonment, not the 188 to 235 months predicted 
by McCoy's counsel.  See U.S.S.G. Ch. 5, Pt. A (table).  The 
miscalculation committed by McCoy's counsel had been rein-
forced when the prosecutor, in response to an inquiry from 
counsel for McCoy, likewise had estimated the applicable 
sentencing range at 188 to 235 months.

     At a hearing held for the purpose of accepting McCoy's 
plea, the court informed McCoy of the minimum statutory 
penalty he faced but not of the maximum statutory penalty, 
nor of the applicable sentencing range under the Guidelines.  
At the same proceeding the Government claimed that if 
McCoy went to trial, it could prove the following facts:

     On July 9, 1998 Sanders arranged to sell 62 grams of 
     cocaine base to an undercover agent of the Drug En-
     
     forcement Agency.  That same evening McCoy met the 
     undercover agent, told him he did not have the full 62 
     grams, and sold him 44.5 grams of cocaine base.  McCoy 
     also gave the agent a pager number to be used to 
     arrange future transactions.  Several months later a 
     confidential informant for the DEA contacted Sanders to 
     purchase 125 grams of cocaine base.  Sanders agreed to 
     meet the informant at a shopping mall in Maryland on 
     October 6, 1998;  he arrived at the appointed time in a 
     car driven by McCoy.  Upon meeting the informant, 
     however, Sanders was uneasy and he canceled the sale 
     and left with McCoy.  The police followed Sanders and 
     McCoy for a few miles and then arrested them.  Prior to 
     being stopped, Sanders threw from the car a bag contain-
     ing 119.6 grams of cocaine base.
     
McCoy admitted the Government's account was true and 
accurate and he accepted responsibility for between 150 and 
500 grams of cocaine base.  The court then accepted his plea.

     It was not until after the plea hearing, when McCoy 
received the presentence report, that he discovered he was 
facing a higher sentencing range than his attorney and the 
prosecutor had previously indicated.  After realizing his mis-
take but still prior to sentencing, McCoy filed a motion to 
withdraw his plea of guilty.  He argued that an "important 
element of [his] willingness to plead guilty was based on [his] 
counsel's, along with the attorney for the government's, calcu-
lation of [his] total sentence."  Although he remained willing 
to plead to a charge with a possible sentence of from 188 to 
235 months in prison, he stated that "in deliberating over the 
issue of whether to forego a trial or enter into a plea 
agreement, he did not contemplate the fact that he would be 
submitting himself to a sentence with a minimum imposition 
of 22 years and a maximum sentence of 27-1/2 years."  
Because he had misunderstood the applicable sentencing 
range when he entered his plea, McCoy argued, his plea had 
been involuntary and hence unconstitutional.  The Govern-
ment opposed the motion upon the grounds that McCoy's plea 
had not been involuntary and that he had not presented a 
legally cognizable defense to the charges against him.  The 

Government conceded, however, that the passage of time 
since McCoy pleaded guilty had not "in any way prejudiced 
its case."

     In response, McCoy asserted his innocence and argued that 
he had done so throughout the negotiations over the plea 
agreement.  McCoy specifically noted that he had filed a 
motion challenging the undercover agent's identification of 
him as the seller in the transaction that took place on July 9, 
based in part upon evidence that other officers at the scene 
had indicated in their surveillance notes that the seller was a 
"white male," whereas McCoy is a black male.  (At the 
sentencing hearing the prosecutor conceded that McCoy had 
consistently claimed he was unaware, when he drove Sanders 
to the shopping mall, that Sanders intended to sell drugs;  
according to McCoy, it was not until they left the mall that he 
"was aware that a transaction either had been planned or that 
that was the purpose of Mr. Sanders' trip there.")

     The district court denied McCoy's motion to withdraw his 
plea.  The court discounted McCoy's claim of innocence be-
cause, when the court had accepted his plea, McCoy had 
admitted that the Government's allegations were true and 
gave as one of his reasons for pleading guilty that he had 
committed the crime charged.  After acknowledging the Gov-
ernment's concession that it would not be prejudiced by 
proceeding to trial, the court also rejected McCoy's argument 
that he would not have pleaded guilty if he had known the 
actual sentencing range to which he was exposed.  The court 
discounted McCoy's claimed reliance upon the range his 
attorney had told him would apply if he pleaded guilty 
because McCoy's plea agreement explicitly stated that he had 
not been promised a specific sentence and McCoy stated 
when pleading guilty that he had not been made any promise 
outside of the plea agreement.  Additionally, the court noted 
that in his motion to withdraw McCoy had characterized his 
counsel's representations about his sentencing range as "ap-
proximate."  Therefore, the court concluded that McCoy's 
plea had not been contingent upon a specific sentencing 
range, denied his motion to withdraw the plea, and sentenced 

him to 262 months of imprisonment, to be followed by five 
years of supervised release.

                           II. Analysis

     McCoy argues upon appeal that the district court abused 
its discretion by denying his motion to withdraw his plea:  
"Withdrawal of a guilty plea prior to sentencing is to be 
liberally granted, and permitted for 'any fair and just rea-
son.' "  United States v. Taylor, 139 F.3d 924, 929 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (quoting Fed.R.Crim.P. 32(e)).  In reviewing the dis-
trict court's denial of a motion to withdraw we focus upon 
three factors:  "(1) whether the defendant has asserted a 
viable claim of innocence;  (2) whether the delay between the 
guilty plea and the motion to withdraw has substantially 
prejudiced the government's ability to prosecute the case;  
and (3) whether the guilty plea was somehow tainted."  Id. 
Because the Government concedes the second factor, we 
confine our analysis to the remaining two.

     A.   Legally Cognizable Defense
          
     A defendant seeking to withdraw his plea of guilty "gener-
ally must make out a legally cognizable defense to the charge 
against him."  United States v. Cray, 47 F.3d 1203, 1207 
(D.C. Cir. 1995).  The defendant's "general denial" is not 
enough;  he must "affirmatively advance an objectively rea-
sonable argument that he is innocent, for he has waived his 
right to try his luck before a jury."  Id.

     McCoy has adequately presented cognizable defenses to 
the charges against him.  As recounted above, the grand jury 
indicted McCoy on two counts:  (1) conspiracy to distribute 
and to possess with intent to distribute 50 grams or more of 
cocaine base;  and (2) distribution of 5 grams or more of 
cocaine base.  The latter charge is based upon the alleged 
sale of 44.5 grams of cocaine base on July 9, 1998;  the 
conspiracy charge is premised upon both the July sale and 
the failed sale of 119.6 grams of cocaine base in October 1998.

     As for the July sale, McCoy has consistently argued that 
the police mistakenly identified him as the seller.  This 

defense, if accepted by the jury, obviously would preclude 
conviction upon the charge of distribution and would eliminate 
part of the basis for the charge of conspiracy.

     As for the failed transaction of October 6, McCoy maintains 
that he did not know Sanders intended to sell cocaine base 
and that he did not realize "something was not proper" until 
the police stopped his vehicle.  To convict McCoy of conspira-
cy under 21 U.S.C. s 846 the Government must prove he had 
"the specific intent to further the common unlawful objective" 
of the conspiracy.  United States v. Childress, 58 F.3d 693, 
707-08 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  McCoy's claim that he did not know 
Sanders intended to sell cocaine base on October 6 amounts 
to an assertion that he lacked the requisite intent to conspire 
with Sanders.  If a jury was to conclude the Government has 
not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that McCoy did partici-
pate in the sale on July 9, and to accept his claim that he 
lacked specific intent to conspire with Sanders on October 6, 
McCoy could not be convicted of the charge of conspiracy.  
Accordingly, we hold that McCoy has presented a legally 
cognizable defense to each of the charges against him.

     B.   Involuntariness of the Plea
          
     Prior to sentencing the "standard for allowing withdrawal 
of a plea is fairly lenient when the defendant can show that 
the plea was entered unconstitutionally."  Taylor, 139 F.3d at 
929;  see Cray, 47 F.3d at 1207.  McCoy contends that his 
plea was entered unconstitutionally because it was based 
upon legal assistance so defective as to deprive him of his 
constitutional right to assistance of counsel.  A plea of guilty 
is constitutionally valid if and only if it "represents a volun-
tary and intelligent choice among the alternative courses of 
action open to the defendant."  Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 
56 (1985);  see United States v. Loughery, 908 F.2d 1014, 1019 
(D.C. Cir. 1990).  A plea based upon advice of counsel that 
"falls below the level of reasonable competence such that the 
defendant does not receive effective assistance," Loughery, 
908 F.2d at 1019, is neither voluntary nor intelligent.  See 
Taylor, 139 F.3d at 929.

     In order to show that his plea was based upon constitution-
ally deficient assistance of counsel, the defendant must "ordi-
narily satisfy the two-pronged standard of Strickland v. 
Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984)."  Id.  He must show:  
(1) "that his counsel's performance 'fell below an objective 
standard of reasonableness' by identifying specific 'acts or 
omissions of counsel that are alleged not to have been the 
result of reasonable professional judgment' ";  and (2) " 'that 
there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's errors, 
he would not have pleaded guilty and would have insisted on 
going to trial.' "  Id. 929-30.  In this context, a "reasonable 
probability" is one "sufficient to undermine confidence" in the 
defendant's decision to plead guilty.  Strickland, 466 U.S. at 
694;  see Hill, 474 U.S. at 59.

     Usually a claim of "ineffective assistance of counsel ...  
require[s] an evidentiary hearing";  indeed, where the defen-
dant did not raise the claim before the district court, our 
standard practice is to remand for such a hearing.  United 
States v. Gaviria, 116 F.3d 1498, 1513 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  In 
this case, however, "the record is so clear that remand is 
unnecessary," United States v. Soto, 132 F.3d 56, 59 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997);  this court can confidently resolve McCoy's claim 
in the first instance.

     McCoy contends that his counsel's performance "fell below 
an objective standard of reasonableness" because she failed 
correctly to apply the career offender provisions of the Guide-
lines when determining the sentencing range McCoy would 
face if he accepted the Government's plea agreement.  His 
claim finds ample support in precedent.  In Gaviria one 
defendant had refused to plead guilty to the charge of con-
spiracy to distribute narcotics because his counsel had in-
formed him that he would be treated as a career offender 
under the Guidelines and be subject to a sentence of from 360 
months to life in prison.  See 116 F.3d at 1512.  Almost a 
year earlier, however, we had held in United States v. Price, 
990 F.2d 1367, 1370 (1993), that a conspiracy conviction did 
not count as a predicate crime for purposes of the career 
offender provisions of the Guidelines.  Because the defen-
dant's counsel failed to realize that Price precluded treating 

the defendant as a career offender, we held counsel's perfor-
mance was constitutionally deficient.  See id.

     The mistake McCoy's counsel made was even more egre-
gious than that made in Gaviria.  Whereas counsel in Gavi-
ria had failed to find and apply a case interpreting the 
Guidelines, McCoy's counsel failed to follow the formula 
specified on the face of the Guidelines.  Of course not every 
error made in applying the Guidelines amounts to deficient 
performance under the standard of Strickland but, as a sister 
circuit pointed out some years ago in a case very similar to 
this, "familiarity with the structure and basic content of the 
Guidelines (including the definition and implications of career 
offender status) has become a necessity for counsel who seek 
to give effective representation."  United States v. Day, 969 
F.2d 39, 43 (3d Cir. 1992).  We therefore hold that McCoy 
has demonstrated that his counsel's performance was consti-
tutionally deficient.

     McCoy has also satisfied the second part of the Strickland 
test:  He has shown a "reasonable probability" that but for his 
counsel's mistake he would not have pleaded guilty.  Counsel 
told McCoy that by accepting the plea he would get a prison 
sentence in the range from 188 to 235 months;  in fact, he 
faced a range of 262 to 327 months.  The difference between 
counsel's predicted range and McCoy's actual range--more 
than six years between the respective low ends and almost 
eight years between the respective high ends--is significant.

     The Government argues, however, that McCoy probably 
would have pleaded guilty even if he had known the actual 
sentencing range he faced:  he was never promised a specific 
sentence prior to entering his plea, and he was facing a 
mandatory life sentence if convicted after trial.  But, as has 
been pointed out before, a "defendant's understanding of the 
maximum penalties he will face if he enters a guilty plea may 
be of critical importance to the ... decision to accept the 
Government's offer rather than assume the risks of a trial."  
United States v. Horne, 987 F.2d 833, 840 (1993) (Buckley, J. 
concurring).  Although McCoy was never promised a specific 
sentence if he pleaded guilty, it is undisputed that both his 

own attorney and the prosecutor in this case told him that the 
applicable sentencing range would be from 188 to 235 months 
and he credibly argues that he relied--understandably, we 
might add--upon that information.  To be sure, McCoy has 
not proven he would have gone to trial had his (or the 
Government's) counsel not given him incorrect information, 
but he has demonstrated a "reasonable probability" that he 
would have done so.

     We conclude that McCoy's decision to plead guilty was not 
"a voluntary and intelligent choice among the alternative 
courses of action open to [him]."  We therefore hold that his 
conviction is unconstitutional.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we remand this case to the 
district court with instructions to grant McCoy's motion to 
withdraw his plea of guilty.

                                                It is so ordered.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, concurring:

     I agree with the majority that the appellant has satisfied 
the second prong of the Strickland v. Washington prejudice 
test, but only barely.  It seems unlikely, given the evidence 
against him, the appellant would actually have chosen to risk 
trial and mandatory life imprisonment rather than add 27 
months to the 235 months he had already agreed to serve.  
Nevertheless, the Strickland test requires only a reasonable 
probability.  Because the appellant has met this standard, I 
concur in the majority opinion.

                                    