                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 9, 2001   Decided December 11, 2001 

                           No. 00-1497

                   Manganas Painting Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                       Secretary of Labor, 
                            Respondent

             Petition for Review of an Order of the 
         Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission

     Roger L. Sabo argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     John Shortall, Attorney, United States Department of La-
bor, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief 
were Joseph M. Woodward, Associate Solicitor, and Ann S. 
Rosenthal, Attorney.

     Before:  Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed Per Curiam.

     Per Curiam:  Manganas Painting Company appeals the 
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission's deci-
sion that it violated the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
19701 by failing to adequately protect its employees against 
falls when preparing a bridge for repainting.  The Secretary 
of Labor reasonably interpreted her own regulations, and 
substantial evidence on the record as a whole supports the 
Commission's findings, and therefore, we affirm.

                                I.

     Manganas is a painting contractor that specializes in indus-
trial commercial painting.  At its peak, the company em-
ployed approximately 35 employees.  In 1992, Manganas was 
the low bidder to the Ohio Department of Transportation to 
sandblast, repaint, and make certain structural repairs to the 
Jeremiah Morrow Bridge, a twin structure supported by 
structural steel girders spanning an approximate two hundred 
foot gorge which includes the Little Miami River.  The EPA 
and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) required Manganas to equip the bridge with a device 
to contain the lead-based paint being removed from the 
bridge and with protection (such as a safety net) for employ-
ees exposed to the risk of falling.  The Act and its implement-
ing regulations set forth a comprehensive scheme of fall 
protection that applies in the absence of an industry-specific 
scheme--OSHA has not implemented regulations specific to 
the bridge painting industry, so the general fall protection 
regulations applied to Manganas' bridge project.  In 1993, an 
OSHA Compliance Officer inspected the bridge, which Man-
ganas was in the process of preparing for environmental 
containment and safety nets. At that time, the scaffold regula-
tion provided as follows:

__________
     1 29 U.S.C. ss 651-678 (1994 ed. & Supp. V (2000)).

     Guardrails and toeboards shall be installed on all open 
     sides and ends of platforms more than 10 feet above the 
     ground or floor, except needle beam scaffolds and 
     floats....  Scaffolds 4 to 10 feet in height having a 
     minimum horizontal dimension in either direction of less 
     than 45 inches, shall have standard guardrails on open 
     sides and ends of the platform.
     
29 C.F.R. 1926.451(a)(4)(repealed).  The safety net regulation 
provided:

     Safety nets shall be provided when workplaces are more 
     than 25 feet above the ground or water surface, or other 
     surfaces where the use of ladders, scaffolds, catch plat-
     forms, temporary floors, safety lines or safety belts is 
     impractical.
     
29 C.F.R. 1926.105(a).

     After multiple inspections, the OSHA CO issued Manganas 
several citations, three of which are on appeal.2  First, the 
CO cited Manganas based on the employees' method of using 
safety belts, which they were using while rigging the bridge 
for safety nets.  When they were working on the steel beams 
of the bridge, and were exposed to falls upwards of 150 feet, 
the employees would hook the metal safety hooks of their 
safety belts to the portholes of the steel flanges that were a 
part of the bridge deck structure:  the metal hooks did not 
close completely.  The employees also used this method of 
"tying off" their safety belts when ascending and descending 
45 and 90 degree angle beams.  Second, the CO faulted 
Manganas' use of "painters' picks," which are lightweight 
boards, approximately twenty inches wide and eight to twelve 
feet in length.  The painters' picks extended from the hand-
rail of a permanent catwalk running underneath the length of 
the highway spanning the bridge, and rested on a cable 
running horizontally along the outside of the bridge.  Consid-
ering them to be scaffolds, the CO issued Manganas a citation 
because they did not have guardrails.  Finally, the CO found 

__________
     2 The CO issued several separate citations and an amended 
citation, but only three violations are on appeal.

that a Manganas employee, Stillwell, had failed to tie his 
safety belt off at all when he was in the process of securing 
the painters' picks to the horizontal cable running along the 
outside of the bridge.3  The CO characterized the safety belt 
violation stemming from the open hooks as a "repeat" viola-
tion because Manganas had been cited previously for violating 
the same standard.

     Manganas challenged the citations and an Administrative 
Law Judge held a three-day hearing, issuing a decision in 
1996.  The ALJ concluded that the painters' picks were 
scaffolds requiring guardrails;  that Stillwell had failed to tie 
off when on the painters' picks;  and that the safety belts, 
with open hooks, did not provide adequate fall protection.  He 
rejected the Secretary's argument that the safety belt viola-
tion was a "repeat" violation.  The Secretary petitioned the 
Commission for review, arguing that it was;  Manganas also 
petitioned for review, arguing that the painters' picks were 
not governed by the scaffold regulation and disputing the 
ALJ's finding that the fall protection was inadequate.  Four 
years later, the Commission affirmed the ALJ's finding of 
violations, but reversed his finding that the safety belt viola-
tion was not "repeat."  Counsel explained that the delay was 
a result of the Commission's inability to find two commission-
ers who could agree on the outcome of the case.

                               II.

     Manganas argues primarily that the regulations in place in 
1993, as opposed to more explicit subsequent regulations, did 

__________
     3 Manganas argues that the CO essentially double-counted the 
same violation:  that Stillwell worked on the painters' picks without 
guardrails and without tying off.  In oral argument, counsel for the 
Commission clarified that the second citation for Stillwell's conduct 
was for his failure to tie off while putting the pick in place, a 
situation in which the guardrails would not have provided fall 
protection.  Counsel for the Commission also clarified that the 
guardrails are a type of fall prevention, while safety belts arrest 
falls that have already occurred, and that they are not necessarily 
interchangeable forms of abatement.

not adequately proscribe the cited conduct.  Because the 
later regulations explicitly address the method of using safety 
belts, the company reasons, it could not be cited for inade-
quate fall protection if the problem stemmed from the method 
of use, rather than the type of protection.  This argument is 
without merit.  We defer to the Secretary's reasonable inter-
pretation of her original regulation.  In this case, the Secre-
tary has interpreted the safety net regulation to require 
effective fall protection, an interpretation that certainly merits 
deference--indeed, it seems obvious.  It certainly is not so 
unexpected as to violate Manganas' due process rights, as the 
company argued.  Substantial evidence, including courtroom 
testimony and demonstrations, supports the Commission's 
finding that Manganas' method of tying off was effective only 
when the employees leaned back.  In other words, the protec-
tion was not effective in many situations, and therefore 
Manganas failed to provide adequate fall protection.

     Petitioner makes a similar argument with respect to the 
scaffold regulation violation.  According to the company, the 
painters' picks are actually catenary scaffolds, which subse-
quent regulations address as a separate category.  The com-
pany's argument fails for two reasons.  First, the Secretary 
reasonably concluded that the painters' picks are not catenary 
scaffolds, which are defined as platforms between two hori-
zontal cables--the painters' picks, by contrast, had one end 
resting on a permanent catwalk while the other rested on a 
horizontal cable.  Second, even if the painters' picks were 
catenary scaffolds, the Secretary reasonably concluded that 
such scaffolds fell within the general scaffold regulation, 
which required guardrails.  The appropriate question is not 
whether the regulations explicitly addressed the specific 
method of safety belt use or guardrails on catenary scaffolds;  
instead, the question is whether the Secretary's interpretation 
of the safety net and scaffolding regulations as proscribing 
the cited conduct was reasonable.  It was.

     The company also challenges the Commission's finding that 
it had constructive knowledge of the violations, arguing that 
the Commission imposed a constant supervision requirement 
on the company, contrary to its own precedent.  The record 

does not support this argument.  As to the safety belt 
violation that stemmed from the non-closing hooks, Manganas 
taught its employees to use that fall protection and cannot 
now argue that it was unaware that its employees were 
following directions.  In addition, Manganas was clearly 
aware that its painters' picks lacked guardrails.  As to Still-
well's failure to tie off his safety belt while on the painters' 
picks, his testimony made clear that Manganas was not cited 
for an isolated incident.  Instead, Stillwell's practice was to 
walk across the painters' picks without tying off and to fasten 
the painters' picks to the cable without tying off.  The record 
also makes clear that Stillwell was visible to his supervisor, 
and was, in fact, periodically aided by his supervisor when 
setting up the painters' picks.  The Commission's finding that 
Manganas should have been aware, or was aware, is sup-
ported by substantial evidence.

     Finally, Manganas disputes that the Secretary carried her 
burden of showing that the safety net violation was a "repeat" 
one.  According to Manganas, it was not enough that the 
Secretary showed that Manganas twice violated the same 
standard while painting bridges.  But the Commission has 
made it clear that the Secretary makes a prima facie showing 
that a violation is "repeat" if the prior and present violations 
are for failure to comply with the same standard.  See, e.g., 
Potlatch Corp., 7 O.S.H.C. 1061 (1979).  The burden then 
shifts to the employer to demonstrate that the violations took 
place under disparate conditions and hazards associated with 
the separate violations, which Manganas did not do.  The 
company argued only that the first violation was for a failure 
to provide any fall protection, the second for a failure to 
provide adequate fall protection.  This argument does not 
show that Manganas did not commit a "repeat" violation of 
the safety net regulation.

     Accordingly, the Commission's decision is affirmed.

                 