                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 12, 2001    Decided April 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-5362

                    Federal Trade Commission, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

         H.J. Heinz Co. and Milnot Holding Corporation, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv01688)

     Debra A. Valentine, General Counsel, Federal Trade Com-
mission, argued the cause for the appellant.  John F. Daly, 
Assistant General Counsel, Richard G. Parker, Director, and 
David A. Balto and David C. Shonka, Attorneys, Federal 
Trade Commission, were on brief.

     Edward P. Henneberry argued the cause for the appellees.  
W. Bradford Reynolds, Marc G. Schildkraut, Kenneth W. 
Starr, and Mark L. Kovner were on brief.

     J. Joseph Curran, Jr., Attorney General, and Ellen S. 
Cooper, Assistant Attorney General, State of Maryland;  
Bruce M. Botelho, Attorney General, State of Alaska;  Janet 
Napolitano, Attorney General, State of Arizona;  Mark 
Pryor, Attorney General, State of Arkansas;  Bill Lockyer, 
Attorney General, and Peter Siggins, Chief Deputy Attorney 
General, State of California;  Ken Salazar, Attorney General, 
State of Colorado;  Richard Blumenthal, Attorney General 
and Steven Rutstein, Assistant Attorney General, State of 
Connecticut;  Robert R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, Charles 
L. Reischel, Deputy Corporation Counsel, and Bennett Rush-
koff, Senior Counsel, District of Columbia;  Robert A. Butter-
worth, Attorney General, State of Florida;  Earl I. Anzai, 
Attorney General, State of Hawaii;  Alan G. Lance, Attorney 
General, State of Idaho;  James E. Ryan, Attorney General, 
State of Illinois;  Karen M. Freeman-Wilson, Attorney Gen-
eral, State of Indiana;  Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, 
State of Iowa;  Carla J. Stovall, Attorney General, State of 
Kansas;  Richard P. Ieyoub, Attorney General, State of Loui-
siana;  Jennifer Granholm, Attorney General, and Thomas L. 
Casey, Solicitor General, State of Michigan;  Julie Ralston 
Aoki, Assistant Attorney General, State of Minnesota;  Mike 
Moore, Attorney General, State of Mississippi;  Frankie Sue 
Del Papa, Attorney General, State of Nevada;  Philip T. 
McLaughlin, Attorney General, State of New Hampshire;  
Eliot Spitzer, Attorney General, State of New York;  Michael 
F. Easley, Attorney General, and K.D. Sturgis, Assistant 
Attorney General, State of North Carolina;  Herbert D. Soll, 
Attorney General, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands;  Betty D. Montgomery, Attorney General, State of 
Ohio;  W.A. Drew Edmondson, Attorney General, State of 
Oklahoma;  Angel E. Rotger-Sabat, Attorney General, Com-
monwealth of Puerto Rico;  Mark Barnett, Attorney General, 
State of South Dakota;  John Cornyn, Attorney General, 
State of Texas;  Jan Graham, Attorney General, State of 
Utah;  William H. Sorrell, Attorney General, State of Ver-

mont;  Mark L. Earley, Attorney General, Commonwealth of 
Virginia;  Christine O. Gregoire, Attorney General, State of 
Washington;  Darrell V. McGraw, Jr., Attorney General, and 
Douglas L. Davis, Assistant Attorney General, State of West 
Virginia;  James E. Doyle, Attorney General, and Kevin J. 
O'Connor, State of Wisconsin;  and Gay Woodhouse, Attorney 
General, State of Wyoming;  were on brief for The Thirty-Six 
Amici Curiae in support of the appellant.

     James H. Skiles and Jan Amundson were on brief for 
Grocery Manufacturers of America, Inc. et al., Amici Curiae 
in support of the appellees.

     C. Boyden Gray, William J. Kolasky, Jeffrey D. Ayer and 
Robert H. Bork were on brief for Citizens for a Sound 
Economy Foundation, Amicus Curiae, in support of the appel-
lees.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  On February 
28, 2000 H.J. Heinz Company (Heinz) and Milnot Holding 
Corporation (Beech-Nut) entered into a merger agreement.  
The Federal Trade Commission (Commission or FTC) sought 
a preliminary injunction pursuant to section 13(b) of the 
Federal Trade Commission Act (FTCA), 15 U.S.C. s 53(b), to 
enjoin the consummation of the merger.  The injunction was 
sought in aid of an FTC administrative proceeding which was 
subsequently instituted by complaint to challenge the merger 
as violative of, inter alia, section 7 of the Clayton Act, 15 
U.S.C. s 18.  The district court denied the preliminary in-
junction and the FTC appealed to this court.  For the 
reasons set forth below, we reverse the district court and 
remand for entry of a preliminary injunction against Heinz 
and Beech-Nut.

                    I. Background

     Four million infants in the United States consume 80 
million cases of jarred baby food annually, representing a 

domestic market of $865 million to $1 billion.1  FTC v. H.J. 
Heinz, Co., 116 F. Supp. 2d 190, 192 (D.D.C. 2000).  The baby 
food market is dominated by three firms, Gerber Products 
Company (Gerber), Heinz and Beech-Nut.  Gerber, the in-
dustry leader, enjoys a 65 per cent market share while Heinz 
and Beech-Nut come in second and third, with a 17.4 per cent 
and a 15.4 per cent share respectively.  Id.  The district 
court found that Gerber enjoys unparalleled brand recogni-
tion with a brand loyalty greater than any other product sold 
in the United States.  Id. at 193.  Gerber's products are 
found in over 90 per cent of all American supermarkets.2

     By contrast, Heinz is sold in approximately 40 per cent of 
all supermarkets.  Its sales are nationwide but concentrated 
in northern New England, the Southeast and Deep South and 
the Midwest.  Id. at 194.  Despite its second-place domestic 
market share, Heinz is the largest producer of baby food in 
the world with $1 billion in sales worldwide.  Its domestic 
baby food products with annual net sales of $103 million are 
manufactured at its Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania plant, which 
was updated in 1991 at a cost of $120 million.  Id. at 192-93.  
The plant operates at 40 per cent of its production capacity 
and produces 12 million cases of baby food annually.  Its 
baby food line includes about 130 SKUs (stock keeping units), 
that is, product varieties (e.g., strained carrots, apple sauce, 
etc.).  Heinz lacks Gerber's brand recognition;  it markets 
itself as a "value brand" with a shelf price several cents below 
Gerber's.  Id. at 193.

     Beech-Nut has a market share (15.4%) comparable to that 
of Heinz (17.4%), with $138.7 million in annual sales of baby 
food, of which 72 per cent is jarred baby food.  Its jarred 

__________
     1 The facts as set forth herein are based on the district court's 
factual findings and the record material submitted by the parties.

     2 Product volume in retail stores throughout the country is mea-
sured by the product's All Commodity Volume (ACV).  Gerber's 
near 100 per cent ACV is impressive because virtually all supermar-
kets stock at most two brands of baby food.  In at least one area of 
the country as many as 80 per cent of supermarket retailers stock 
only Gerber.

baby food line consists of 128 SKUs.  Beech-Nut manufac-
tures all of its baby food in Canajoharie, New York at a 
manufacturing plant that was built in 1907 and began manu-
facturing baby food in 1931.  Beech-Nut maintains price 
parity with Gerber, selling at about one penny less.  It 
markets its product as a premium brand.  Id.  Consumers 
generally view its product as comparable in quality to Ger-
ber's.  Id.  Beech-Nut is carried in approximately 45 per 
cent of all grocery stores.  Although its sales are nationwide, 
they are concentrated in New York, New Jersey, California 
and Florida.3  Id. at 194.

     At the wholesale level Heinz and Beech-Nut both make 
lump-sum payments called "fixed trade spending" (also 
known as "slotting fees" or "pay-to-stay" arrangements) to 
grocery stores to obtain shelf placement.  Id. at 197.  Gerber, 
with its strong name recognition and brand loyalty, does not 
make such pay-to-stay payments.  The other type of whole-
sale trade spending is "variable trade spending," which typi-
cally consists of manufacturers' discounts and allowances to 
supermarkets to create retail price differentials that entice 
the consumer to purchase their product instead of a competi-
tor's.  Id.

     Under the terms of their merger agreement, Heinz would 
acquire 100 per cent of Beech-Nut's voting securities for $185 
million.  Accordingly, they filed a Premerger Notification and 
Report Form with the FTC and the United States Depart-
ment of Justice pursuant to the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust 
Improvement Act of 1976, 15 U.S.C. s 18a.4  On July 7, 2000 

__________
     3 Although Heinz and Beech-Nut introduced evidence showing 
that in areas that account for 80% of Beech-Nut sales, Heinz has a 
market share of about 2% and in areas that account for about 72% 
of Heinz sales, Beech-Nut's share is about 4%, the FTC introduced 
evidence that Heinz and Beech-Nut are locked in an intense battle 
at the wholesale level to gain (and maintain) position as the second 
brand on retail shelves.

     4 Section 18a requires pre-merger notification for a merger in 
which either the acquiring or the acquired firm has total net sales 
or assets of at least $10 million and the other firm has annual sales 

the FTC authorized this action for a preliminary injunction 
under section 13(b) of the FTCA and, on July 14, 2000, it filed 
a complaint and motion for preliminary injunction.  The 
district court conducted a five-day hearing in late August and 
early September and heard final arguments on September 21, 
2000.  The record before the district court consisted of 1,267 
exhibits, including 150 demonstrative exhibits, 32 depositions 
and 41 affidavits.  In addition, eleven witnesses testified.  On 
October 18, 2000 the district court denied preliminary injunc-
tive relief.  The court concluded that it was "more probable 
than not that consummation of the Heinz/Beech-Nut merger 
will actually increase competition in jarred baby food in the 
United States."  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 200.  The 
FTC appealed and sought injunctive relief pending appeal, 
which this court granted on November 8, 2000.  On Novem-
ber 22, 2000 the FTC filed an administrative complaint 
against Heinz and Beech-Nut, charging that the proposed 
merger violates section 5 of the FTCA and, if consummated, 
would violate section 7 of the Clayton Act.  In the Matter of 
H. J. Heinz, Docket No. 9295 (filed Nov. 22, 2000).

                         II. Analysis

     A. Standard of Review
          
     We review a district court order denying preliminary in-
junctive relief for abuse of discretion, National Wildlife Fed'n 
v. Burford, 835 F.2d 305, 319 (D.C. Cir. 1987), and will set 
aside the court's factual findings only if they are "clearly 
erroneous."  Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a);  United States v. Marine 
Bancorporation, Inc., 418 U.S. 602, 615 n.13 (1974).  If our 
review of the district court order "reveals that it rests on an 
erroneous premise as to the pertinent law, however, we must 
examine the decision in light of the legal principles we believe 
proper and sound."  Ambach v. Bell, 686 F.2d 974, 979 (D.C. 
Cir. 1982).  We apply de novo review to the district court's 

__________
or total assets of at least $100 million.  The acquirer must have at 
least 15 per cent or $15 million worth of the target firm's voting 
securities or assets.  15 U.S.C. s 18a(a).  Filers must disclose 
specific financial and market data and pay a filing fee.

conclusions of law.  See FTC v. National Tea Co., 603 F.2d 
694, 696-98 (8th Cir. 1979) (reviewing de novo proper stan-
dard of proof under section 13(b) of FTCA);  cf. FTC v. 
Warner Communications Inc., 742 F.2d 1156, 1160 (9th Cir. 
1984) (per curiam) (finding as matter of law district court 
applied incorrect standard for section 7 violation).  In decid-
ing whether to grant preliminary injunctive relief under 
section 13(b), the court evaluates whether it is in the public 
interest to enjoin the proposed merger.  See 15 U.S.C. 
s 53(b).

     B.   Section 7 of the Clayton Act
          
     Section 7 of the Clayton Act prohibits acquisitions, includ-
ing mergers, "where in any line of commerce or in any 
activity affecting commerce in any section of the country, the 
effect of such acquisition may be substantially to lessen 
competition, or to tend to create a monopoly."  15 U.S.C. 
s 18;  see United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 
321, 355 (1963) ("The statutory test is whether the effect of 
the merger 'may be substantially to lessen competition' 'in 
any line of commerce in any section of the country.' ").  The 
"Congress used the words 'may be substantially to lessen 
competition' (emphasis supplied), to indicate that its concern 
was with probabilities, not certainties."  Brown Shoe Co. v. 
United States, 370 U.S. 294, 323 (1962) (emphasis original);  
see S. Rep. No. 1775, at 6 (1950) ("The use of these words 
["may be"] means that the bill, if enacted, would not apply to 
the mere possibility but only to the reasonable probability of 
the pr[o]scribed effect....").  "Merger enforcement, like oth-
er areas of antitrust, is directed at market power.  It shares 
with the law of monopolization a degree of schizophrenia:  an 
aversion to potent power that heightens risk of abuse;  and 
tolerance of that degree of power required to attain economic 
benefits."  Lawrence A. Sullivan & Warren S. Grimes, The 
Law of Antitrust s 9.1, at 511 (2000).  The Congress has 
empowered the FTC, inter alia, to weed out those mergers 
whose effect "may be substantially to lessen competition" 
from those that enhance competition.  See H.R. Rep. No. 
1142, at 18-19 (1914).  In section 13(b) of the FTCA, the 
Congress provided a mechanism whereby the FTC may seek 
preliminary injunctive relief preventing the merging parties 

from consummating the merger until the Commission has had 
an opportunity to investigate and, if necessary, adjudicate the 
matter.

     C.   Section 13(b) of the Federal Trade Commission Act
          
     "Whenever the Commission has reason to believe that a 
corporation is violating, or is about to violate, Section 7 of the 
Clayton Act, the FTC may seek a preliminary injunction to 
prevent a merger pending the Commission's administrative 
adjudication of the merger's legality."  FTC v. Staples, Inc., 
970 F. Supp. 1066, 1070 (D.D.C. 1997);  see 15 U.S.C. s 53(b). 
Section 13(b) provides for the grant of a preliminary injunc-
tion where such action would be in the public interest--as 
determined by a weighing of the equities and a consideration 
of the Commission's likelihood of success on the merits.  15 
U.S.C. s 53(b).5  The Congress intended this standard to 
depart from what it regarded as the then-traditional equity 
standard, which it characterized as requiring the plaintiff to 
show:  (1) irreparable damage, (2) probability of success on 
the merits and (3) a balance of equities favoring the plaintiff.  
H.R. Rep. No. 93-624, at 31 (1971).  The Congress deter-
mined that the traditional standard was not "appropriate for 
the implementation of a Federal statute by an independent 
regulatory agency where the standards of the public interest 
measure the propriety and the need for injunctive relief."  Id.  
"The courts had evolved an approach to cases in which 
government agencies, acting to enforce a federal statute, 
sought interim relief.  The agency, in such cases, was not 
held to the high thresholds applicable where private parties 
seek interim restraining orders."  FTC v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 
665 F.2d 1072, 1082 (D.C. Cir. 1981);  see FTC v. Exxon 
Corp., 636 F.2d 1336, 1343 (D.C. Cir. 1980) ("In enacting 
[Section 13(b)], Congress further demonstrated its concern 
that injunctive relief be broadly available to the FTC by 

__________
     5 Section 13(b) of the FTCA provides that "[u]pon a proper 
showing that, weighing the equities and considering the Commis-
sion's likelihood of ultimate success, such action would be in the 
public interest, ... a preliminary injunction may be granted."  15 
U.S.C. s 53(b).

incorporating a unique 'public interest' standard in 15 U.S.C. 
s 53(b), rather than the more stringent, traditional 'equity' 
standard for injunctive relief.").  The FTC is not required to 
establish that the proposed merger would in fact violate 
section 7 of the Clayton Act.  Staples, 970 F. Supp. at 1071;  
see FTC v. Food Town Stores, Inc., 539 F.2d 1339, 1342 (4th 
Cir. 1976) ("The district court is not authorized to determine 
whether the antitrust laws have been or are about to be 
violated. That adjudicatory function is vested in the FTC in 
the first instance.").  We now consider the FTC's likelihood of 
success and weigh the equities.  Accord FTC v. Freeman 
Hosp., 69 F.3d 260, 267 (8th Cir. 1995);  FTC v. University 
Health, Inc., 938 F.2d 1206, 1217 (11th Cir. 1991);  Warner 
Communications, 742 F.2d at 1160.

                    1. Likelihood of Success

     To determine likelihood of success on the merits we mea-
sure the probability that, after an administrative hearing on 
the merits, the Commission will succeed in proving that the 
effect of the Heinz/Beech-Nut merger "may be substantially 
to lessen competition, or to tend to create a monopoly" in 
violation of section 7 of the Clayton Act. 15 U.S.C. s 18.  This 
court and others have suggested that the standard for likeli-
hood of success on the merits is met if the FTC "has raised 
questions going to the merits so serious, substantial, difficult 
and doubtful as to make them fair ground for thorough 
investigation, study, deliberation and determination by the 
FTC in the first instance and ultimately by the Court of 
Appeals."  FTC v. Beatrice Foods Co., 587 F.2d 1225, 1229 
(D.C. Cir. 1978) (Appendix to Statement of MacKinnon & 
Robb, JJ.)6;  Staples, 970 F. Supp. at 1071;  Warner Commu-
nications, 742 F.2d at 1162 (quoting National Tea, 603 F.2d 
at 698);  see University Health, 938 F.2d at 1218.  This 
specific standard was articulated by the court below, see H.J. 

__________
     6 In Beatrice Foods, two members of the court, writing separately 
from a denial of en banc review, included the quoted language from 
an unpublished judgment and memorandum issued earlier in the 
litigation.

Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 194, and it is a standard to which 
the appellees have not objected.

     In United States v. Baker Hughes Inc., 908 F.2d 981, 982-
83 (D.C. Cir. 1990), we explained the analytical approach by 
which the government establishes a section 7 violation.  First 
the government must show that the merger would produce "a 
firm controlling an undue percentage share of the relevant 
market, and [would] result[ ] in a significant increase in the 
concentration of firms in that market."  Philadelphia Nat'l 
Bank, 374 U.S. at 363.  Such a showing establishes a "pre-
sumption" that the merger will substantially lessen competi-
tion.  See Baker Hughes, 908 F.2d at 982.  To rebut the 
presumption, the defendants must produce evidence that 
"show[s] that the market-share statistics [give] an inaccurate 
account of the [merger's] probable effects on competition" in 
the relevant market.  United States v. Citizens & S. Nat'l 
Bank, 422 U.S. 86, 120 (1975).7  "If the defendant successfully 
rebuts the presumption [of illegality], the burden of producing 
additional evidence of anticompetitive effect shifts to the 
government, and merges with the ultimate burden of persua-
sion, which remains with the government at all times."  Bak-
er Hughes Inc., 908 F.2d at 983;  see also Kaiser Aluminum, 
652 F.2d at 1340 & n.12.  Although Baker Hughes was 
decided at the merits stage as opposed to the preliminary 
injunctive relief stage, we can nonetheless use its analytical 
approach in evaluating the Commission's showing of likeli-

__________
     7 To rebut the defendants may rely on "[n]onstatistical evidence 
which casts doubt on the persuasive quality of the statistics to 
predict future anticompetitive consequences" such as "ease of entry 
into the market, the trend of the market either toward or away 
from concentration, and the continuation of active price competi-
tion."  Kaiser Aluminum & Chem. Corp. v. FTC, 652 F.2d 1324, 
1341 (7th Cir. 1981).  In addition, the defendants may demonstrate 
unique economic circumstances that undermine the predictive value 
of the government's statistics.  See United States v. General Dy-
namics Corp., 415 U.S. 486, 506-10 (1974) (fundamental changes in 
structure of coal market made market concentration statistics inac-
curate predictors of anticompetitive effect);  see also University 
Health, 938 F.2d at 1218.

hood of success.  Accordingly, we look at the FTC's prima 
facie case and the defendants' rebuttal evidence.

                    a. Prima Facie Case

     Merger law "rests upon the theory that, where rivals are 
few, firms will be able to coordinate their behavior, either by 
overt collusion or implicit understanding, in order to restrict 
output and achieve profits above competitive levels."  FTC v. 
PPG Indus., 798 F.2d 1500, 1503 (D.C. Cir. 1986).8  Increases 
in concentration above certain levels are thought to "raise[ ] a 
likelihood of 'interdependent anticompetitive conduct.' "  Id. 
(quoting General Dynamics, 415 U.S. at 497);  see FTC v. 
Elders Grain, 868 F.2d 901, 905 (7th Cir. 1989).  Market 
concentration, or the lack thereof, is often measured by the 
Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index (HHI).  See Staples, 970 
F. Supp. at 1081 n.12.9

__________
     8 A "horizontal merger" involves firms selling the same or similar 
products in a common geographical market.

     9 "The FTC and the Department of Justice, as well as most 
economists, consider the measure superior to such cruder measures 
as the four-or eight-firm concentration ratios which merely sum up 
the market shares of the largest four or eight firms."  PPG, 798 
F.2d at 1503.  The Department of Justice and the FTC rely on the 
HHI in evaluating proposed horizontal mergers.  See United States 
Dep't of Justice & Federal Trade Comm'n, Horizontal Merger 
Guidelines ss 1.5, 1.51 (1992), as revised (1997).  The HHI is 
calculated by totaling the squares of the market shares of every 
firm in the relevant market.  For example, a market with ten firms 
having market shares of 20%, 17%, 13%, 12%, 10%, 10%, 8%, 5%, 
3% and 2% has an HHI of 1304 (202 + 172 + 132 + 122 + 102 + 
102 + 82 + 52 +32 +22).  If the firms with 13% and 5% market 
shares were to merge, the HHI would increase by 130 points, 
expressed by the formula 2ab, which is derived from (a+b)2 or a2 + 
2ab + b2.  Under the Merger Guidelines a market with a post-
merger HHI above 1800 is considered "highly concentrated" and 
mergers that increase the HHI in such a market by over 50 points 
"potentially raise significant competitive concerns."  Id. at s 1.51.  
Mergers "producing an increase in the HHI of more than 100 points 
[in such markets] are [presumed] likely to create or enhance market 

     Sufficiently large HHI figures establish the FTC's prima 
facie case that a merger is anti-competitive.  See Baker 
Hughes, 908 F.2d at 982-83 & n.3;  PPG, 798 F.2d at 1503.  
The district court found that the pre-merger HHI "score for 
the baby food industry is 4775"--indicative of a highly con-
centrated industry.10  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 196;  see 
PPG, 798 F.2d at 1503;  Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra, 
s 1.51.  The merger of Heinz and Beech-Nut will increase 
the HHI by 510 points.  This creates, by a wide margin, a 
presumption that the merger will lessen competition in the 
domestic jarred baby food market.  See Horizontal Merger 
Guidelines, supra, s 1.51 (stating that HHI increase of more 
than 100 points, where post-merger HHI exceeds 1800, is 
"presumed ... likely to create or enhance market power or 
facilitate its exercise");  see also Baker Hughes, 908 F.2d at 
982-83 & n.3;  PPG, 798 F.2d at 1503.11  Here, the FTC's 

__________
power or facilitate its exercise."  Id.  Although the Merger Guide-
lines are not binding on the court, they provide "a useful illustration 
of the application of the HHI."  PPG, 798 F.2d at 1503 n.4.

     10 To determine the HHI score the district court first had to 
define the relevant market.  The court defined the product market 
as jarred baby food and the geographic market as the United 
States.  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 195.  The parties do not 
challenge the court's definition.

     11 The FTC argues that this finding alone--that it is certain to 
establish a prima facie case--entitles it to preliminary injunctive 
relief under PPG.  We disagree with the Commission's reading of 
PPG.  In PPG, the Commission appealed the district court's denial 
of its request for a preliminary injunction to prevent PPG Indus-
tries, the world's largest producer of glass aircraft transparencies, 
from acquiring Swedlow, Inc., the world's largest manufacturer of 
acrylic aircraft transparencies.  798 F.2d at 1502.  After defining 
the relevant market and determining market share, the district 
court found that the merger would significantly increase the concen-
tration in an already highly concentrated market.  It also "found 
high market-entry barriers that would prolong high market concen-
tration."  Id. at 1503.  On appeal, this court stated:  "There is no 
doubt that the pre-and post-acquisition HHI's and market shares 
found in this case entitle the Commission to some preliminary 
relief."  Id.  This statement came, however, in the context of a case 

market concentration statistics12 are bolstered by the indis-
putable fact that the merger will eliminate competition be-
tween the two merging parties at the wholesale level, where 
they are currently the only competitors for what the district 
court described as the "second position on the supermarket 
shelves."  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 196.  Heinz's own 
documents recognize the wholesale competition and anticipate 
that the merger will end it.  JA 2680;  see also JA 2185.  
Indeed, those documents disclose that Heinz considered three 
options to end the vigorous wholesale competition with 
Beech-Nut:  two involved innovative measures while the third 
entailed the acquisition of Beech-Nut.  JA 2184.  Heinz 
chose the third, and least pro-competitive, of the options.

     Finally, the anticompetitive effect of the merger is further 
enhanced by high barriers to market entry.13  The district 
__________
in which the appellants offered no rebuttal (other than the observa-
tion of rapid and continuing technological changes in the industry) 
to the presumption generated by the market concentration data on 
which the FTC based its prima facie showing.  Id. at 1506.  The 
court then noted the rule established in Weyerhaeuser that the FTC 
is entitled to a "presumption in favor of a preliminary injunction 
when [it] establishes a strong likelihood of success on the merits."  
Id. at 1507.

     12 The Supreme Court has cautioned that statistics reflecting 
market share and concentration, while of great significance, are not 
conclusive indicators of anticompetitive effects.  See General Dy-
namics, 415 U.S. at 498;  Brown Shoe, 370 U.S. at 322 n.38 
("Statistics reflecting the shares of the market controlled by the 
industry leaders and the parties to the merger are, of course, the 
primary index of market power;  but only a further examination of 
the particular market--its structure, history and probable future--
can provide the appropriate setting for judging the probable anti-
competitive effect of the merger.").  In General Dynamics the 
Supreme Court held that the market share statistics the Commis-
sion used to seek divestiture of the merged firm were insufficient 
because, in failing to take into account the acquired firm's long-term 
contractual commitments (coal contracts), the statistics overestimat-
ed the acquired firm's ability to compete in the relevant market in 
the future.  General Dynamics, 415 U.S. at 500-504.

     13 Barriers to entry are important in evaluating whether market 
concentration statistics accurately reflect the pre- and likely post-

court found that there had been no significant entries in the 
baby food market in decades and that new entry was "diffi-
cult and improbable."  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 196.  
This finding largely eliminates the possibility that the re-
duced competition caused by the merger will be ameliorated 
by new competition from outsiders and further strengthens 
the FTC's case.  See University Health, 938 F.2d at 1219 & 
n.26.

     As far as we can determine, no court has ever approved a 
merger to duopoly under similar circumstances.

                    b. Rebuttal Arguments

     In response to the FTC's prima facie showing, the appel-
lees make three rebuttal arguments, which the district court 
accepted in reaching its conclusion that the merger was not 
likely to lessen competition substantially.  For the reasons 

__________
merger competitive picture.  Cf.  Baker Hughes, 908 F.2d at 987.  
If entry barriers are low, the threat of outside entry can significant-
ly alter the anticompetitive effects of the merger by deterring the 
remaining entities from colluding or exercising market power.  See 
United States v. Falstaff Brewing Corp., 410 U.S. 526, 532-33 
(1973);  Baker Hughes, 908 F.2d at 987 ("In the absence of signifi-
cant barriers, a company probably cannot maintain supracompeti-
tive pricing for any length of time.");  Horizontal Merger Guide-
lines, supra, s 3.0 ("A merger is not likely to create or enhance 
market power or to facilitate its exercise, if entry into the market is 
so easy that market participants, after the merger, either collective-
ly or unilaterally could not profitably maintain a price increase 
above premerger levels.").  Low barriers to entry enable a potential 
competitor to deter anticompetitive behavior by firms within the 
market simply by its ability to enter the market.  FTC v. Procter & 
Gamble Co., 386 U.S. 568, 581 (1967) ("It is clear that the existence 
of Procter at the edge of the industry exerted considerable influ-
ence on the market.").  Existing firms know that if they collude or 
exercise market power to charge supracompetitive prices, entry by 
firms currently not competing in the market becomes likely, there-
by increasing the pressure on them to act competitively.  See Baker 
Hughes, 908 F.2d at 988;  Byars v. Bluff City News Co., 609 F.2d 
843, 851 n.19 (6th Cir. 1979).

discussed below, these arguments fail and thus were not a 
proper basis for denying the FTC injunctive relief.

     1. Extent of Pre-Merger Competition
          
     The appellees first contend, and the district court agreed, 
that Heinz and Beech-Nut do not really compete against each 
other at the retail level.  Consumers do not regard the 
products of the two companies as substitutes, the appellees 
claim, and generally only one of the two brands is available on 
any given store's shelves.  Hence, they argue, there is little 
competitive loss from the merger.

     This argument has a number of flaws which render clearly 
erroneous the court's finding that Heinz and Beech-Nut have 
not engaged in significant pre-merger competition.  First, in 
accepting the appellees' argument that Heinz and Beech-Nut 
do not compete, the district court failed to address the record 
evidence that the two do in fact price against each other, see, 
e.g., 8/31/2000 Tr. 247-48, and that, where both are present in 
the same areas,14 they depress each other's prices as well as 
those of Gerber even though they are virtually never all found 
in the same store.  See, e.g., 8/30/2000 Tr. 147-48, 172;  PX 
531 at p 8;  PX 481 at p 12;  PX 479 at p p 6-7;  PX 478 at p 6;  
DX 14 at RP-110.  This evidence undermines the district 
court's factual finding.

     Second, the district court's finding is inconsistent with its 
conclusion that there is a single, national market for jarred 
baby food in the United States.  The Supreme Court has 
explained that "[t]he outer boundaries of a product market 
are determined by the reasonable interchangeability of use 
[by consumers] or the cross-elasticity of demand between the 
product itself and substitutes for it."  Brown Shoe, 370 U.S. 
at 325;  see also United States v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & 
Co., 351 U.S. 377, 395 (1956).15  The definition of product 

__________
     14 There are at least ten metropolitan areas in which Heinz and 
Beech-Nut both have more than a 10 per cent market share and 
their combined share exceeds 35 per cent.  PX 781 at Ex. 1B.

     15 Interchangeability of use and cross-elasticity of demand look to 
the availability of products that are similar in nature or use and the 

market thus "focuses solely on demand substitution factors," 
i.e., that consumers regard the products as substitutes.  Hori-
zontal Merger Guidelines, supra, s 1.0;  Sullivan & Grimes, 
supra, s 11.2b1, at 579.  By defining the relevant product 
market generically as jarred baby food, the district court 
concluded that in areas where Heinz's and Beech-Nut's prod-
ucts are both sold, consumers will switch between them in 
response to a "small but significant and nontransitory in-
crease in price (SSNIP)."  Horizontal Merger Guidelines, 
supra, s 1.11;  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 195.  The 
district court never explained this inherent inconsistency in 
its logic nor could counsel for the appellees explain it at oral 
argument.

     Third, and perhaps most important, the court's conclusion 
concerning pre-merger competition does not take into account 
the indisputable fact that the merger will eliminate competi-
tion at the wholesale level between the only two competitors 
for the "second shelf" position.  Competition between Heinz 
and Beech-Nut to gain accounts at the wholesale level is 
fierce with each contest concluding in a winner-take-all result.  
JA 2680.  The district court regarded this loss of competition 
as irrelevant because the FTC did not establish to its satisfac-
tion that wholesale competition ultimately benefitted consum-
ers through lower retail prices.  The district court concluded 
that fixed trade spending did not affect consumer prices and 
that "the FTC's assertion that the proposed merger will 
affect variable trade spending levels and consumer prices is 
... at best, inconclusive."16  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 
197.  Although the court noted the FTC's examples of con-

__________
degree to which buyers are willing to substitute those similar 
products for one another.  See E.I. du Pont de Nemours, 351 U.S. 
at 393.

     16 Fixed trade spending consists of "slotting fees," "pay-to-stay" 
arrangements, new store allowances and other payments to retail-
ers in exchange for shelf space and desired product display.  H.J. 
Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 197.  Variable trade spending includes 
payments to retailers tied to sales volume and intended to insure a 
specific sales volume and lower shelf price.  Id.

sumer benefit through couponing initiatives, the court held 
that it was "impossible to conclude with any certainty that the 
consumer benefit from such couponing initiatives would be 
lost in the merger."  Id.

     In rejecting the FTC's argument regarding the loss of 
wholesale competition, the court committed two legal errors. 
First, as the appellees conceded at oral argument, no court 
has ever held that a reduction in competition for wholesale 
purchasers is not relevant unless the plaintiff can prove 
impact at the consumer level.  Oral Arg. Tr. at 22, 28;  see 
Hospital Corp. of Am. v. FTC, 807 F.2d 1381, 1389 (7th Cir. 
1986) ("Section 7 does not require proof that a merger or 
other acquisition has caused higher prices in the affected 
market.  All that is necessary is that the merger create an 
appreciable danger of [collusive practices] in the future. A 
predictive judgment, necessarily probabilistic and judgmental 
rather than demonstrable, is called for.") (citation omitted). 
Second, it is, in any event, not the FTC's burden to prove 
such an impact with "certainty."  To the contrary, the anti-
trust laws assume that a retailer faced with an increase in the 
cost of one of its inventory items "will try so far as competi-
tion allows to pass that cost on to its customers in the form of 
a higher price for its product."  In re Brand Name Prescrip-
tion Drugs Antitrust Litig., 123 F.3d 599, 605 (7th Cir. 1997), 
reh'g and suggestion for reh'g en banc denied (Oct. 8, 1997). 
Section 7 is, after all, concerned with probabilities, not cer-
tainties.  United States v. El Paso Natural Gas Co., 376 U.S. 
651, 658 (1964);  Brown Shoe, 370 U.S. at 323;  Baker Hughes, 
908 F.2d at 984).17

__________
     17 Although the merger's effects on the wholesale market for baby 
food are important to a determination of whether the merger is 
likely to reduce competition in the baby food market overall, we 
reject the FTC's argument here that the "wholesale competition" 
between Heinz and Beech-Nut is an entirely distinct "line of 
commerce" within the meaning of section 7 of the Clayton Act such 
that it must be analyzed independently from "retail competition."  
The Congress amended section 7 in 1950 "to make the measure of 
anticompetitive acquisitions the extent to which they lessened com-
petition 'in any line of commerce,' rather than the extent to which 

     2. Post-Merger Efficiencies
          
     The appellees' second attempt to rebut the FTC's prima 
facie showing is their contention that the anticompetitive 
effects of the merger will be offset by efficiencies resulting 
from the union of the two companies, efficiencies which they 
assert will be used to compete more effectively against Ger-
ber.  It is true that a merger's primary benefit to the 
economy is its potential to generate efficiencies.  See general-
ly 4A Phillip E. Areeda, Herbert Hovenkamp & John L. 
Solow, Antitrust Law p 970 at 22-25 (1998).  As the Merger 
Guidelines now recognize, efficiencies "can enhance the 
merged firm's ability and incentive to compete, which may 
result in lower prices, improved quality, or new products."  
Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra, s 4.

     Although the Supreme Court has not sanctioned the use of 
the efficiencies defense in a section 7 case, see Procter & 
Gamble Co., 386 U.S. at 580,18 the trend among lower courts 

__________
they lessened competition 'between' the two companies."  Citizen 
Publishing Co. v. United States, 394 U.S. 131, 137 n.3 (1969).  
Courts interpret "line of commerce" as synonymous with the rele-
vant product market.  See General Dynamics, 415 U.S. at 510;  
Falstaff Brewing, 410 U.S. at 531-32.  The district court defined 
only one market--jarred baby food sold throughout the line of 
commerce in the United States.  Thus, the proper "line of com-
merce" for analysis in this case is the overall market for jarred 
baby food, which includes both retail and wholesale levels.  At this 
point in the proceedings, the wholesale market cannot be separated 
out for analysis without regard to the merger's effect on other 
levels of competition.

     18 In Procter & Gamble Co., 386 U.S. at 580, the Supreme Court 
stated that "[p]ossible economies cannot be used as a defense to 
illegality" in section 7 merger cases.  The issue is, however, not a 
closed book.  See Staples, 970 F. Supp. at 1088 (collecting cases).  
Areeda and Turner explain that "[i]n interpreting the Clorox lan-
guage, moreover, observe that the court referred only to 'possible' 
economies and to economies that 'may' result from mergers that 
lessen competition.  To reject an economies defense based on mere 
possibilities does not mean that one should reject such a defense 
based on more convincing proof."  4 Phillip Areeda & Donald 

is to recognize the defense.  See, e.g., FTC v. Tenet Health 
Care Corp., 186 F.3d 1045, 1054 (8th Cir. 1999), reh'g and 
reh'g en banc denied (Oct. 6. 1999);  University Health, 938 
F.2d at 1222;  FTC v. Cardinal Health, Inc., 12 F. Supp. 2d 
34, 61 (D.D.C. 1998);  Staples, 970 F. Supp. at 1088-89;  see 
also ABA Antitrust Section, Mergers and Acquisitions:  Un-
derstanding the Antitrust Issues 152 (2000) ("The majority of 
courts have considered efficiencies as a means to rebut the 
government's prima facie case that a merger will lead to 
restricted output or increased prices.  These courts, however, 
generally have found inadequate proof of efficiencies to sus-
tain a rebuttal of the government's case.").  In 1997 the 
Department of Justice and the FTC revised their Horizontal 
Merger Guidelines to recognize that "mergers have the po-
tential to generate significant efficiencies by permitting a 
better utilization of existing assets, enabling the combined 
firm to achieve lower costs in producing a given quantity and 
quality than either firm could have achieved without the 
proposed transaction."  Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra, 
s 4.

     Nevertheless, the high market concentration levels present 
in this case require, in rebuttal, proof of extraordinary effi-
ciencies, which the appellees failed to supply.  See University 
Health, 938 F.2d at 1223 ("[A] defendant who seeks to 
overcome a presumption that a proposed acquisition would 
substantially lessen competition must demonstrate that the 
intended acquisition would result in significant economies and 
that these economies ultimately would benefit competition 
and, hence, consumers.");  Horizontal Merger Guidelines, su-
pra, s 4 (stating that "[e]fficiencies almost never justify a 
merger to monopoly or near-monopoly");  4A Areeda, et al., 
Antitrust Law p 971f, at 44 (requiring "extraordinary" effi-
ciencies where the "HHI is well above 1800 and the HHI 
increase is well above 100").  Moreover, given the high con-

__________
Turner, Antitrust Law p 941b, at 154 (1980).  They conclude that 
"[t]he Court's brief and unelaborated language [in Clorox] cannot 
reasonably be taken as a definitive disposition of so important and 
complex an issue as the role of economies in analyzing legality of a 
merger."  Id.

centration levels, the court must undertake a rigorous analy-
sis of the kinds of efficiencies being urged by the parties in 
order to ensure that those "efficiencies" represent more than 
mere speculation and promises about post-merger behavior.  
The district court did not undertake that analysis here.

     In support of its conclusion that post-merger efficiencies 
will outweigh the merger's anticompetitive effects, the district 
court found that the consolidation of baby food production in 
Heinz's under-utilized Pittsburgh plant "will achieve substan-
tial cost savings in salaries and operating costs."  H.J. Heinz, 
16 F. Supp. 2d at 199.  The court also credited the appellees' 
promise of improved product quality as a result of recipe 
consolidation.19  The only cost reduction the court quantified 
as a percentage of pre-merger costs, however, was the so-
called "variable conversion cost":  the cost of processing the 
volume of baby food now processed by Beech-Nut.  The 
court accepted the appellees' claim that this cost would be 
reduced by 43% if the Beech-Nut production were shifted to 
Heinz's plant, see JA 4619, a reduction the appellees' expert 
characterized as "extraordinary."

     The district court's analysis falls short of the findings 
necessary for a successful efficiencies defense in the circum-
stances of this case.  We mention only three of the most 
important deficiencies here.  First, "variable conversion cost" 
is only a percentage of the total variable manufacturing cost.  
A large percentage reduction in only a small portion of the 
company's overall variable manufacturing cost does not neces-
sarily translate into a significant cost advantage to the merg-
er.  Thus, for cost reduction to be relevant, we must at least 

__________
     19 In addition, the district court described Heinz's distribution 
network as much more efficient than Beech-Nut's.  H.J. Heinz, 116 
F. Supp. 2d at 199.  It failed to find, however, a significant 
diseconomy of scale in distribution from which either Heinz or 
Beech-Nut suffers.  4A Areeda, et al., supra, p 975e1, at 73.  In 
other words, although Beech-Nut has an inefficient distribution 
system, it can make that system more efficient without merger.  
Heinz's own efficient distribution network illustrates that a firm the 
size of Beech-Nut does not need to merge in order to attain an 
efficient distribution system.

consider the percentage of Beech-Nut's total variable manu-
facturing cost that would be reduced as a consequence of the 
merger.  At oral argument, the appellees' counsel agreed. 
Oral Arg. Tr. at 43.  This correction immediately cuts the 
asserted efficiency gain in half since, according to the appel-
lees' evidence, using total variable manufacturing cost as the 
measure cuts the cost savings from 43% to 22.3%.  See JA 
4620.

     Second, the percentage reduction in Beech-Nut's cost is still 
not the relevant figure.  After the merger, the two entities 
will be combined, and to determine whether the merged 
entity will be a significantly more efficient competitor, cost 
reductions must be measured across the new entity's com-
bined production--not just across the pre-merger output of 
Beech-Nut.  See 4A Areeda, et al., supra, p 976d at 93-94.  
The district court, however, did not consider the cost reduc-
tion over the merged firm's combined output.  At oral argu-
ment the appellees' counsel was unable to suggest a formula 
that could be used for determining that cost reduction.  See 
Oral Arg. Tr. at 45-47.

     Finally, and as the district court recognized, the asserted 
efficiencies must be "merger-specific" to be cognizable as a 
defense.20  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 198-99;  see 

__________
     20 The Horizontal Merger Guidelines explain that "merging firms 
must substantiate efficiency claims so that the Agency can verify by 
reasonable means the likelihood and magnitude of each asserted 
efficiency, how and when each would be achieved (and any costs of 
doing so), how each would enhance the merged firm's ability and 
incentive to compete, and why each would be merger-specific.  
Efficiency claims will not be considered if they are vague or 
speculative or otherwise cannot be verified by reasonable means."  
Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra, s 4.  Regarding the types of 
efficiencies asserted here, the Guidelines state:

     The Agency has found that certain types of efficiencies are 
     more likely to be cognizable and substantial than others.  For 
     example, efficiencies resulting from shifting production among 
     facilities formerly owned separately, which enable the merging 
     firms to reduce the marginal cost of production, are more likely 
     to be susceptible to verification, merger-specific, and substan-
     
Horizontal Merger Guidelines, supra, s 4;  4A Areeda, et al., 
supra, p 973, at 49-62.  That is, they must be efficiencies that 
cannot be achieved by either company alone because, if they 
can, the merger's asserted benefits can be achieved without 
the concomitant loss of a competitor.  See generally 4A 
Areeda, et al., supra, p 973.  Yet the district court never 
explained why Heinz could not achieve the kind of efficiencies 
urged without merger.  As noted, the principal merger bene-
fit asserted for Heinz is the acquisition of Beech-Nut's better 
recipes, which will allegedly make its product more attractive 
and permit expanded sales at prices lower than those charged 
by Beech-Nut, which produces at an inefficient plant.  Yet, 
neither the district court nor the appellees addressed the 
question whether Heinz could obtain the benefit of better 
recipes by investing more money in product development and 
promotion--say, by an amount less than the amount Heinz 
would spend to acquire Beech-Nut.  At oral argument, 
Heinz's counsel agreed that the taste of Heinz's products was 
not so bad that no amount of money could improve the 
brand's consumer appeal.  Oral Arg. Tr. at 54.  That being 
the case, the question is how much Heinz would have to spend 
to make its product equivalent to the Beech-Nut product and 
hence whether Heinz could achieve the efficiencies of merger 
without eliminating Beech-Nut as a competitor.  The district 
court, however, undertook no inquiry in this regard.  In 
short, the district court failed to make the kind of factual 
determinations necessary to render the appellees' efficiency 
defense sufficiently concrete to offset the FTC's prima facie 
showing.

__________
     tial, and are less likely to result from anticompetitive reduc-
     tions in output.  Other efficiencies, such as those relating to 
     research and development, are potentially substantial but are 
     generally less susceptible to verification and may be the result 
     of anticompetitive output reductions.  Yet others, such as those 
     relating to procurement, management, or capital cost are less 
     likely to be merger-specific or substantial, or may not be 
     cognizable for other reasons.
     
Id.

     3.   Innovation
          
     The appellees claim next that the merger is required to 
enable Heinz to innovate, and thus to improve its competitive 
position against Gerber.  Heinz and Beech-Nut asserted, and 
the district court found, that without the merger the two 
firms are unable to launch new products to compete with 
Gerber because they lack a sufficient shelf presence or ACV.  
See H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 199-200.  This kind of 
defense is often a speculative proposition.  See 4A Areeda, et 
al., supra, p 975g (noting "truly formidable" proof problems 
in determining innovation economies).  In this case, given the 
old-economy nature of the industry as well as Heinz's position 
as the world's largest baby food manufacturer, it is a particu-
larly difficult defense to prove.  The court below accepted the 
appellees' argument principally on the basis of their expert's 
testimony that new product launches are cost-effective only 
when a firm's ACV is 70% or greater (Heinz's is presently 
40%;  Beech-Nut's is 45%).  That testimony, in turn, was 
based on a graph that plotted revenue against ACV.  Accord-
ing to the expert, the graph showed that only four out of 27 
new products launched in 1995 had been successful--all for 
companies with an ACV of 70% or greater.

     The chart, however, does not establish this proposition and 
the court's consequent finding that the merger is necessary 
for innovation is thus unsupported and clearly erroneous.  All 
the chart plotted was revenue against ACV and hence all it 
showed was the unsurprising fact that the greater a compa-
ny's ACV, the greater the revenue it received.  Because the 
graph did not plot the profitability (or any measure of "cost-
effectiveness"), there is no way to know whether the expert's 
claim--that a 70% ACV is required for a launch to be 
"successful" in an economic sense--is true.21  Moreover, the 

__________
     21 For example, a 5 cent piece of bubble gum introduced with a 
90% ACV could appear as a failure on the graph because of low 
revenue but nonetheless be profitable.  On the other hand, a high 
priced grocery product introduced with the same ACV could gener-
ate a lot of revenue (and thus appear as a "success" on the graph) 
yet be unprofitable.

number of data points on the chart were few;  they were 
limited to launches in a single year;  and they involved 
launches of all new grocery products rather than of baby food 
alone.  Assessing such data's statistical significance in estab-
lishing the proposition at issue, i.e., the necessity of 70% ACV 
penetration, is thus highly speculative.  The district court did 
not even address the question of the data's statistical signifi-
cance and the appellees' counsel could offer no help at oral 
argument.  See Oral Arg. Tr. at 39 ("I'm not aware of the 
statistical significance of the underlying study.").22  In the 
absence of reliable and significant evidence that the merger 
will permit innovation that otherwise could not be accom-
plished, the district court had no basis to conclude that the 
FTC's showing was rebutted by an innovation defense.

     Moreover, Heinz's insistence on a 70-plus ACV before it 
brings a new product to market may be largely to persuade 
the court to recognize promotional economies as a defense.  
Heinz argues that to profitably launch a new product, it must 
have nationwide market penetration to recoup the money 
spent on advertising and promotion.  It wants to spread 
advertising costs out among as many product units as possi-
ble, thereby lowering the advertising cost per unit.  It does 
not want to "waste" promotional expenditures in markets 
where its products are not on the shelf or where they are on 
only a few shelves.  For example, in a metropolitan area in 
which Heinz has a 75 per cent ACV, every dollar spent on 

__________
     22 The graph evidence is also not useful unless we know the 
"sunk" costs in bringing the product to market and the manufactur-
er's fixed and variable costs in producing the product.  Sunk costs 
are costs that have already been incurred such as research and 
development and promotional expenses, including brand name de-
velopment.  See Henry N. Butler, Economic Analysis for Lawyers 
935 (1998).  Fixed costs refer to those expenses that do not vary 
with output and will be incurred as long as the firm continues in 
business.  Variable costs are those that change with the rate of 
output such as wages paid to workers and payments for raw 
materials.  See id. at 920, 936;  E. Thomas Sullivan & Jeffrey L. 
Harrison, Understanding Antitrust and its Economic Implications 
19-21 (3d ed. 1998).

advertising is two or three times more "effective" than in a 
market in which it has only a 25 per cent ACV.  As one 
authority notes, however, "[t]he case for recognizing a de-
fense based on promotional economies is relatively weak."  
4A Areeda, et al., supra, p 975f, at 77.  The district court 
accepted Heinz's claim that it could not introduce new prod-
ucts without at least a 70 per cent ACV because it would be 
unable to adequately diffuse its advertising and promotional 
expenditures.  But the court failed to determine whether 
substantial promotional scale economies exist now and, if they 
do, whether Heinz and Beech-Nut "for that reason operate at 
a substantial competitive disadvantage in the market or mar-
kets in which they sell" or whether there are effective alter-
natives to merger by which the disadvantage can be over-
come.  Id. at p 975f2, at 78.

     4.   Structural Barriers to Collusion
          
     In a footnote the district court dismissed the likelihood of 
collusion derived from the FTC's market concentration data.  
"[S]tructural market barriers to collusion" in the retail mar-
ket for jarred baby food, the court said, rebut the normal 
presumption that increases in concentration will increase the 
likelihood of tacit collusion.  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 
198 n.7.  The court's sole citation, however, was to testimony 
by the appellees' expert, Jonathan B. Baker, a former Di-
rector of the Bureau of Economics at the FTC, who testified 
that in order to coordinate successfully, firms must solve 
"cartel problems" such as reaching a consensus on price and 
market share and deterring each other from deviating from 
that consensus by either lowering price or increasing produc-
tion.  He opined that after the merger the merged entity 
would want to expand its market share at Gerber's expense, 
thereby decreasing the likelihood of consensus on price and 
market share.  9/8/2000 Tr. 1010-1013.  In his report, Baker 
elaborated on his theory, explaining that the efficiencies 
created by the merger will give the merged firm the ability 
and incentive to take on Gerber in price and product improve-
ments.  DX 617.  He also predicted that policing and moni-
toring of any agreement would be more difficult than it is 
now, due in part to a time lag in the ability of one firm to 

detect price cuts by another.  But the district court made no 
finding that any of these "cartel problems" are so much 
greater in the baby food industry than in other industries 
that they rebut the normal presumption.  In fact, Baker's 
testimony about "time lag" is refuted by the record which 
reflects that supermarket prices are available from industry-
wide scanner data within 4-8 weeks.  See DX 617 at p 86 
(report of appellees' expert Jonathan Baker);  see also Oral 
Arg. Tr. at 30 (statement by appellees' counsel that nothing in 
record reflects time lag is greater in baby food industry than 
in other industries).  His testimony is further undermined by 
the record evidence of past price leadership in the baby food 
industry.23

     The combination of a concentrated market and barriers to 
entry is a recipe for price coordination.  See University 
Health, 938 F.2d at 1218 n.24 ("Significant market concentra-
tion makes it 'easier for firms in the market to collude, 
expressly or tacitly, and thereby force price above or farther 
above the competitive level.' "  (citation omitted)).  "[W]here 
rivals are few, firms will be able to coordinate their behavior, 
either by overt collusion or implicit understanding, in order to 
restrict output and achieve profits above competitive levels."  
PPG, 798 F.2d at 1503.  The creation of a durable duopoly 
affords both the opportunity and incentive for both firms to 

__________
     23 In an oligopolistic market characterized by few producers, price 
leadership occurs when firms engage in interdependent pricing, 
setting their prices at a profit-maximizing, supracompetitive level 
by recognizing their shared economic interests with respect to price 
and output decisions.  See Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & William-
son Tobacco Corp., 509 U.S. 209, 227 (1993);  see also Jesse W. 
Markham, The Nature and Significance of Price Leadership, 41 
Amer. Econ. Rev. 891 (1951);  Richard A. Posner, Oligopoly and the 
Antitrust Laws:  A Suggested Approach, 21 Stan. L. Rev. 1562, 1582 
(1969);  Donald Arthur Washburn, Price Leadership, 64 Va. L. Rev. 
691, 693-697 (1978).  In a duopoly, a market with only two competi-
tors, supracompetitive pricing at monopolistic levels is a danger.  
See Edward Hastings Chamberlin, The Theory of Monopolistic 
Competition:  A Re-orientation of the Theory of Value 46-55 (8th 
ed. 1962).

coordinate to increase prices.  The district court recognized 
this when it questioned Baker on whether the merged entity 
will, up to a point, expand its market share but "then [with 
Gerber will] find a nice equilibrium and they'll all get along 
together."  9/8/2000 Tr. 1014.  Tacit coordination

     is feared by antitrust policy even more than express 
     collusion, for tacit coordination, even when observed, 
     cannot easily be controlled directly by the antitrust laws.  
     It is a central object of merger policy to obstruct the 
     creation or reinforcement by merger of such oligopolistic 
     market structures in which tacit coordination can occur.
     
4 Phillip E. Areeda, Herbert Hovenkamp & John L. Solow, 
Antitrust Law p 901b2, at 9 (rev. ed. 1998).  Because the 
district court failed to specify any "structural market barriers 
to collusion" that are unique to the baby food industry, its 
conclusion that the ordinary presumption of collusion in a 
merger to duopoly was rebutted is clearly erroneous.24

                     * * * * *

     Although we recognize that, post-hearing, the FTC may 
accept the rebuttal arguments proffered by the appellees, 
including their efficiencies defense, and permit the merger to 
proceed, we conclude that the FTC succeeded in "rais[ing] 
questions going to the merits so serious, substantial, difficult 
and doubtful as to make them fair ground for thorough 
investigation, study, deliberation and determination by the 
FTC."  Warner Communications, 742 F.2d at 1162.  The 
FTC demonstrated that the merger to duopoly will increase 
the concentration in an already highly concentrated market;  
that entry barriers in the market make it unlikely that any 
anticompetitive effects will be avoided;  that pre-merger com-
petition is vigorous at the wholesale level nationwide and 

__________
     24 Contrary to the appellees' claims, nothing in Baker Hughes 
suggests otherwise.  In that case, the sophisticated nature of the 
purchasers of the industry's product and the "volatile and shifting" 
nature of each firm's market share rendered the HHI figures an 
unreliable measure of concentration.  See 908 F.2d at 986-87.  No 
such circumstances exist in this case.

present at the retail level in some metropolitan areas;  and 
that post-merger competition may be lessened substantially.  
These substantial questions have not been sufficiently an-
swered by the appellees.  As we said in Baker Hughes, "[t]he 
more compelling the prima facie case, the more evidence the 
defendant must present to rebut it successfully."  908 F.2d at 
991.  In concluding that the FTC failed to make the requisite 
showing, the district court erred in a number of respects.  
Regarding the contention of lack of pre-merger competition, 
it made a clearly erroneous factual finding and misunderstood 
the law with respect to the import of competition at the 
wholesale level.  Regarding the proffered efficiencies defense, 
the court failed to make the kind of factual findings required 
to render that defense sufficiently concrete to rebut the 
government's prima facie showing.  Finally, as to the conten-
tion that the merger is necessary for innovation, the court 
clearly erred in relying on evidence that does not support its 
conclusion. Because the district court incorrectly assessed the 
merits of the appellees' rebuttal arguments, it improperly 
discounted the FTC's showing of likelihood of success.

                2. Weighing of the Equities

     Although the FTC's showing of likelihood of success cre-
ates a presumption in favor of preliminary injunctive relief, 
we must still weigh the equities in order to decide whether 
enjoining the merger would be in the public interest.  15 
U.S.C. s 53(b);  see PPG, 798 F.2d at 1507;  Weyerhaeuser, 
665 F.2d at 1081-83.  The principal public equity weighing in 
favor of issuance of preliminary injunctive relief is the public 
interest in effective enforcement of the antitrust laws.  Uni-
versity Health, 938 F.2d at 1225.  The Congress specifically 
had this public equity consideration in mind when it enacted 
section 13(b).  See Food Town Stores, 539 F.2d at 1346 
(Congress enacted section 13(b) to preserve status quo until 
FTC can perform its function).  The district court found, and 
there is no dispute, that if the merger were allowed to 
proceed, subsequent administrative and judicial proceedings 
on the merits "will not matter" because Beech-Nut's manu-
facturing facility "will be closed, the Beech-Nut distribution 

channels will be closed, the new label and recipes will be in 
place, and it will be impossible as a practical matter to undo 
the transaction."  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 201.  
Hence, if the merger were ultimately found to violate the 
Clayton Act, it would be impossible to recreate pre-merger 
competition.  See Warner Communications, 742 F.2d at 1165 
("A denial of a preliminary injunction would preclude effective 
relief if the Commission ultimately prevails and divestiture is 
ordered.").  Section 13(b) itself embodies congressional recog-
nition of the fact that divestiture is an inadequate and unsat-
isfactory remedy in a merger case, 119 Cong. Rec. 36612 
(1973), a point that has been emphasized by the United States 
Supreme Court.  See, e.g., FTC v. Dean Foods Co., 384 U.S. 
597, 606 n.5 (1966) ("Administrative experience shows that the 
Commission's inability to unscramble merged assets frequent-
ly prevents entry of an effective order of divestiture.").

     On the other side of the ledger, the appellees claim that the 
injunction would deny consumers the procompetitive advan-
tages of the merger.  See FTC v. Pharmtech Research, Inc., 
576 F. Supp. 294, 299 (D.D.C. 1983) (explaining that public 
equities include "beneficial economic effects and procompeti-
tive advantages for consumers").  The district court found 
that if the merger were preliminarily enjoined, the injury to 
competition would also be irreversible, that is, the merger 
would be abandoned and could not be consummated if ulti-
mately found lawful.  By contrast to its first finding, however, 
for the latter conclusion the court relied not on the facts of 
this case but on our statement in Exxon that--as a general 
matter--temporarily blocking a tender offer is likely to end 
an attempted acquisition, "as a result of the short life-span of 
most tender offers."  Id.  (quoting Exxon, 636 F.2d at 1343).  
In their brief in this court, the appellees offer nothing more 
to support the finding that the merger would never be 
consummated were an injunction to issue.  Indeed, they 
devote only a single sentence, without any citation, to the 
point.  The district court's finding that an injunction would 
"kill this merger" is thus not a factual finding supported by 
record evidence.  This case does not involve a short-lived 
tender offer as did the case cited by the court for its "kill the 

merger" conclusion.  The appellees acknowledge that there is 
no alternative buyer for Beech-Nut and the court found that 
it is not a failing company but rather a "profitable and 
ongoing enterprise."  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 201 n.9.  
If the merger makes economic sense now, the appellees have 
offered no reason why it would not do so later.  Moreover, 
Beech-Nut's principal assets of value to Heinz are, asserted-
ly, its recipes and brand name.  Nothing in the record leads 
us to believe that both will not still exist when the FTC 
completes its work.  It may be that Beech-Nut will have to 
sell its recipes to Heinz at a lower price than the price of 
today's merger.  But that is at best a "private" equity which 
does not affect our analysis of the impact on the market of 
the two options now before us and which has not in any event 
been urged by the appellees.25  See id.

     In sum, weighing of the equities favors the FTC.  If the 
merger is ultimately found to violate section 7 of the Clayton 
Act, it will be too late to preserve competition if no prelimi-
nary injunction has issued.  On the other hand, if the merger 
is found not to lessen competition substantially, the efficien-
cies that the appellees urge can be reclaimed by a renewed 

__________
     25 The district court noted that "[t]he parties have not stressed 
private equities" but the court nonetheless considered them.  It 
concluded that while "the corporate interests of Heinz and Milnot 
and especially the interests of Dearborn Capital Partners LP, which 
presumably acquired Milnot through a leveraged buyout with the 
purpose and intent of selling its interest at a profit" were important 
to the private parties, they should not affect the outcome of the 
proceeding.  H.J. Heinz, 116 F. Supp. 2d at 200 n.9.  We agree.  
"While it is proper to consider private equities in deciding whether 
to enjoin a particular transaction, we must afford such concerns 
little weight, lest we undermine section 13(b)'s purpose of protect-
ing the 'public-at-large, rather than the individual private competi-
tors.' "  University Health, 938 F.2d at 1225 (citation omitted);  cf. 
Weyerhaeuser, 665 F.2d at 1083 ("Private equities do not outweigh 
effective enforcement of the antitrust laws.  When the Commission 
demonstrates a likelihood of ultimate success, a countershowing of 
private equities alone would not suffice to justify denial of a 
preliminary injunction barring the merger.").

transaction.  Our conclusion with respect to the equities 
necessarily lightens the burden on the FTC to show likelihood 
of success on the merits, a burden which the FTC has met 
here.

                         III. Conclusion

     It is important to emphasize the posture of this case.  We 
do not decide whether the FTC will ultimately prove its case 
or whether the defendants' claimed efficiencies will carry the 
day.26  Our task is to review the district court's order to 
determine whether, under section 13(b), preliminary injunc-
tive relief would be in the public interest.  We have consid-
ered the FTC's likelihood of success on the merits. We have 
weighed the equities.  We conclude that the FTC has raised 
serious and substantial questions.  We also conclude that the 
public equities weigh in favor of preliminary injunctive relief 
and therefore that a preliminary injunction would be in the 
public interest.  Accordingly, we reverse the district court's 
denial of preliminary injunctive relief and remand the case for 
entry of a preliminary injunction pursuant to section 13(b) of 
the Federal Trade Commission Act.

                                                        So ordered.

__________
     26 "The most difficult mergers to assess may be those that 
combine both negative and positive effects:  creating market power 
that increases the risk of oligopolistic pricing while at the same time 
creating efficiencies that reduce production or marketing costs."  
Sullivan & Grimes, supra, s 9.1, at 511.

                                                                 