                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 8, 2001      Decided June 15, 2001 

                           No. 00-1242

                     Tualatin Electric, Inc. 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

             International Brotherhood of Electrical 
                       Workers, Local 48, 
                            Intervenor

        On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
           Enforcement of a Supplemental Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Karen O'Kasey argued the cause for petitioner.  With her 
on the briefs was Thomas M. Triplett.

     Steven B. Goldstein, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Julie B. Broido, 
Supervisory Attorney.

     Norman D. Malbin argued the cause and filed the brief for 
intervenor International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, 
Local 48.

     Nora H. Leyland and Victoria L. Bor were on the brief for 
amicus curiae International Brotherhood of Electrical Work-
ers, AFL-CIO.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Making use of a tactic called 
"salting," the International Brotherhood of Electrical Work-
ers, Local No. 48 authorized several of its members to seek 
work at Tualatin Electric, a nonunion electrical contractor, in 
order to advocate union membership among Tualatin's em-
ployees and to gather information that might assist the Union 
in an election campaign.  Tualatin discharged one such em-
ployee, or "salt," because of his union activity and refused to 
hire four other job applicants because it suspected they were 
affiliated with the Union.  The National Labor Relations 
Board held, in proceedings not here under review, that the 
dismissal and the refusals to hire were unfair labor practices 
in violation of the ss 8(a)(1) and (3) of the National Labor 
Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. ss 158(a)(1), (3).  See Tualatin 
Electric, Inc., 312 NLRB 129, 135 (1993) ("Tualatin I"), enf'd 
sub nom. Tualatin Electric, Inc. v. NLRB, 84 F.3d 1202 (9th 
Cir. 1996) (discharge);  Tualatin Electric, Inc., 319 NLRB 
1237, 1237 (1995) ("Tualatin II") (refusals to hire).

     After further proceedings the Board awarded backpay to 
the five discriminatees.  See Tualatin Electric, Inc., 331 
NLRB No. 6, slip op. at 1-2 (2000) ("Decision").  Tualatin 
petitions for review of the Decision on the grounds that salts 
are not entitled to backpay under the Act and, in the alterna-

tive, that the Board miscalculated the amounts of backpay 
due the salts in this case.  Because the Board's determina-
tions are based upon reasonable interpretations of the Act 
and of the Board's own precedents, we deny Tualatin's peti-
tion and grant the Board's application for enforcement.

                          I. Background

     In 1992 the Union began an effort to organize Tualatin by 
salting Project Thunder, a construction site at which Tualatin 
was a subcontractor.  Under its "salt program," the Union 
paid its agents working in non-union shops the amount neces-
sary to bring their wages up to union scale;  it also required 
salts to terminate their employment at the Union's behest, or 
else to face substantial fines.  See Decision at 3 n.1;  Tualatin 
II, 319 NLRB at 1239.  The Union's salting campaign against 
Tualatin continued until December 20, 1993, when it advised 
Tualatin by letter that it no longer sought either "to organize 
... [or] to represent Tualatin's employees";  referring to the 
discharge and the refusals to hire at issue in this case, the 
Union said that instead it "intend[ed] to use picketing to 
truthfully advise the public of Tualatin Electric's illegal acts."  
Decision at 6.

     In July 1992 Edward Campbell, having agreed to salt 
Tualatin for the Union, sought and obtained a job as a 
journeyman electrician on Tualatin's Project Thunder.  Two 
weeks later he was cashiered.  Tualatin I, 312 NLRB at 131.  
In settlement of the resulting unfair labor practice (ULP) 
case, Tualatin agreed to reinstate Campbell;  when Campbell 
reported for work, however, Tualatin assigned him not to 
Project Thunder but to its Wal-Mart jobsite, which increased 
his round-trip daily commute by at least 60 miles.  See 
Tualatin I, 312 NLRB at 132;  Decision at 6.  Campbell, 
believing that employment at Wal-Mart did not constitute 
"reinstatement," abandoned the job after two days.  Tualatin 
I, 312 NLRB at 132.  The Board concluded that Tualatin 
violated the settlement agreement by substituting Wal-Mart 
for Project Thunder, and that Tualatin had dismissed Camp-
bell in the first place because of his union activity.  Id. at 133, 

135.  The Board ordered Tualatin to reinstate Campbell and 
scheduled further proceedings to determine the amount of 
backpay due him.  Id. at 129, 135.  The Ninth Circuit denied 
Tualatin's petition for review of the Board's holding that it 
had violated the settlement agreement.  See Tualatin Elec-
tric, 84 F.3d at 1205.

     Several months after Campbell's botched reinstatement, 
Tualatin denied the employment applications of four other 
union salts, including Gary Mangel.  The Board found that 
Tualatin had unlawfully refused to hire the four because it 
knew or suspected they were connected with the Union.  The 
Board ordered that they be hired and that further proceed-
ings be conducted to determine the amount of backpay due 
each.  Tualatin II, 319 NLRB at 1241-42.  Tualatin agreed 
not to contest the "findings of fact and conclusions of law 
underlying" Tualatin II except insofar as they concerned 
"the amount of backpay due";  the Board then consolidated 
the backpay proceedings arising from Tualatin I and Tuala-
tin II.  Decision at 3.

     In those proceedings the ALJ rejected Tualatin's argument 
that salts are not entitled to backpay under the Act.  He also 
held that the salts' backpay remedies should be calculated 
under the rubric of Dean General Contractors, 285 NLRB 
573 (1987), whereby the Board presumes, subject to rebuttal 
by the employer, that an unlawfully discharged employee in 
the construction industry would have been reassigned to a 
new project upon the termination of the project at which he 
had been working.  The ALJ further held, contrary to Tuala-
tin's position, that (1) backpay was available for the period 
after the Union's letter announcing the termination of its 
organizing effort;  and (2) seeking employment exclusively at 
union shops did not breach the salts' duty to mitigate, for 
which "a discriminatee need only follow his regular method 
for obtaining work."  Id. at 5.

     The ALJ also resolved several issues regarding mitigation 
in favor of particular discriminatees.  He concluded that the 
period for which Campbell was due backpay was not tolled by 
his departure from the Wal-Mart project;  "inasmuch as the 

Ninth Circuit and the Board had concluded that his reinstate-
ment was invalid, Campbell was not required to have accept-
ed it under any circumstances."  Id. at 6.  Nor was backpay 
tolled when Campbell resigned a salting job with another 
nonunion contractor at the direction of the Union;  avoiding 
union discipline, ruled the ALJ, is "good cause" for quitting a 
nonunion job.  Id. Finally, the ALJ held that backpay for 
Gary Mangel was not tolled when he refused several short-
term jobs so that he would not lose his eligibility for a long-
term job under the rules of the Union's hiring hall.  Id. at 9.

     The Board upheld the decisions of the ALJ in all respects, 
id. at 1-2, Member Hurtgen dissenting in part.  Tualatin now 
petitions for review of the Board's decision, and the Union 
intervenes on behalf of the Board.

                           II. Analysis

     Tualatin challenges several of the legal principles the 
Board applied in calculating the amount of backpay due the 
discriminatees.  We uphold the Board's legal determinations 
so long as they are neither arbitrary nor inconsistent with 
established law.  See, e.g., Lee Lumber & Bldg. Material 
Corp. v. NLRB, 117 F.3d 1454, 1460 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (NLRB 
"to be given a great deal of deference in developing the rules 
that it will apply to particular situations").

     First, Tualatin argues that salts are necessarily ineligible 
for a backpay remedy, which "must be sufficiently tailored to 
expunge only the actual, and not merely speculative, conse-
quences of" an ULP.  Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883, 
900 (1984) (emphases omitted).  The employer contends that 
a damages due a salt are invariably speculative because a 
salt's job tenure depends not only upon his employer but also 
upon his union.  Contrary to the Board's claims, Tualatin is 
not estopped from making this argument by its agreement 
not to contest the findings and conclusions reached in Tuala-
tin II:  the argument addresses "the amount of backpay due," 
which Tualatin expressly reserved the right to challenge.  
Nor is the argument precluded by Tualatin Electric v. 
NLRB, which decided only that Campbell's assignment to the 

Wal-Mart project did not amount to reinstatement, and en-
forced a Board order that by its terms requires further 
proceedings to determine Tualatin's backpay liability.  84 
F.3d at 1205-06.

     On the merits, however, we agree with the Board that 
Tualatin's argument is incompatible with the Supreme 
Court's holding that, although he "serv[es] two masters," a 
salt is an "employee" within the meaning of the National 
Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 152(3).  NLRB v. Town & 
Country Elec., Inc., 516 U.S. 85, 94-95 (1995).  In light of the 
Court's holding that salts "do not forfeit their 'employee' 
status or their statutory protection from unlawful discrimina-
tion," the Board properly reasoned that neither "do [salts] 
forfeit their eligibility for backpay ... to remedy the discrim-
ination."  Decision at 1 (citing Town & Country, 516 U.S. at 
95).

     Second, Tualatin objects to the Board's presumption that 
the discriminatees' employment would not have ended with 
Project Thunder, which the Board based upon a line of cases 
originating with Dean, 285 NLRB at 575.  See Decision at 1;  
see also Casey Elec. Inc., 313 NLRB 774, 774 (1994).  An 
employer may rebut the Dean presumption by showing that 
under its "established policies," the employee would not have 
been reassigned.  Decision at 1.  Tualatin does not claim to 
have rebutted the presumption;  instead it argues that Dean 
should be overruled or, in the alternative, not applied to cases 
involving salts.  Again we reject the Board's objection to an 
argument being raised but agree with the Board on the 
merits.

     The Board contends that its reliance upon Dean in Tuala-
tin I and II precludes Tualatin from relitigating here the 
applicability of that case;  in fact, however, the two earlier 
proceedings leave open the question whether Dean should be 
applied when calculating backpay for salts.  In Tualatin I the 
only reference to Dean is "for the proposition that the 
question of whether backpay is due a discriminatee ... is 
appropriately resolved during the compliance process."  Tua-
latin I, 312 NLRB at 129 n.1.  Although the Board said in 

Tualatin II that "reinstatement and backpay recommenda-
tions are subject to the procedures discussed in Dean," 319 
NLRB at 1242, here the employer, as we noted above, 
reserved the right to challenge those aspects of Tualatin II 
relevant to the calculation of "the amount of backpay due."

     On the merits, Tualatin first suggests generally that the 
Dean rule is unduly complicated and prejudicial to employers 
in the construction industry, who in staffing an ever-changing 
roster of projects will often have lawful reasons for not 
transferring a particular employee.  That is no basis, howev-
er, for concluding that Dean's allocation of the burden of 
production is arbitrary or contrary to law.

     The employer then claims that Dean should not be applied 
to salts.  Dean places upon the employer the burden of 
showing that an employee would not have been transferred in 
part because the relevant "[e]vidence ... would tend primari-
ly to be in the possession of the respondent employer which 
controls the decision whether to transfer or reassign."  Dean, 
285 NLRB at 574-75.  Tualatin argues that because a salt's 
ability to "transfer or reassign" depends upon the union's 
approval, in salting cases it is the union that "tend[s] primari-
ly" to have the relevant evidence.  To continue imposing the 
evidentiary burden upon the employer when the evidence is in 
the hands of the union would, according to Tualatin, be a 
"terrible injustice."

     Tualatin overstates the degree to which the Dean presump-
tion is based upon the employer's superior access to evidence;  
that is but one of several reasons underpinning Dean.  At 
least as important, per the Board, is the judgment that the 
policies of the Act make it undesirable "to apply a presump-
tion in favor of an adjudicated wrongdoer while seeking to 
remedy the underlying unfair labor practice committed 
against the aggrieved employee."  Dean, 285 NLRB at 574;  
see also Ferguson Elec. Co., Inc., 330 NLRB No. 75, slip op. 
at 3 (2000), enf'd, 242 F.3d 426 (2d Cir. 2001) ("The Board 
resolves compliance-related uncertainties or ambiguities 
against the wrongdoer").  The principle that the party who 
has acted unlawfully should bear the burden of producing 

evidence for the purpose of limiting its damages has as much 
force in a case involving salts as in any other.  We therefore 
hold that the Board may apply the Dean presumption when 
calculating the backpay due to salts.  The employer, of 
course, retains the correlative right to seek out and to present 
evidence that a salt would not have been transferred at the 
conclusion of the project on which he last worked, whether by 
reason of the union's policies or of its own.

     Third, Tualatin objects to the Board's determination that 
the salts "satisf[ied] their obligation to mitigate damages 
because they followed their normal pattern of seeking em-
ployment through the Union's hiring hall."  Decision at 1.  
The employer claims first that the agency precedents the 
Board cites in support of this conclusion are distinguishable 
and inapposite.  That is of no moment, for the Board is 
entitled to elaborate upon its previous decisions in any way 
that it reasonably believes will advance the purposes of the 
Act.  The Board did not unreasonably extend its precedents 
in applying here its rule that an employee's normal job-
seeking efforts fulfill the duty to mitigate.  See Ferguson 
Elec., 330 NLRB No. 75, slip op. at 6 ("In seeking interim 
employment, a discriminatee need only follow his regular 
method for obtaining work");  cf. Big Three Indus. Gas, 263 
NLRB 1189, 1217 (1982), overruled on other grounds, Ameri-
can Navigation Co., 268 NLRB 426, 427 (1983) (reasonable 
for employee searching for work in mitigation to hew to 
jobseeking patterns "tradition[al] in the trade").

     Tualatin also echoes an argument raised by Member Hurt-
gen in dissent:  because salts were authorized to work on 
some nonunion jobs at the time they were dismissed or not 
hired, they should be required to seek nonunion work in 
mitigation.  As Member Hurtgen put it, that the Union might 
not approve of such employment "cannot be a justification for 
a failure to mitigate."  Decision at 3.  Although that position 
is certainly reasonable, it is not unreasonable for the Board to 
limit the duty to mitigate so as not to require a salt to accept 
employment that would subject him to union discipline or 
require him to abandon full union membership.  We therefore 
uphold the Board in this respect as well.

     Fourth, Tualatin challenges the Board's decision that back-
pay continued to accrue after the Union announced the end of 
its salting campaign.  According to Tualatin this is inappro-
priate because the end of the Union's organizing effort also 
would have marked the end of the salts' employment.  As the 
Board points out, however, what Tualatin ignores is that "the 
Union continued to authorize its members to work for the 
Respondent after [the end of the campaign] in order to obtain 
information in support of its area standards picketing."  Deci-
sion at 1 n.1.  We therefore reject Tualatin's argument.

     Fifth, Tualatin contends that its backpay obligation to 
Campbell ended when he quit two days after Tualatin had 
"reinstated" him at the Wal-Mart Project.  Because "Project 
Thunder was coming to a conclusion" while the Wal-Mart 
project "promised substantial additional work into the indefi-
nite future," Tualatin maintains that Campbell at least should 
have been required to keep working while he asked the Board 
for relief.  "[P]ublic policy reasons," says Tualatin, "strongly 
support the work and grieve concept."  The Board, however, 
unanimously adopted the conclusion of the ALJ that Camp-
bell's quitting was not a breach of his duty to mitigate 
because, "as the Ninth Circuit and the Board had concluded 
that his reinstatement was invalid, Campbell was not required 
to have accepted it under any circumstances."  Decision at 6.  
The Board also noted that the Wal-Mart project was signifi-
cantly further from Campbell's home than was Project Thun-
der, making the two positions not "substantially equivalent."  
Id.  Tualatin nowhere explains why its policy judgment 
should outweigh the deference owed to the Board's contrary 
judgment.

     Alternatively, Tualatin claims the Board should have tolled 
Campbell's backpay as of his acceptance, with Union approv-
al, of employment as a salt at another nonunion contractor.  
Campbell worked at that job for two weeks before quitting at 
the behest of the Union.  See Decision at 2.  The Board held 
that Campbell could, without reducing his entitlement to 
backpay, resign rather than having to stay on that job and 
"subject himself to internal union discipline."  Id.  Tualatin 
argues that the precedent cited by the Board, Local 90 

Operative Plasterers v. Cement Masons' Int'l Ass'n, 252 
NLRB 750, 754 (1980), is not controlling;  that is irrelevant 
because the Board never suggested its holding was compelled 
by that case.  See Decision at 2.  Tualatin argues further 
that it is "[in]appropriate," "ironic[ ]," and contrary to both 
"[c]ommon sense" and "[c]ommon decency" to hold a salt's 
employer liable for backpay when "the Union, for its own 
reasons, elects to require its employee/members to terminate 
[their mitigating] employment with a third party."  The 
Board, however, is of the view that it would be "inappropri-
ate" to require an employee acting to mitigate the injury 
caused by an employer's ULP to subject himself to union 
sanctions that he would not have incurred had the employer 
not acted unlawfully.  Mere disagreement with this policy 
view -- and that is all Tualatin offers -- is not a basis upon 
which this court may reverse a decision of the Board.  See, 
e.g., Pacific Micronesia Corp. v. NLRB, 219 F.3d 661, 665 
(D.C. Cir. 2000).

     Finally, Tualatin objects to the Board's holding that Man-
gel did not breach his duty to mitigate by declining offers of 
short-term work so he could remain eligible, under the rules 
of the Union's hiring hall, for a long-term assignment.  See 
Decision at 9.  The Board endorsed the ALJ's determination 
that "[a] discriminatee may legitimately refuse a referral if he 
can reasonably expect to obtain employment in the future 
which would clearly be a better opportunity."  Id. (quoting 
Plumbers Local 305, 297 NLRB 57, 60 (1989)).  Yet again, 
Tualatin's argument that the ALJ's decision is not compelled 
by the cited precedent is unavailing.  Tualatin also argues 
that it would be more sensible to require an employee to 
accept any job offered because one can never be sure how 
long a purportedly longer job will actually last.  In the view 
of the Board, however, an employee does not violate his duty 
to make a "diligent or reasonable search" for work when he 
rejects a short-term assignment based upon a "reasonable 
expectation" -- which necessarily falls short of a certainty -- 
that doing so will enhance his chances to secure a long-term 
job.  See Decision at 9.  This position, being neither unrea-

sonable nor contrary to precedent, commands the deference 
of the court.

                         III. Conclusion

     Because the Board's Decision is reasonable and consistent 
with applicable law, we deny Tualatin's petition for review 
and grant the Board's application for enforcement.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                           