                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 4, 2002    Decided April 23, 2002 

                           No. 00-5407

                        Monica M. Peyton, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Michael F. DiMario, 
            The Public Printer of the United States, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv00491)

     Michael C. Johnson, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellant.  With him on the briefs were Roscoe C. 
Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assis-
tant U.S. Attorney.

     Theodore S. Allison argued the cause for appellee.  With 
him on the brief was John W. Karr.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Monica Peyton, a former employ-
ee of the Government Printing Office ("GPO"), brought this 
action against Michael F. DiMario, in his official capacity as 
Public Printer of the United States, alleging employment 
discrimination pursuant to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, 42 U.S.C. ss 2000e, et seq.  Peyton's hostile work 
environment claim and retaliation claim were tried to a jury, 
which issued a verdict for Peyton and awarded her $482,000 
in compensatory damages.  The district court decreased the 
compensatory damages award to the statutory cap of $300,000 
in accordance with 42 U.S.C. s 1981a(b)(3)(D).  The district 
court further awarded Peyton $78,476.90 as back pay and 
$377,615.72 as compensation for lost future earnings.  The 
Public Printer (hereinafter referred to as "GPO") appealed, 
challenging only the damages and relief awarded.  GPO 
contends the district court abused its discretion by:  (1) 
awarding the statutory maximum in compensatory damages;  
(2) awarding back pay for a period when Peyton was in 
school;  and (3) awarding future earnings that are unreason-
ably speculative.  We affirm the district court as to its award 
of compensatory damages and back pay.  However we agree 
with appellant that the future earnings awarded are unrea-
sonably speculative and remand for further proceedings.

                          I. Background

                  A. Peyton's Employment at GPO

     Appellee Monica Peyton worked for GPO for 11 years 
(from July 5, 1987 to August 14, 1998).  She served in various 
GS-5 and GS-6 positions, including supply clerk and supply 
technician. In the fall of 1995 she was accepted into a 2-year 
proofreader apprenticeship program.  Successful completion 
of the apprenticeship program leads to an appointment as a 
journeyman proofreader.  The apprenticeship program con-
sisted of on-the-job training as well as some classroom in-

struction.  Apprentices were evaluated during each 13-week 
period of the 2-year training program. GPO set specific 
proofreading standards (e.g., the number of keystrokes that 
must be read within an hour) and then taught the apprentices 
how to meet those standards.  Throughout the training pro-
gram GPO provides information to apprentices to allow them 
to access their reading speed at any time and periodically 
advises apprentices as to whether they are meeting expecta-
tions.  Peyton's apprenticeship began in January 1996.  Al-
though she apparently failed to meet the number of key 
strokes per hour during one of the periods in 1996, Peyton 
continued successfully in the program.  Then in 1997, she 
failed to meet the number of required keystrokes per hour for 
the July 6-October 4 period.

     According to Peyton's evidence, a superior, Charlotte Mas-
sey, made lewd comments and gestures concerning Peyton's 
breasts on more than one occasion.  Peyton complained to 
Massey directly and Massey ranted at her and intimidated 
her.  Thereafter, Peyton made an informal complaint to 
GPO's Equal Employment Opportunity ("EEO") office on 
July 1, 1997, and a formal complaint on August 15, 1997.  
Upon learning that Peyton had filed the informal complaint, 
Massey engaged in a pattern of harassment, including threats 
communicated directly and through co-workers.  There was 
physical contact between Peyton and Massey, which Peyton 
characterized as a bump, or an elbowing, by Massey.  Peyton 
complained to her superiors that her work was being adverse-
ly affected by the hostile environment of the proof room, but 
to no avail. Peyton was even told that she should drop her 
complaint.  Ultimately, Peyton was distressed and fearful 
about approaching the head desk when Massey was assigned 
to work there.

     According to GPO, Peyton's failure to meet the proofread-
ing goal in 1997 resulted in her being given a 2-week delay, 
then a 12-week probation to improve.  Peyton in fact began 
to improve.  However, Peyton was misled as to when these 
probationary periods actually began and was ultimately ex-
pelled from the apprenticeship program in what had been 
represented to her as the fifth week of the scheduled 12-week 

probation.  Peyton was released from the apprenticeship 
program in January 1998, though not terminated by GPO at 
that time.  GPO placed her in the Library Programs Service, 
and ultimately she was terminated on August 14, 1998.

                       B. Proceedings Below

     Having exhausted her administrative remedies, Peyton 
filed the action below in the district court.  In her complaint 
(filed before she was fired), Peyton alleged sex discrimination 
in the forms of quid pro quo sexual harassment and a hostile 
work environment, as well as retaliation for pursuing her 
rights under Title VII.  Subsequently she amended her com-
plaint to allege that she was terminated from GPO as retalia-
tion.  The district court granted summary judgment for GPO 
on the quid pro quo claim but denied it with respect to the 
hostile work environment and retaliation claims.  Peyton's 
hostile work environment and retaliation claims were tried to 
a jury in November 1999.  The jury returned a unanimous 
verdict finding that Peyton proved, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, each element of her claim of sex discrimination on 
the basis of hostile or abusive work environment, and retalia-
tion, against GPO.  The jury awarded Peyton compensatory 
damages in the amount of $482,000.

     The jury also sat in an advisory capacity on the issues of 
damages for past lost earnings and benefits, up to the time of 
trial, and damages for future lost earnings.  See Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 39(c).  The jury returned an advisory verdict in which it 
found that plaintiff had proved, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that she was entitled to damages for past lost 
earnings and benefits, and to damages for future lost earn-
ings.  The advisory verdict recommended $50,000 for back 
pay and $840,000 for future lost earnings.

     On the issues of entitlement to back pay and future lost 
earnings, the district court made findings of fact.  The court 
agreed with the jury that Peyton "presented convincing and 
credible evidence proving that her co-workers' and supervi-
sors' conduct had a material effect upon her ability to per-

form and upon her quality of life in the workplace."  It found 
no credible explanation for the discrepancy between the time-
frame of the probationary training period represented by 
GPO to Peyton, and the period actually treated as the proba-
tionary training period by GPO.  The court found the evi-
dence to establish that after being told of her probation on 
December 2, 1997, until her removal from the program, "Ms. 
Peyton performed above the required standards."  The dis-
trict court concluded as a matter of law that "[a]s a direct and 
proximate result of the retaliatory adverse employment ac-
tions taken against Ms. Peyton by officials of the GPO, Ms. 
Peyton failed to be promoted to journeyman proofreader, as 
of January 2, 1998, and was terminated from her employment 
with the GPO as of August 14, 1998. She has suffered 
compensatory damages and a loss of earnings and benefits as 
a direct and proximate result of these adverse employment 
actions."

                      C. Damages and Relief

     Based on its findings, the district court awarded compensa-
tory damages and equitable relief. First, the court reduced 
the amount of compensatory damages recoverable to 
$300,000, the statutory maximum under Title VII for an 
award against an employer with more than 500 employees.  
See 42 U.S.C. s 1981a(b)(3)(D).  The court "determine[d] on 
the facts of this case" that $300,000 "represent[ed] a fair and 
appropriate compensatory award pursuant to the statutory 
cap at 42 U.S.C. s 1981a(b)(3)."  In denying GPO's Rule 59(a) 
and (e) motion for a new trial or, in the alternative, remittitur, 
the district court rejected the argument that this award of 
compensatory damages was "grossly excessive" because the 
case did not present "the 'most egregious' instance of unlaw-
ful conduct meriting the 'maximum amount recoverable under 
Title VII's statutory cap.' "  Rather, the court determined 
"that the jury could reasonably view this case as the type of 
egregious, unlawful conduct that Title VII was designed to 
remedy."  It distinguished this case from Nyman v. FDIC, 
967 F. Supp. 1562, 1572 (D.D.C. 1997), based on the physical 
assault of Peyton and GPO's manipulation of "the apprentice 

training rules in order to expel the plaintiff from the training 
program."  It concluded that the "$300,000 award neither 
'shocks the conscience' nor represents a 'miscarriage of jus-
tice.' "

     The court awarded back pay and future lost earnings 
("front pay") as equitable relief.  It calculated back pay for 
three periods:  January 2-August 14, 1998 (while Peyton was 
still at GPO);  August 14-October 11, 1998 (from termination 
at GPO until employment by Bowne, Inc.);  and October 11, 
1998 to Trial (Peyton employed at Bowne, Inc.).  It deter-
mined Peyton was entitled to an award of back pay in the 
amount of $78,476.90.  The court rejected arguments by 
appellant GPO that Peyton inadequately mitigated her losses 
during the August-October period when she was unemployed.  
Noting that it is "the defendant's burden to prove that the 
plaintiff's efforts to secure employment constituted inade-
quate effort to mitigate damages," the court "conclude[d] that 
the defendant has failed to demonstrate that the plaintiff 
inadequately mitigated her losses."

     In determining that front pay was appropriate, the court 
first found that it would be "futile, ill-advised, and inequitable 
to order that Ms. Peyton be returned to her old position."  
Relying on our decision in Barbour v. Merrill, 48 F.3d 1270, 
1278 (D.C. Cir. 1995), cert. dismissed, 516 U.S. 1155 (1996), 
the district court calculated projected future lost earnings.  It 
found that at the time of trial, Peyton earned $549.90 less per 
week ($28,594.80 less per year) working for Bowne, Inc., a 
private printer, than she would as a journeyman proofreader 
for GPO.  Because the court found that "Ms. Peyton reason-
ably expected and intended to work as a proofreader for the 
GPO until she retired," it awarded her "front pay which 
reflects that the plaintiff will suffer a loss of future earnings 
totaling $28,594.80 per year until her projected retirement," 
discounted to the net present value.  As Peyton was 34 years 
old, and her retirement was projected at age 60, the district 
court ultimately awarded $377,615.72 in front pay.

     GPO filed the instant appeal challenging the district court's 
determination of compensatory damages, back pay, and front 
pay.

                           II. Analysis

     This Court reviews a district court's denial of a Rule 59(a) 
and (e) motion for abuse of discretion. Fed. R. Civ. P. 59(a), 
(e);  see Langevine v. District of Columbia, 106 F.3d 1018, 
1023 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (Rule 59(a));  Anyantaku v. Moore, 151 
F.3d 1053, 1058 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (Rule 59(e)).  This Court also 
reviews equitable relief, the standard for calculating back pay 
and front pay, under an abuse of discretion standard.  See 
Barbour, 48 F.3d at 1277-78.  A "district court has wide 
discretion to award equitable relief."  Id. at 1278.  "The 
district court should fashion this relief so as to provide a 
victim of employment discrimination the most complete make-
whole relief possible."  Id.  In reviewing for an abuse of 
discretion, the Court considers "whether the decision maker 
failed to consider a relevant factor, whether [the decision 
maker] relied on an improper factor, and whether the reasons 
given reasonably support the conclusion."  Id. (citation omit-
ted).  With this standard of review in mind, we consider each 
of the challenged awards in turn:  compensatory damages;  
back pay;  and future lost earnings or "front pay."

                     A. Compensatory Damages

     GPO argues that the denial of the motion for new trial, or 
remittitur, and the award of $300,000 in compensatory dam-
ages is an abuse of discretion in that a "$300,000 compensato-
ry damages award is grossly excessive given the record in 
this case."  Appellant relies on Nyman v. FDIC, 967 F. Supp. 
at 1570-73, for the standards that should govern remittitur in 
a Title VII case.  In Nyman, the district court held that the 
"maximum amount recoverable under the applicable cap ... 
should be reserved for the most egregious cases of unlawful 
conduct."  967 F. Supp. at 1572.  There the district court 
ordered remittitur of a $350,000 compensatory damages ver-
dict to $175,000.  Id. at 1567. Appellant essentially argues 
that the harm to Peyton was not serious enough to warrant 
the maximum penalty under the law, particularly when com-
pared to other Title VII cases.  Further, according to GPO, 
appellee's approach would have us consider the "quality of the 

'unlawful conduct' at issue," rather than the nature of the 
harm suffered, conflating compensatory damages with puni-
tive damages-damages which are foreclosed to the plaintiff as 
the defendant is a government entity.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 1981a(b)(1).  As to the critical inquiry of harm to the 
victim, appellant contends there "simply was no significant 
evidence of any prolonged, serious, or substantial harm to 
appellee stemming from GPO's actions."

     At the outset, we address appellant's suggestion that Pey-
ton failed to carry her burden in proving damages. Although 
compensatory damages must be proven and cannot be pre-
sumed, see Carey v. Piphus, 435 U.S. 247, 263-64 (1978), 
there has been no such presumption here.  The district court 
found that the jury could reasonably view this case as the 
type of egregious, unlawful conduct that Title VII was de-
signed to remedy:  Peyton had worked her way up the ladder 
at GPO, won a desirable apprenticeship, was harassed by a 
superior in the final months, was threatened, intimidated, 
physically assaulted, suffered retaliation for attempting to 
exercise her rights under Title VII, and was ultimately fired 
for exercising her rights. The evidence supports the district 
court's finding that she became depressed, angry, and suf-
fered a loss of self-esteem.  She was injured.

     Thus, the only question remaining is whether it was an 
abuse of discretion by the district court to award the statuto-
ry maximum, $300,000 in compensatory damages, when the 
jury had awarded $482,000. Of course, the district court is in 
the best position to determine damages, as it heard all of the 
evidence and saw all of the witnesses.  This Court will only 
require remittitur when (1) the verdict is beyond all reason, 
so as to shock the conscience, or (2) the verdict is so inordi-
nately large as to obviously exceed the maximum limit of a 
reasonable range within which the jury may properly operate. 
See Jeffries v. Potomac Dev. Corp., 822 F.2d 87, 96 (D.C. Cir. 
1987);  Williams v. Steuart Motor Co., 494 F.2d 1074, 1085 
(D.C. Cir. 1974).  The district court did not abuse its discre-
tion in determining that neither test required remittitur here.

     Appellant does not contend that an award of $300,000 
"shocks the conscience" in the abstract, but rather argues, 
relying on the district court's opinion in Nyman, that 42 
U.S.C. s 1981a(b) in essence requires a sliding scale. Thus, 
only the "most egregious cases of unlawful conduct" are 
entitled to the statutory maximum of $300,000, and this case 
is not so egregious.  First, we reject the argument that 
s 1981a(b) itself ever requires a reduction below the $300,000 
cap.  By its plain language, 1981a(b)(3) does nothing other 
than provide a cap.  Nothing in the language of that section 
evidences a congressional intent to specifically empower, let 
alone require, a trial or appellate court to reduce a verdict in 
excess of $300,000 to some lesser figure.  Although appellant 
offers a plethora of cases in which smaller damage figures 
have been awarded, and in which remittiturs to amounts 
below $300,000 have been ordered, appellant provides no 
authority for the proposition that cases involving some per-
ceived or even evident degree of injury less than the most 
egregious must inherently be awarded some figure lower than 
the cap.  It may well be that in the most egregious conceiva-
ble case a jury might award, for example, $300,000,000, which 
would be reduced to $300,000.  The fact that some other 
hypothetical case might be only half as egregious (assuming 
such comparisons can be made) would not require either the 
trial or appellate court to reduce the award in that hypotheti-
cal case from $150,000,000 to $150,000.

     Rather, the proper approach is to determine whether the 
judgment awarded, regardless of whether it is the statutory 
maximum, is supported by evidence, and does not shock the 
conscience, or is not inordinately large so as to be obviously 
unreasonable.  Cf. Smith v. Northwest Financial Acceptance, 
Inc., 129 F.3d 1408, 1416 (10th Cir. 1997).  The cases that 
appellant offers for purposes of comparison in which lesser 
damages were awarded or approved do not convince us to the 
contrary.  In rejecting that line of argument, we find useful 
the reasoning of a state court considering a similar question 
in a different context.

     The appellant argues that a comparison of this award to 
     other awards for similar injuries would show that this 
     award is excessive.  We stated in Fitzsimonds v. Cogs-
     well, ... that "We are sure counsel realizes that there is 
     no way of obtaining uniformity in the amount juries and 
     trial judges may award for damages in personal-injury 
     cases."  Because of the unique circumstances of each 
     case as well as the adjustments which would necessarily 
     have to be made for inflation, it is awkward to discuss the 
     size of an award through comparison with past decisions.
     
Mariner v. Marsden, 610 P.2d 6, 16 (Wyo. 1980).  Just so 
here.

     All, then, that is left is to assess whether the district court 
abused its discretion in granting a damage award of $300,000, 
which is $182,000 less than the jury would have awarded.  It 
is rarely appropriate for an appellate court to reduce the trial 
court's determination as to the proper amount of damages. 
Thus, in reviewing a damage award, we consider whether it 
would be "a denial of justice to permit it to stand."  Grunen-
thal v. Long Island R. Co., 393 U.S. 156, 159 (1968) (quoting 
Dagnello v. Long Island R. Co., 289 F.2d 797, 806 (2d Cir. 
1961)). Given the district court's findings of fact, which are 
unchallenged, we cannot say that the court abused its discre-
tion. The court found that "Ms. Peyton presented convincing 
and credible evidence proving that her co-workers' and super-
visors' conduct had a material effect upon her ability to 
perform and upon her quality of life in the workplace." 
(emphasis added).  The plaintiff convinced the jury, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that she had been the victim 
of retaliation, that she was distressed and that she was fearful 
about her work environment.  Indeed, appellant concedes 
that Peyton reported "feelings of depression and sadness 
typical of plaintiffs in Title VII cases."  Moreover, to the 
extent that the egregiousness of GPO's conduct was consid-
ered, it was merely as a proxy to assess the distress inflicted 
upon Peyton.  Although we might have decided this issue 
differently were it before us de novo, because we cannot say 
that the district court abused its discretion, we affirm the 

denial of the Rule 59(a) and (e) motion, and thus allow the 
compensatory damage award to stand.

                           B. Back Pay

     Appellant objects to the award of back pay for the August-
October 1998 period, during which, it contends, Peyton failed 
to adequately mitigate her damages.  It is not entirely clear 
that GPO properly preserved this issue for appeal.  However, 
even assuming that appellant did, we find that the district 
court did not abuse its discretion.  The employer has the 
burden of proving failure to mitigate.  See, e.g., Fleming v. 
County of Kane, 898 F.2d 553, 560 (7th Cir. 1990).  GPO 
claims that Peyton was enrolled in school during the August-
October 1998 period and did not demonstrate that she was 
actively seeking work.  Relying on Dailey v. Societe Gene-
rale, 108 F.3d 451, 455-58 (2d Cir. 1997), appellant contends 
that Peyton's school attendance shows that she failed to 
"demonstrate at least a modicum of due diligence in pursuing 
full-time employment."  Dailey, however, provides little sup-
port.  There the Second Circuit rejected a per se rule that 
full-time school attendance was incompatible with the duty to 
mitigate, and rejected the defendant's claim that the plaintiff 
had failed to mitigate.  See id.  In any event, here GPO has 
failed to prove that Peyton was attending school full time, 
much less that she made inadequate efforts to seek employ-
ment. As the appellant has not shown that Peyton withdrew 
from the market and was not ready, willing, and able to 
accept other employment, we cannot say that the district 
court abused its discretion in granting back pay for the 
August-October 1998 period.

              C. Future Lost Earnings ("Front Pay")

     Although appellee argues that the front pay issue was not 
properly preserved for appeal, we agree with appellant that it 
was.  It is clear from the district court's Memorandum Opin-
ion filed May 24, 2000, that appellant had raised the issue of 
the amount of front pay to the district court:  "[T]he defen-
dant asserts ... that any front pay award in excess of a few 

years is unduly speculative."  Thus, the question is whether 
the award of $377,615.72 in future lost earnings was an abuse 
of discretion.  We determine that it was.

     In Barbour v. Merrill, 48 F.3d 1270 (D.C. Cir. 1995), cert. 
dismissed, 516 U.S. 1155 (1996), we articulated factors to be 
considered in calculating front pay. Certain considerations 
"including whether an award of front pay would be 'unduly 
speculative,' may in some circumstances limit the court's 
discretion."  Id. at 1280.  "The longer a proposed front pay 
period, the more speculative the damages become."  
McKnight v. GM, 973 F.2d 1366, 1372 (7th Cir. 1992). Here 
the award of 26 years of front pay was unduly speculative and 
therefore an abuse of discretion. Contrary to the district 
court's understanding, Barbour does not hold that a plaintiff's 
intention to remain at her employer until retirement, even if 
that intention is entirely reasonable, automatically entitles 
front pay for the remainder of her work life.  Rather, Barb-
our includes a list of non-exhaustive factors to consider, 
including age.  See Barbour, 48 F.3d at 1280.  Indeed, Barb-
our specifically suggests that the district court consider the 
length of time employees in similar positions stay at the 
defendant employer as well as at other employers, the time 
required to secure similar employment, and other factors.  
Id.  Moreover, on remand, the district court in Barbour only 
awarded one year of front pay, which was affirmed by this 
Court.  See Barbour v. Merrill, 132 F.3d 1480 (D.C. Cir. 
1997) (Table).  Neither the district court nor appellee cites 
any case which suggests that an employee's subjective intent 
to remain at a job until retirement, by itself, justifies an 
award of front pay for the rest of her career.

     While some speculation is necessary to determine front 
pay, here the appellee produced no expert testimony concern-
ing her earning potential, nor did the district court examine 
what positions were available in the private sector comparable 
to a journeyman proofreader position at GPO.  "The plaintiff 
bears the initial burden of providing the district court 'with 
the essential data necessary to calculate a reasonably certain 
front pay award.' "  Barbour, 48 F.3d at 1279 (quoting 
McKnight, 973 F.2d at 1372).  However, here the district 

court simply calculated the difference between pay at Bowne 
and GPO, and assumed that appellee would have stayed at 
Bowne for the rest of her career.  In fact, Peyton had only 
been working at Bowne a little over a month when the trial 
began.  Further, the district court took "judicial notice that 
Ms. Peyton can expect to receive regular and incremental 
increases in compensation as an employee of Bowne, Inc., as 
she would have as an employee of the GPO."  But the 
evidence does not reflect how such increases would compare 
between the public and private sectors.  Moreover, there is 
no evidence in the record that salaries at Bowne represent a 
"fair sample of the market" or the industry standard in the 
private sector.  Nor does evidence in the record support the 
finding that the GPO proofreading job provided Peyton an 
"optimum and unparalleled occasion to earn a handsome 
living."  Appellee's assertion that the GPO position "was an 
unusually high paying job" is also without basis.  Indeed, 
none of the citations to the Joint Appendix in her brief 
support appellee's claim that her witnesses "testified about 
the uncommonly high compensation for the GPO position."  
Finally, appellee does not substantiate her claim that she is 
not generally able to "pursue jobs in the future that will be 
essentially comparable to the job she lost."  In sum, we 
cannot uphold the determination of front pay.

     The Ninth Circuit's decision in Gotthardt v. National RR 
Passenger Corp., 191 F.3d 1148 (9th Cir. 1999), does not alter 
our analysis.  That case involved a 59 year-old employee 
approaching retirement who had been truly incapacitated by 
the employer's wrongful conduct and could not enter another 
career.  See id. at 1156.  Given those circumstances, the 
Ninth Circuit upheld a front pay award that compensated 
future lost earnings through the mandatory retirement age of 
70:  "Although an eleven-year front pay award seems gener-
ous, the district court explicitly found that Gotthardt would be 
unable to work in the future, taking into account her age (59), 
her educational and vocational background, and, especially, 
her health."  Id. at 1157.  The Gotthardt court noted that 
these were unique circumstances, because "front pay is in-
tended to be temporary in nature."  Id. (quoting Cassino v. 

Reichhold Chemicals, Inc., 817 F.2d 1338, 1347 (9th Cir. 
1987)).  Similarly, in Davis v. Combustion Engineering, Inc., 
742 F.2d 916, 923 (6th Cir. 1984), the Sixth Circuit upheld an 
award of front pay to a 59 year-old plaintiff but noted that 
front pay for a 41 year-old plaintiff until retirement age might 
be unwarranted.  Indeed, "[o]ther courts seem to agree that 
plaintiffs in their forties are too young for lifetime front pay 
awards."  Stafford v. Electronic Data Systems Corp., 749 
F. Supp. 781, 789 (E.D. Mich. 1990) (citing Bailey v. Contain-
er Corporation of America, 660 F. Supp. 1048 (S.D. Ohio 
1986);  Foit v. Suburban Bancorp, 549 F. Supp. 264, 267 (D. 
Md. 1982);  Monroe v. Penn-Dixie Cement Corp., 335 
F. Supp. 231, 235 (N.D. Ga. 1971)).

     To award Peyton front pay based on the assumption that 
she will continue in an allegedly low-paying job (compared to 
a journeyman proofreader at GPO) for a full career, when she 
is only 34 years old and not incapacitated, is to give her a 
tremendous windfall rather than to make her whole.  There 
is no reason to assume that if she is, in fact, qualified for a 
high-paying job at GPO, she will not be able to find a high-
paying job in the future.  Perhaps she will not.  Perhaps 
private printers systemically pay less for the work she was 
training to do.  However, the district court cannot make this 
determination solely on the basis of appellee's one month of 
experience at a private employer that may, or may not, be 
representative of the private sector, doing work that may, or 
may not, be comparable to the work of a journeyman proof-
reader at GPO.  The record does not support such a specula-
tive conclusion.  Accordingly, we vacate the district court's 
award of $377,615.72 in future lost earnings, and remand for 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                         III. Conclusion

     The district court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
the Rule 59(a) and (e) motion for a new trial, or in the 
alternative, remittitur.  Therefore we affirm the award of 
$300,000 in compensatory damages.  Nor did the district 
court abuse its discretion in awarding $78,476.90 as back pay.  

However, because the award of $377,615.72 in future lost 
earnings was based on undue speculation, it was an abuse of 
discretion, requiring reversal.  We vacate the district court's 
award of front pay and remand for proceedings consistent 
with this opinion.

                                           