                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 18, 2002   Decided January 14, 2003 

                           No. 01-1403

               Waterbury Hotel Management, LLC and 
                  Waterbury Hotel Equity, LLC, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

               On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                       Enforcement of an Order of the National 
                         Labor Relations Board

     Scott V. Kamins argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Jay P. Krupin and D. Jay Sumner.  
Alison N. Davis entered an appearance.

     David A. Fleischer, Senior Attorney, National Labor Rela-
tions Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John 

H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Arm-
strong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Fred L. Corn-
nell Jr., Supervisory Attorney.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The purchaser of a unionized hotel 
petitions for review of the National Labor Relations Board's 
finding that it committed unfair labor practices in an effort to 
prevent further union activity at the hotel.  Finding the 
Board's determinations consistent with the National Labor 
Relations Act and supported by substantial evidence, we deny 
the petition for review and grant the Board's cross-application 
for enforcement.

                                I.

     The Waterbury Sheraton Hotel was first opened in the 
mid-1980s by owners Joseph and Loretta Calabrese.  The 
Calabreses also owned a hotel management company, JLM, 
Inc., which ran the hotel under a lease with the Calabreses.  
In 1995, Local 217, Hotel and Restaurant Employees and 
Bartenders Union, AFL-CIO, was certified as the bargaining 
representative of the hotel's service, front desk, restaurant, 
and maintenance employees.

     When the Calabreses declared personal bankruptcy in 
1994, Prudential Insurance Company, which held a mortgage 
on the hotel property, began foreclosure proceedings.  JLM 
continued to operate the hotel for a short period, but it too 
filed for bankruptcy, and the bankruptcy court appointed a 
trustee who took over day-to-day operations of the hotel.  In 
the meantime, Prudential solicited and ultimately secured a 
purchase offer from New Castle, LLC, a company that owns, 
operates, and develops hotels and resorts throughout the 
United States and Canada.  New Castle acquired the facility, 
then operating as a mid-market Sheraton Four Points hotel, 
with the intention of converting it to a more upscale, four-star 
operation.  To run the hotel, New Castle set up two subsid-
iaries, Respondents Waterbury Hotel Equity and Waterbury 

Hotel Management, to which we shall refer as "Waterbury."

     Although the purchase and sale agreement, signed in No-
vember 1996, provided that Waterbury would "have no obli-
gation to hire any of the employees currently employed at the 
Hotel property," New Castle President David Buffam and 
other company representatives repeatedly assured the trust-
ee that Waterbury would interview current hotel employees.  
When the trustee organized an on-site job fair at which 
potential employers could interview the hotel's employees, 
however, Waterbury refused to participate.

     As it turned out, Waterbury had plans for its own job fair, 
which it conducted over three days in late January.  At the 
fair, applicants were first interviewed by "screeners," who 
would either reject them or pass them on for first, and 
perhaps second, substantive interviews.  In the end, Water-
bury hired 65 employees for positions within the bargaining 
unit, 20 of whom had worked for the old hotel.  The company 
interviewed and rejected 62 other incumbent employees, in-
cluding all members of the Union's negotiating committee.  
Among those hired were three Yale undergraduates and one 
recent graduate whom, unbeknownst to Waterbury, the Un-
ion had asked to apply for jobs.  Waterbury later fired two of 
the undergraduates for wearing union buttons in violation of 
the hotel's dress code.  One week later, it fired the recent 
graduate for job abandonment.

     The Union filed unfair labor practice charges, alleging that 
Waterbury violated sections 8(a)(1), (a)(3), and (a)(5) of the 
National Labor Relations Act by discriminatorily refusing to 
hire incumbent hotel employees, unilaterally setting initial 
terms and conditions of employment without bargaining with 
the Union, and discharging the three Yale students because 
they supported the Union.  See 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (a)(3), 
(a)(5).  After a hearing, the Administrative Law Judge found 
in favor of the Union.  The Board adopted the ALJ's findings 
and conclusions, as well as his recommended order.  Water-
bury Hotel Mgmt. LLC, 333 N.L.R.B. No. 60, 2001 NLRB 

LEXIS 136 (Mar. 9, 2001).  Waterbury petitions for review, 
and the Board cross-applies for enforcement.

                               II.

     As we often observe, our role in reviewing decisions of the 
National Labor Relations Board is limited.  We will set aside 
the Board's decision only if the Board "acted arbitrarily or 
otherwise erred in applying established law to the facts at 
issue, or if its findings are not supported by substantial 
evidence."  Plumbers & Pipe Fitters Local Union No. 32 v. 
NLRB, 50 F.3d 29, 32 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted).  With this highly deferential 
standard of review in mind, we consider each of Waterbury's 
challenges to the Board's decision.

                             ALJ Bias

     We begin with the company's claim that the ALJ deprived 
it of a fair hearing.  According to Waterbury, the ALJ, who 
had presided over a previous hearing concerning the hotel, at 
which he found that the Calabreses' management company 
had committed unfair labor practices, J.L.M., Inc., 312 
N.L.R.B. 304 (1993), enforced in part, 31 F.3d 79 (2d Cir. 
1994), erred by not disclosing this source of potential bias.  
But if, as the Supreme Court has held, an ALJ is not 
disqualified from presiding over the remand of a case in 
which he previously ruled against the same employer, NLRB 
v. Donnelly Garment Co., 330 U.S. 219, 236-37 (1947), then 
New Castle could not have obtained the ALJ's disqualification 
simply because he had ruled against a different employer, 
Waterbury's predecessor, in an unrelated case.

     Waterbury next claims that the ALJ's bias is evident in his 
decision to adopt the Board's post-hearing brief more or less 
verbatim.  Although we have held that wholesale cutting and 
pasting from proposed findings and conclusions warrants 
particularly close scrutiny, Berger v. Iron Workers Reinforced 
Rodmen Local 201, 843 F.2d 1395, 1407-08 & n.3 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (per curiam), we have never held, as Waterbury insists, 
that this practice alone demonstrates impermissible bias, id.;  

see also Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564, 572 (1985) 
("[E]ven when the trial judge adopts proposed findings verba-
tim, the findings are those of the court and may be reversed 
only if clearly erroneous.").  In this case, we are satisfied that 
the Board, recognizing that the ALJ had made extensive use 
of the General Counsel's brief, gave the ALJ's findings the 
appropriate scrutiny:  It "independently reviewed the entire 
record, including the judge's decision, in consideration of the 
exceptions and briefs."  Waterbury Hotel Mgmt., 333 
N.L.R.B. No. 60, 2001 NLRB LEXIS 136, at *6.

     Finally, Waterbury detects bias in the ALJ's decisions to 
disallow or ignore evidence tending to rebut the Board's case.  
In each instance Waterbury cites, however, the ALJ actually 
admitted the evidence, but determined--reasonably, we be-
lieve--either to discredit the evidence or that it was entitled 
to little weight.  Such adverse rulings alone hardly demon-
strate "that the ALJ had a fixed opinion--a closed mind on 
the merits of the case."  Pharaon v. Bd. of Governors of the 
Fed. Reserve Sys., 135 F.3d 148, 155 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted).

                    Unlawful Hiring Practices

     NLRA section 8(a)(3) makes it an unfair labor practice for 
an employer to discriminate in hiring or in other employment 
decisions in order to encourage or discourage membership in 
a labor union.  29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(3).  This prohibition of 
discriminatory hiring extends to employers that take over 
another business.  Although under no obligation to hire pre-
decessor employees, such employers may not lawfully refuse 
to hire them because of their union affiliation.  Howard 
Johnson Co. v. Detroit Local Joint Executive Bd., Hotel & 
Restaurant Employees, 417 U.S. 249, 261 & n.8 (1974);  ac-
cord Capital Cleaning Contractors, Inc. v. NLRB, 147 F.3d 
999, 1005 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

     To establish a section 8(a)(3) violation, the Board must first 
determine "whether the employer's actions are motivated by 
anti-union considerations."  Teamsters Local Union No. 171 
v. NLRB, 863 F.2d 946, 955 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (internal quota-

tion marks and citation omitted).  The Board may rely on 
both direct and circumstantial evidence in resolving this 
question of fact.  Id.;  Elastic Stop Nut Div. of Harvard 
Indus. v. NLRB, 921 F.2d 1275, 1280 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  Once 
the General Counsel has established that the employer was in 
fact motivated by anti-union animus, the Board must find a 
violation of the Act unless the employer can show that "it 
would have taken the [same] action regardless of the exis-
tence of such animus."  Elastic Stop Nut, 921 F.2d at 1280;  
see also NLRB v. Transp. Mgmt. Corp., 462 U.S. 393, 403-04 
(1983), aff'g NLRB v. Wright Line, 251 N.L.R.B. 1083 (1980), 
enforced, 662 F.2d 899 (1st Cir. 1981).

     The record in this case contains substantial, unrebutted 
evidence that Waterbury's hiring decisions were motivated by 
anti-union animus.  The trustee, whom the ALJ credited, 
testified that New Castle President David Buffam, explaining 
why the company refused to participate in the trustee's job 
fair, said that "he had received advice of counsel and ... 
needed to be concerned about who he hired and how he 
hired";  that "there were certain hiring parameters that he 
couldn't exceed";  and that "they could have labor issues down 
the road."  Waterbury Hotel Mgmt., 333 N.L.R.B. No. 60, 
2001 NLRB LEXIS 136, at *53-*54.  When a former employ-
ee was brought on as a temporary worker because of the 
hotel's pressing need for banquet employees, but then denied 
permanent employment, the acting banquet manager ex-
plained, "I'm sorry, but we were told not to hire any of the 
old people back."  Id. at *182.  And when asked by one of the 
Yale students if there was a union at the hotel, the accounting 
director responded, "No, there is no union here, the word 
'union' has been wiped clear of this place."  Id. at *276.  
From these and similar statements in the record, the ALJ 
could have properly inferred that the company's hiring deci-
sions were motivated by anti-union animus.  See, e.g., Capital 
Cleaning Contractors, 147 F.3d at 1005 (upholding finding of 
anti-union animus based on company vice-president's state-
ments that he did not want to hire union members);  Elastic 
Stop Nut, 921 F.2d at 1281 (statements that employer would 
hire no more than 25 percent of predecessor's work force).

     Substantial evidence also supports the Board's conclusion 
that Waterbury was determined not to hire enough incum-
bent employees to trigger a bargaining obligation.  To begin 
with, record evidence indicates that Waterbury's hiring proce-
dures departed from its usual practice.  Normally when New 
Castle purchased a hotel, it interviewed the existing work-
force while the hotel was still operating.  In this case, the 
company refused to participate in the trustee's job fair for 
former employees, instead conducting its own fair after the 
predecessor hotel had closed.  Cf. Southwire Co. v. NLRB, 
820 F.2d 453, 460, 463 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (departing from usual 
practice can be evidence of anti-union motive).  Record evi-
dence also indicates that Waterbury conducted the job fair in 
a manner that put incumbent employees at a disadvantage.  
The ALJ found that the human resources director, in prepa-
ration for the job fair, winnowed Waterbury's list of post-
screening interview questions down to a few highly general, 
abstract questions, excluding all inquiries relating to inter-
viewees' experience.  As the ALJ saw it, this refusal to credit 
job experience reflected a desire to avoid hiring incumbent, 
union employees.  We think this sufficient to establish a 
prima facie case that Waterbury's hiring decisions were moti-
vated by anti-union considerations.

     Waterbury argues that even if it did act with anti-union 
animus, such animus was not a but-for cause of its hiring 
decisions.  According to Waterbury, it had legitimate reasons 
for not considering incumbent employees' job experience, 
given that they gained that experience while working for an 
operation that ultimately fell into bankruptcy.  But Water-
bury points to no evidence showing that any incumbent 
employees were in any way responsible for the decline and 
fall of the Calabreses' hotel.  Quite to the contrary, in a 
proposal seeking financing for its new hotel, the company 
attributed the predecessor hotel's failure not to the employ-
ees, but to the "regional and national recession" and to the 
"lack of experienced and efficient management."  Cf. Capital 
Cleaning Contractors, 147 F.3d at 1007 (rejecting an affirma-
tive defense based on clients' dissatisfaction with employees' 

performance where there was no evidence that the client had 
singled out any individual employees).

     Waterbury contends that it would have refused to hire 
incumbent employees no matter their union affiliation because 
they failed to satisfy the neutral hiring criteria used at the 
job fair.  Record evidence shows, however, that the company 
applied its neutral criteria inconsistently.  For example, Wa-
terbury rejected incumbent employees on the basis of "incom-
patible hours" because they were in school, yet hired the two 
Yale students, as well as other newcomers also attending 
school.  Waterbury also rejected incumbent employees on the 
basis of "pay not acceptable" because they said they expected 
$6.25 or $6.50 per hour for what was, unbeknownst to them, a 
$6.00 per hour housekeeping job, yet hired nonincumbents 
who asked for $7.00 per hour.  The record is full of similar 
inconsistencies.  Substantial evidence thus supports the 
Board's conclusion that the hiring criteria served as little 
more than pretext for weeding out incumbent, union employ-
ees.  See United Food & Commercial Workers Int'l Union v. 
NLRB, 768 F.2d 1463, 1475 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (discrediting 
employer's argument that neutral hiring criteria were imple-
mented for legitimate business purposes where they were 
disproportionately applied against union employees).

                          Successorship

     Waterbury next contends that it did not violate the NLRA 
by unilaterally setting initial employment conditions for its 
employees without first bargaining with the Union.  Although 
NLRA section 8(a)(5) makes it an unfair labor practice for an 
employer "to refuse to bargain collectively with the represen-
tatives of [its] employees," 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5), a new 
employer generally assumes an obligation to bargain with the 
representative of its predecessor's employees only if the new 
employer is considered a "successor" to the old--that is, if it 
(1) conducts essentially the same business as its predecessor, 
and (2) hires a "substantial and representative complement" 
of the predecessor's work force, and a majority of the new 
work force had been employees of the predecessor.  Capital 

Cleaning Contractors, 147 F.3d at 1005, 1007;  see also Fall 
River Dyeing & Finishing Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 41 
(1987).  Waterbury contends that it fits neither of these two 
criteria.

     Whether a new employer is a successor to the old is a fact-
intensive inquiry requiring consideration of whether, in view 
of "the totality of the circumstances," there is "substantial 
continuity" between the new and predecessor employers.  
Harter Tomato Prods. Co. v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 934, 937 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).  Factors affecting the determination of whether 
such continuity exists include "whether the business of both 
employers is essentially the same;  whether the employees of 
the new company are doing the same jobs in the same 
working conditions under the same supervisors;  and whether 
the new entity has the same production process, produces the 
same products, and basically has the same body of custom-
ers."  Fall River, 482 U.S. at 43.  Because the NLRA's 
purpose is to "further industrial peace," including avoiding 
the labor unrest that might result if employees' "legitimate 
expectations in continued representation by their union are 
thwarted," the central question the Board must consider is 
"whether those employees who have been retained will under-
standably view their job situations as essentially unaltered."  
Id. at 39, 43 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).

     Pointing out that the Supreme Court has also said that the 
substantial continuity test directs the Board to focus on 
"whether the new company has 'acquired substantial assets of 
its predecessor,' " id. (quoting Golden State Bottling Co. v. 
NLRB, 414 U.S. 168, 184 (1973)), Waterbury argues that it 
cannot be a successor because, although it acquired the 
Calabreses' hotel from Prudential, it did not acquire the 
substantial assets of JLM, the Calabreses' hotel management 
company which employed the hotel's management team and 
employees.  We disagree.  While the Supreme Court has 
certainly said that acquisition of the predecessor's assets may 
be evidence of substantial continuity in business operations, 
as in Golden State Bottling Co. v. NLRB, 414 U.S. 168, 184 
(1973), it has never held that transfer of assets is either a 
necessary or a sufficient condition for that finding.  The core 

inquiry in the successorship analysis, after all, is not whether 
assets have been transferred, but whether employees may 
legitimately expect the change in control to affect their 
continued union representation.  We thus hold, as have all of 
our sister circuits to have squarely considered the issue, that 
the acquisition of substantial assets is not a prerequisite for 
successorship.  See Saks & Co. v. NLRB, 634 F.2d 681, 687 
(2d Cir. 1980) ("[W]hile a transfer of assets may be evidence 
of the requisite continuity of business operations, it has not 
been thought to be a necessary condition....");  see also 
NLRB v. Houston Bldg. Serv., Inc., 936 F.2d 178, 180-81 & 
n.2 (5th Cir. 1991) ("Transfer of ownership of assets ... is 
only one factor we consider.");  Tom-a-Hawk Transit, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 419 F.2d 1025, 1027-28 (7th Cir. 1969) ("The duty of 
an employer who has taken over an 'employing industry' to 
honor the employees' choice of bargaining agent is not one 
that ... necessarily turns upon the acquisition of assets.") 
(quoting Maintenance, Inc., 148 N.L.R.B. 1299, 1301 (1964)).

     Considering the "totality of the circumstances," moreover, 
we find in the record sufficient evidence of continuity of 
business operations to support the Board's successorship 
determination.  Although it never acquired the assets of 
JLM, the legal entity that ran the hotel, Waterbury did 
acquire the assets--the hotel property, fixtures, and equip-
ment--of JLM's sole owners.  Waterbury provides the same 
type of service as its predecessor, and it does not dispute that 
employees at the new hotel continue performing largely the 
same set of jobs that they had performed before Waterbury 
came on the scene.

     Further objecting to the Board's successorship finding, 
Waterbury points to extensive renovations and policy changes 
it made in an effort to transform the facility into a more 
upscale hotel targeted at "higher-caliber" customers.  Peti-
tioners' Br. at 24.  According to Waterbury, this attempt to 
upgrade the quality of service marks a fundamental break 
from the prior business.  Record evidence, however, reveals 
that for at least two years, Waterbury continued operating 
the hotel as a mid-market Four Points hotel, rather than an 

upscale Sheraton.  And even though in its effort to enhance 
the quality of hotel service, Waterbury changed a substantial 
complement of the hotel managers, corporate policies, and 
sales and service contracts, we believe the Board reasonably 
determined that these changes were not "essential changes" 
likely to affect employee attitudes about union representation.  
See Clarion Hotel-Marin, 279 N.L.R.B. 481 (1986) (finding 
that a hotel's conversion from a Holiday Inn to a Clarion 
Hotel, with attendant changes to conform with Clarion stan-
dards, was not an "essential change" that would affect em-
ployee attitudes about representation);  cf. Harter, 133 F.3d 
at 938 ("We ask not whether [the employer's] view of the 
facts supports its version of what happened, but rather 
whether the Board's interpretation of the facts is reasonably 
defensible.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).

     Next, Waterbury argues that even if the record contains 
substantial evidence of continuity of business operations, it 
remained free to set initial terms and conditions of employ-
ment because a majority of its employees never worked for 
its predecessor.  See NLRB v. Burns Int'l Sec. Servs., Inc., 
406 U.S. 272, 281-82 (1972) (successors are generally free to 
set initial terms and conditions of employment).  But where, 
as here, a successor refuses to hire predecessor employees 
because of anti-union animus, the Board presumes that but 
for such discrimination, the successor would have hired a 
majority of incumbent employees.  Capital Cleaning Contrac-
tors, 147 F.3d at 1008.  In other words, "when a successor 
refuses to hire its predecessor's employees based upon anti-
union animus, the successor loses the right unilaterally to set 
the initial terms and conditions of employment."  Id.  Al-
though Waterbury thinks this rule is "unreasonable and 
arbitrary," Petitioners' Br. at 42, both this and every other 
circuit to have considered the issue have approved it.  See 
Capital Cleaning Contractors, 147 F.3d at 1008.

                       Employee Discharges

     Finally, Waterbury challenges the Board's finding that it 
violated NLRA section 8(a)(3), which makes it an unfair labor 

practice for an employer to dismiss employees for engaging in 
protected union activities, 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(3), when it 
dismissed the three Yale students--Joann Lo, Francis En-
gler, and Jonathan Zerolnick.

     Waterbury fired Lo and Engler for wearing union buttons 
in violation of the hotel's general prohibition against wearing 
unauthorized pins and badges.  Although the NLRA general-
ly protects employees' right to wear union buttons or other 
insignia, Republic Aviation Corp. v. NLRB, 324 U.S. 793, 
801-03 & n.7 (1945);  accord Pioneer Hotel, Inc. v. NLRB, 182 
F.3d 939, 946 (D.C. Cir. 1999), employers may enforce rules 
that have the effect of interfering with such protected activi-
ties under "special circumstances."  Pioneer Hotel, 182 F.3d 
at 946.  Citing Burger King Corp. v. NLRB, 725 F.2d 1053, 
1054-55 (6th Cir. 1984), in which the Sixth Circuit held that 
"where an employer enforces a policy that its employees may 
only wear authorized uniforms in a consistent and nondiscrim-
inatory fashion and where those employees have contact with 
the public, a 'special circumstance' exists as a matter of law 
which justifies the banning of union buttons," Waterbury 
argues that similar circumstances justified its dress code 
because its employees deal with the public.  Petitioners' Br. 
at 42-43.

     We need not consider the validity of Waterbury's across-
the-board no-buttons policy, however, for the record contains 
substantial evidence that the company did not apply the 
policy across the board.  Both Lo and Engler testified that 
they had worn unauthorized shamrock buttons in plain view 
of hotel managers, and that the managers, perhaps swept up 
in the St. Patrick's Day spirit, said not a word to them.  In 
contrast, when the two appeared at work wearing unautho-
rized union buttons, both were promptly reprimanded and 
dismissed.  Even if, as some courts have held, dress codes 
such as Waterbury's might be valid, selective enforcement to 
banish only pro-union buttons and insignia from the work-
place is certainly not.  See Burger King, 725 F.2d at 1054-55 
(6th Cir. 1994) (an employer may enforce a no-buttons policy 
for employees who have contact with the public if it does so 
"in a consistent and nondiscriminatory fashion").

     One week after dismissing Lo and Engler, Waterbury also 
fired their roommate, Jonathan Zerolnick, the recent Yale 
graduate.  Whether Waterbury fired Zerolnick for abandon-
ing his job, as the company claims, or for associating with 
union supporters, as the Board found, is a close call.  The 
record certainly contains some evidence to support Water-
bury's claim that it fired Zerolnick for job abandonment.  
After being told that he could take a temporary leave of 
absence and that he should contact his supervisor when ready 
to return, he made no contact with anyone at the hotel for 
several weeks.  Our job, however, is to determine whether 
the Board's view of the facts, not the employer's, is supported 
by substantial evidence.  See Harter, 133 F.3d at 938.  In 
light of record evidence indicating that Waterbury granted 
Zerolnick the leave of absence without setting firm dates for 
his return to work or for contacting the hotel, that no one 
from Waterbury contacted him before sending the termi-
nation letter, and that Waterbury sent the letter just one 
week after discovering his roommates' union affiliation, we 
think the Board had a sufficient basis for concluding that 
Waterbury fired Zerolnick because of his association with 
union supporters.

                               III.

     Having considered Waterbury's remaining arguments and 
found them to be without merit, we deny the petition for 
review and grant the Board's cross-application for enforce-
ment.

                                                                 So ordered.

           