                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 15, 2002   Decided November 15, 2002 

                           No. 01-5280

                     Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

             Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv01251)

     Mary E. Hennessy, pro hac vice, argued the cause for 
appellant.  With her on the briefs was Gloria B. Solomon.  
Joel G. Chefitz entered an appearance.

     Lawrence H. Richmond, Counsel, FDIC, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With him on the brief was Colleen J. Boles, 
Senior Counsel.  Ann S. DuRoss, Assistant General Counsel, 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  In this case, we must decide whether 
Federal Deposit Insurance Act requirements applicable to 
banks that acquire savings associations continue to apply 
when such banks are in turn acquired by other banks.  The 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which is charged 
with enforcement of the statute, concluded that these "second 
generation" transactions are subject to the Act's restrictions.  
The district court agreed.  Because we find the statute 
ambiguous on this issue and the FDIC's interpretation consis-
tent with congressional purpose, we affirm.

                                I.

     Following widespread failures of savings and loan associa-
tions in the 1980s, Congress restructured the federal deposi-
tory insurance system in the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.  Pub. L. No. 101-73, 
103 Stat. 183 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 12 
U.S.C.).  Known as FIRREA, the Act abolished the insolvent 
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and shifted 
its responsibilities to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion.  The Act also created an independent Bank Insurance 
Fund (known as BIF) to cover deposits of commercial banks 
and a Savings Association Insurance Fund (known as SAIF) 
to cover deposits of savings and loan associations.  SAIF's 
premiums were significantly higher than BIF's because SAIF 
needed to build reserves and to cover additional thrift fail-
ures.

     Because Congress worried that SAIF's capitalization could 
be jeopardized if healthy savings associations, in order to take 
advantage of BIF's lower premiums, converted to banks or 
transferred their deposits to banks, FIRREA also amended 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Act to impose entrance and 
exit fees on so-called conversion transactions that effectively 
transfer deposits between BIF members and SAIF members.  
12 U.S.C. s 1815(d)(2)(B), (E), (F).  FIRREA also imposed a 

five-year moratorium (later extended to 1996) on such trans-
actions.  Id. s 1815(d)(2)(A)(ii).

     One of the few exceptions to the moratorium and fees is 
contained in the so-called Oakar Amendment, which allows 
certain mergers and deposit transfers as long as participants 
obtain regulatory approval and the acquiring institutions con-
tinue paying proportional assessments to BIF and SAIF.  Id. 
s 1815(d)(3).  If the acquiring bank is a BIF-insured institu-
tion (an "Oakar bank"), for instance, it pays BIF assessments 
on its original deposits and SAIF assessments on the "adjust-
ed attributable deposit amount" (AADA)--the proportion of 
deposits obtained from savings associations, adjusted for sub-
sequent growth.  Id. s 1815(d)(3)(B)(i).  The Oakar bank's 
AADA premiums are deposited in SAIF, and SAIF bears a 
proportional share of any costs incurred by the FDIC if the 
bank later fails.  Id. s 1815(d)(3)(D)(i), (G).

     In 1990, the FDIC issued an advisory opinion--the Rankin 
Letter--explaining how it would treat situations in which an 
Oakar bank merges with or is acquired by a normal BIF 
member.  FDIC Advisory Op. No. 90-22 (June 15, 1990).  
Although nothing in FIRREA explicitly addresses this ques-
tion, the FDIC said that it would consider such "second-
generation" or "downstream" purchases to be conversion 
transactions.  Accordingly, the acquiring BIF member would 
be subject either to the moratorium and fee provisions or to 
the Oakar Amendment's proportional assessments rule.  The 
FDIC later reaffirmed this position in a December 1996 
rulemaking.  12 C.F.R. s 327.37;  61 Fed. Reg. 64,960, 
64,962-64 (Dec. 10, 1996).

     In April 1996, after the issuance of the Rankin Letter but 
before the 1996 regulations, appellant Wells Fargo, a BIF 
member, acquired and merged with First Interstate Bancorp 
and seven of its subsidiaries, including three Oakar banks 
that had acquired savings association deposits in prior trans-
actions.  Over the next several years, the FDIC assessed 
SAIF premiums on a portion of Wells Fargo's new deposits.

     Arguing that its purchase of the Oakar banks was not a 
conversion transaction, Wells Fargo filed suit in the United 

States District Court for the District of Columbia seeking a 
$23 million refund of SAIF premiums and other charges that 
it had paid because a portion of its deposits were treated as 
being insured by SAIF.  The district court, applying Chev-
ron's two-part analysis, Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Res. 
Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-43 (1984), found the 
statute silent as to the treatment of transactions between 
Oakar banks and normal BIF members and the FDIC's 
interpretation both reasonable and consistent with congres-
sional intent.  Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., v. FDIC, No. 
00-1251, slip op. at 7, 9-12 (D.D.C. June 15, 2001).  The court 
therefore granted the FDIC's motion to dismiss for failure to 
state a claim upon which relief can be granted.  Id. at 12.  
Our review is de novo.  Cummings v. Dep't of the Navy, 279 
F.3d 1051, 1053 (D.C. Cir. 2002).

                               II.

     We start our analysis, as always, by asking whether Con-
gress has spoken to "the precise question at issue."  Chevron, 
467 U.S. at 842.  If it has, both we and the agency must give 
effect to Congress's unambiguously expressed intent.  Id. at 
842-43.  Because the judiciary functions as the final authority 
on issues of statutory construction, "[a]n agency is given no 
deference at all on the question whether a statute is ambigu-
ous."  Cajun Elec. Power Coop., Inc. v. FERC, 924 F.2d 1132, 
1136 (D.C. Cir. 1991);  see also SBC Communications Inc. v. 
FCC, 138 F.3d 410, 418 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (stating that a court 
must determine whether a statute is ambiguous on its own, 
without regard to an agency's reasoning).  We consider the 
provisions at issue in context, using traditional tools of statu-
tory construction and legislative history.  Nat'l Rifle Ass'n of 
Am., Inc. v. Reno, 216 F.3d 122, 127 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

     Under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act as amended by 
FIRREA, mergers or consolidations between two financial 
institutions are "conversion transactions" only if they involve 
a "Bank Insurance Fund member" on one side and a "Savings 
Association Insurance Fund member" on the other.  12 
U.S.C. s 1815(d)(2)(B)(ii).  The Act then defines these two 

terms:  A "Bank Insurance Fund member" is "any depository 
institution the deposits of which are insured by the [BIF]," 
and a "Savings Association Insurance Fund member" is "any 
depository institution the deposits of which are insured by the 
[SAIF]."  Id. s 1817(l)(4), (5).  Wells Fargo, a BIF member, 
argues that the statute unambiguously says that Oakar banks 
(like the ones it acquired) are also BIF members and there-
fore that its acquisitions were not "conversion transactions."  
Disagreeing, the FDIC insists that Oakar banks must be 
treated as SAIF members for purposes of second generation 
transactions because financial institutions would otherwise be 
able to evade both proportional Oakar assessments and en-
trance and exit fees by transferring savings association de-
posits first to an Oakar bank and then to a normal BIF 
member.

     We disagree with Wells Fargo that the statute is unambig-
uous with respect to "the precise question at issue":  whether 
Oakar banks should be considered SAIF members for pur-
poses of regulating downstream transactions.  Not only has 
Wells Fargo identified nothing in either the statute or its 
legislative history suggesting that Congress even considered 
this issue, but section 1817(l)'s definitions do not prohibit 
institutions from being members of both funds simultaneous-
ly.  According to Wells Fargo, section 1817(l) implicitly 
forbids dual membership because it used mutually exclusive 
terms to determine institutions' fund membership at the time 
of enactment, id. s 1817(l)(3);  see also id. s 1817(l)(1), (2) 
(establishing mutually exclusive membership rules for newly 
established financial institutions), but this argument ignores 
the fact that the Oakar Amendment explicitly allows institu-
tions to take on a hybrid status after engaging in a conversion 
transaction with a member of the other fund.  Id. 
s 1815(d)(3).

     Moreover, nothing in the Oakar Amendment unambiguous-
ly resolves the issue of fund membership.  Wells Fargo 
emphasizes that the Amendment states that an Oakar bank's 
AADA "shall be treated as deposits which are insured by the 
Savings Association Insurance Fund" for purposes of assess-
ment, id. s 1815(d)(3)(B)(i) (emphasis added), not that its 

deposits actually are insured by SAIF.  Yet the Act never 
defines the difference between being "treated as" and actually 
"insured by" SAIF, nor specifies whether such treatment 
should continue if an Oakar bank's AADA is transferred to 
another institution.  Indeed, the statute appears to make no 
meaningful distinction between Oakar banks' relationships 
with BIF and SAIF.  Such banks are "treated as" SAIF 
members for purposes of assessment since they must pay 
SAIF rates on their AADAs and since those premiums must 
be deposited in SAIF.  Id. s 1815(d)(3)(D)(i).  The statute 
also treats them as SAIF members for purposes of loss 
allocation.  Although Wells Fargo argues that another provi-
sion of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act indicates that BIF 
should make all initial payments to depositors in the event 
that an Oakar bank fails, id. s 1821(f)(1), SAIF must absorb 
the losses attributable to the bank's AADA if the institution's 
assets are insufficient to cover all FDIC payouts, id. 
s 1815(d)(3)(G).

     Wells Fargo points to section 1815(d)(3)(E)(ii), which states 
that the Oakar Amendment "shall not be construed as autho-
rizing transactions which result in the transfer of any insured 
depository institution's Federal deposit insurance from 1 Fed-
eral deposit insurance fund to the other Federal deposit 
insurance fund."  Wells Fargo interprets this language to 
mean that a BIF member that acquires a savings association 
remains exclusively a BIF member, but we think it not so 
clear.  The new financial institution that results from such a 
merger is in fact a hybrid, treated as a savings association 
with respect to its AADA and as a bank with respect to its 
original deposits.  For core purposes of assessment and loss 
allocation, the Oakar Amendment mandates that the hybrid 
still be treated as a member of SAIF after the Oakar 
transaction, a result that comports with section 
1815(d)(3)(E)(ii)'s statement that the institution's deposit in-
surance does not transfer between funds.  Indeed, the 
Amendment specifically provides that Oakar banks may end 
their obligations to SAIF by paying the entrance and exit 
fees to transfer their AADAs to BIF after the moratorium's 
expiration.  Id. s 1815(d)(3)(H).

     Finally, FIRREA's legislative history is equally ambiguous 
on the membership status of Oakar banks.  Although Wells 
Fargo emphasized at oral argument that the Senate's original 
version of the bill would have defined SAIF members as 
including "any other financial institution that is required to 
pay assessments into the [SAIF]," S. 774, 101st Cong. 
s 208(l)(4) (1989), that language could not have been intended 
to refer to Oakar banks because it was drafted before the 
Oakar Amendment was even proposed.  The conference com-
mittee reports do not discuss why committee members did 
not adopt the Senate's membership definition nor what they 
thought about the fund membership of Oakar banks, H.R. 
Rep. No. 101-222, at 394-96 (1989);  H.R. Rep. No. 101-209, at 
396-98 (1989), but Amendment sponsor Rep. Mary Rose 
Oakar stated clearly that the hybrid institutions "will [still] be 
subject to the moratorium restrictions, the exit and entrance 
fee requirements and will not have left the SAIF system for 
purposes of the thrift acquired."  135 Cong. Rec. 18,556 
(1989).

     On balance, then, we think the Oakar Amendment is ambig-
uous on two counts:  as to whether a hybrid Oakar bank is a 
"depository institution the deposits of which are insured by 
the Savings Association Insurance Fund" to the extent of its 
AADA, 12 U.S.C. s 1817(l)(5), and as to whether its adjusted 
attributable deposit amount should still be "treated as" in-
sured by SAIF for purposes of assessment after a down-
stream transaction with another BIF member, id. 
s 1815(d)(3)(B)(i).  Both of our sister circuits that have con-
sidered the issue agree that the statutory scheme is ambigu-
ous.  As the Eleventh Circuit explained

     Under the statute, a BIF Oakar institution holds some 
     funds that are in every meaningful way and effect in-
     sured by the SAIF, and it holds other funds that are in 
     every meaningful way and effect insured by the BIF.  
     The statute defines an SAIF member institution as one 
     whose funds "are insured by the [SAIF]," id. 
     s 1817(l)(5), and it defines a BIF member institution as 
     an institution whose funds "are insured by the [BIF]," id. 
     
     s 1817(l)(4).  Under these provisions and definitions, an 
     Oakar institution can be a 'member' of both funds.  Thus, 
     there is an ambiguity in the statute.
     
Bank of Am., N.A., v. FDIC, 244 F.3d 1309, 1317 (11th Cir. 
2001);  see also Branch Banking & Trust Co. v. FDIC, 172 
F.3d 317, 326-27 (4th Cir. 1999) (finding a conflict between 
the requirement that the AADA merely be treated as insured 
by SAIF and the Oakar Amendment's prohibition on trans-
fers between funds).

                               III.

     We next consider the FDIC's interpretation of the statute.  
Although both parties assume that Chevron's second step 
governs this case, we doubt whether the FDIC is entitled to 
Chevron deference because, although it had issued the Rankin 
Letter at the time Wells Fargo acquired the three Oakar 
banks, it had not yet exercised its formal rulemaking authori-
ty--the 1996 regulation.  See United States v. Mead Corp., 
533 U.S. 218, 229-34 (2001);  Am. Fed'n of Gov't Employees v. 
Veneman, 284 F.3d 125, 129 (D.C. Cir. 2002) (agency action 
not intended to have force of law is not entitled to Chevron 
deference).  At the very least, however, because the FDIC is 
charged with administering this highly detailed regulatory 
scheme, we may resort to its "body of experience and in-
formed judgment" for guidance to the extent that its position 
is persuasive.  Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 
(1944).

     Congress restricted conversion transactions for an obvious 
reason:  It wanted to ensure that assessments on savings 
association deposits would keep flowing into SAIF so that the 
fund would be properly capitalized.  See, e.g., H.R. Rep. No. 
101-54, Pt. 1, at 411-12 (1989) ("The Committee believes that 
this moratorium is necessary ... to provide for a stable and 
increased premium income to reduce the amount of taxpayer 
funds ultimately needed to resolve the crisis.").  The Oakar 
Amendment not only furthered this goal, but also encouraged 
healthy banks to acquire ailing savings associations by ensur-
ing that acquiring institutions unwilling to pay the steep 

entrance and exit fees to transfer deposits directly out of 
SAIF could instead accept a hybrid status and ongoing SAIF 
assessments.  See 135 Cong. Rec. 18,556 (1989) (statement of 
Rep. Oakar) (Oakar banks "will not have left the SAIF 
system for purposes of the thrift acquired");  see also 12 
U.S.C. s 1815(d)(3)(H) (requiring Oakar institutions to pay 
entrance and exit fees after the expiration of the moratorium 
to end their obligations to pay proportional assessments).

     As the FDIC pointed out in both its 1996 rulemaking and 
brief in this case, Wells Fargo's interpretation would frus-
trate Congress's stated purpose and would render the statu-
tory scheme largely meaningless since institutions could 
evade the entrance and exit fee payments and the continuing 
obligation to pay proportional assessments by structuring 
conversion transactions as two-step transfers--from a savings 
association to an Oakar bank and then to a normal BIF 
member.  In contrast, the FDIC's interpretation "implements 
Congressional intent because it prevents financial institutions 
from manipulating the system at SAIF's expense.  It is also 
consistent with the Oakar Amendment's requirement that an 
Oakar bank's deposits retain their original fund affiliation."  
Appellee's Br. at 31.  Thus, treating downstream mergers 
between Oakar banks and normal BIF members as conver-
sion transactions is a reasonable--if not the most reason-
able--interpretation of the statute.  See Bank of Am., N.A., 
244 F.3d at 1322;  Branch Banking & Trust, 172 F.3d at 328-
29.

     Wells Fargo makes three challenges to the reasonableness 
of the FDIC's interpretation.  It argues that the agency's 
position is unwarranted because the facts alleged in the 
bank's complaint show that this merger did not involve a bad-
faith attempt to evade SAIF assessments, amounts to a post 
hoc rationalization adopted for purposes of litigation, and 
conflicts with prior agency interpretations.  None of these 
arguments is persuasive.

     Congress was concerned with the effect of conversion 
transactions on SAIF's capitalization, not the parties' good or 
bad faith.  Also, since 1990, the FDIC has held firm to its 

interpretation that second-generation transactions should be 
treated as conversion transactions.  Industry members' ques-
tioning of this interpretation at the time that the FDIC 
confirmed its earlier position in a formal rulemaking does not 
negate the fact that the agency made a considered decision on 
the issue.  Otherwise, any rulemaking adopted in the face of 
comments challenging an agency's statutory interpretation 
would have to be discounted as a post hoc rationalization 
adopted in anticipation of potential litigation by disgruntled 
commenters.

     In support of its claim that the FDIC's position in this case 
conflicts with earlier statements, Wells Fargo points to a 1995 
opinion letter in which the agency concluded that an Oakar 
bank was not a formal member of SAIF for purposes of 
certain secondary statutes that levy additional charges 
against SAIF members.  FDIC Gen. Counsel Op. No. 7, 60 
Fed. Reg. 7055 (Feb. 6, 1995).  But that opinion did not deal 
with the issue this case raises--whether Oakar banks should 
be treated as members of SAIF for purposes of downstream 
transactions.  Wells Fargo lists a parade of horribles that it 
believes would occur if Oakar banks were deemed SAIF 
members for all purposes, but that is the import of neither 
the Rankin Letter nor the 1996 rulemaking.  Instead, both 
treat Oakar banks as SAIF members only with regard to 
second-generation transactions.  Given the unique hybrid na-
ture of Oakar banks, we think it not at all unreasonable for 
the FDIC to conclude that they should be treated as SAIF 
members for purposes related to loss allocation and premium 
assessments, but not for others.

     Because the most reasonable interpretation of sections 
1815(d)(3) and 1817(l) treats Oakar banks as SAIF members 
during subsequent conversion transactions, we affirm.

                                                            So ordered.

                                