                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 18, 2000     Decided May 30, 2000 

                           No. 99-3058

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                         John Williams, 
                            Appellant


          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00288-01)

     Gabriel R. Sanz-Rexach argued the cause for the appel-
lant.  John P. Dean was on brief for the appellant.

     Sharon A. Sprague, Assistant United States Attorney, 
argued the cause for the appellee.  Wilma A. Lewis, United 
States Attorney, and John R. Fisher, Assistant United States 
Attorney, were on brief for the appellee.

     Before:  Silberman, Henderson and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  John Williams 
seeks reversal of his conviction of possession of a firearm and 
ammunition by a felon.  Williams argues that the district 
court made erroneous evidentiary rulings that cannot be 
deemed harmless.  He challenges the admission of police 
officers' testimony regarding the contents of a police radio 
call during the events leading to his arrest, the general 
danger of traffic stops and the assertion that drug users 
commonly carry weapons.  It is the admission of the latter, 
followed by the trial court's denying Williams an opportunity 
to cross-examine the witness and the government's mention 
of the testimony in closing argument, which concerns us 
here.1

                                I.

     Between 1:30 and 1:45 a.m. on August 1, 1998, Officers 
Antonio Duncan and David Reid of the Metropolitan Police 
Department, patrolling in the southeast region of the District 
of Columbia in a police cruiser, stopped the car in which 
Williams was a passenger for failing to stop completely at a 
stop sign and then straddling a double-yellow line.  As soon 
as the officers left their cruiser, Williams got out of the 
passenger side of the car "in a crouched position."  Tran-
script (Tr.) 3/3/99 at 39.  The officers testified that Williams 
immediately reached for his waistband and that he was 
holding something "of some girth[,] ... an object of some 
weight," id. at 166, which they believed could have been a 
concealed weapon.  See id. at 158-59, 166-67.  Ignoring 
commands to remain in the car and, then, to show his hands, 
Williams maneuvered around the open door and began run-

__________
     1 We have considered Williams's arguments regarding the admis-
sibility of other portions of the officers' testimony and find them 
without merit.

ning.  Duncan chased him while Reid detained the driver, 
who had stayed in the car.2

     Running with his hands at his waistband, Williams began to 
cross a footbridge.  He collided into the metal railing and 
slowed down a bit.  The collision caused a metal clanking 
noise.  Duncan suspected that whatever object Williams ap-
peared to have been carrying caused the clanking noise and 
that Williams may have discarded it from the bridge.  Con-
tinuing his pursuit, Duncan did not hear the sound of an 
object striking the concrete "creekbed" below.  He made a 
radio call requesting backup wherein he described the suspect 
and his location and mentioned the "possibility" that the 
suspect had a gun.3  Tr. 3/3/99 at 47.  Shortly thereafter, 
Duncan apprehended and arrested Williams with the help of 
an unidentified civilian.

     Officer Carter Adams responded to the radio call and, at 
Duncan's direction, searched portions of the creekbed.  
Williams had told Duncan, when returning to the spot where 
he hit the footbridge railing, first, that Duncan had not seen 
him throw anything and "had no case" and, then, that he had 
thrown his "stash" or his "works," id. at 50, terms commonly 
used to refer to drugs and drug paraphernalia, respectively.  
Adams found no drugs or drug paraphernalia but did find a 
handgun.  The creekbed contained "no more than half an 
inch" of water.  Tr. 3/4/99 at 5.  Analysis of the gun revealed 
neither fingerprints nor rust.  The safety switch on the side 
of the gun facing the ground was bent and a piece on the 
bottom of the gun was cracked.

     Williams's first trial on one count of unlawful possession of 
a firearm and ammunition by a felon, a violation of 18 U.S.C. 

__________
     2 The reasonableness of neither the stop of the car nor the 
subsequent pursuit of Williams is in question.

     3 While Duncan testified that he had said "possibility" in the 
radio call, see Tr. 3/3/99 at 47, Officer Carter Adams, who respond-
ed to the call, testified that he remembered the radio call different-
ly, that is, as describing the suspect as a man with a gun.  See Tr. 
3/3/99, mid-afternoon session, at 5.  The tape of the call was not in 
evidence.

s 922(g)(1), resulted in a mistrial when the jury failed to 
reach a unanimous verdict.  After Williams withdrew a guilty 
plea to a lesser offense, a second trial commenced.  The 
officers' testimony at the retrial focused on their suspicion 
that Williams had a gun because of his movements when he 
got out of the car and his collision with the bridge railing.  
The officers conceded, however, that they did not see an 
object in Williams's hands nor see him actually throw any-
thing.  Defense counsel offered other explanations for the 
officers' observations and for the discovery of the gun in the 
creekbed.  The government had established Williams was a 
drug user4 so defense counsel raised the possibility that 
Williams could have discarded drugs or drug paraphernalia, 
see Tr. 3/3/99 at 109-11, and suggested that the officers did 
not conduct an adequate search to rule out the possibility, see 
id. at 140-42.  Counsel also elicited testimony that violence 
was common in the area and recovery of a gun in the area 
was not unprecedented.  See id. at 80.

     After a lengthy redirect examination of Duncan, the prose-
cutor ended the questioning with the following exchange:

     Q: Now you were asked a lot of questions about violent 
     crimes in that area [where the chase and subsequent 
     arrest occurred] and about guns being discarded, is that 
     right?
     
     A: Correct.
     
     Q: Okay.  And you know that area pretty well?
     
     A: Yes.
               ...
     
     Q: In your experience as a patrol officer, is it common 
     for people who use drugs or sell drugs to carry weapons 
     for protection?
     
     A: Yes.
     
Tr. 3/3/99 at 160-61 (emphasis added).  The court then ex-
cused Duncan from the witness stand and defense counsel 
__________
     4 See Tr. 3/3/99 at 68-69 (property taken from Williams after 
arrest included syringe and needle exchange card).

approached the bench, explaining that she would have object-
ed to the last question but did not have the chance because 
"[t]hat answer came out so quickly."  Id. at 161.  The trial 
judge said she would have allowed the exchange in any event 
and then denied counsel's request for a "very brief re-cross."  
Id.  The prosecutor reminded the jury of Duncan's testimony 
during her reply closing argument and in the following con-
text:

          Counsel also raised an issue about violent crime in the 
     area to explain, possibly, how this gun--some other way 
     that this gun could have ended up in that creek....  
     [C]ounsel ask [sic] a number of questions about violent 
     crime and about people discarding weapons in the area[,] 
     and you will recall those type [sic] of questions.  Well, 
     remember that the officer also testified that it is not 
     uncommon for drug users or drug sellers to carry weap-
     ons for protection as well.
     
          Ladies and gentlemen, there is no evidence that this 
     weapon was tied to any violent crime.  And in fact, the 
     evidence is to the contrary because had this gun been 
     involved in a violent crime, where somebody wanted to 
     get rid of it, you would expect that it wouldn't be fully 
     loaded....  If you recall, this was a fully loaded weapon 
     with one in the chamber....  In addition, it's an expen-
     sive weapon....
     
Tr. 3/4/99 at 154-55.

     Williams was convicted and sentenced to 180 months in 
prison, followed by two years of supervised release.  A spe-
cial assessment of $100 was also imposed.

                               II.

     We review a trial judge's evidentiary rulings for abuse of 
discretion.  See United States v. Smart, 98 F.3d 1379, 1386 
(D.C. Cir. 1996) (citing United States v. Salamanca, 990 F.2d 
629, 637 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 928 (1993)).  A 
"district court's decision to admit evidence ... is entitled to 
'much deference' on review," United States v. Ramsey, 165 
F.3d 980, 984 n.3 (D.C. Cir.) (quoting United States v. Lewis, 

693 F.2d 189, 193 (D.C. Cir. 1982)), cert. denied, 120 S. Ct. 
223 (1999), but if it is found erroneous, the burden is on the 
government to prove the error was harmless.  See United 
States v. Lampkin, 159 F.3d 607, 614 (D.C. Cir. 1998), cert. 
denied, 526 U.S. 1140 (1999);  Smart, 98 F.3d at 1390 ("At all 
times, the burden of proving that an error was not prejudicial 
rests on the government.") (citing United States v. Olano, 507 
U.S. 725, 734 (1993)).

                                A.

     Williams challenges the admission of Duncan's affirmative 
reply on redirect examination to the following question:  "In 
your experience as a patrol officer, is it common for people 
who use drugs or sell drugs to carry weapons for protection?"  
Tr. 3/3/99 at 160-61.  Although the inquiry regarding Dun-
can's experience with drug dealers commonly carrying weap-
ons for protection raises no eyebrows, see, e.g., United States 
v. Conyers, 118 F.3d 755, 757 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (noting in 
appeal of drug trafficking conviction "those who transport 
drugs often carry (and all too often use) a firearm"), we 
cannot say the same regarding drug users.5  Finding the link 
between drug users and guns tenuous, we look to the founda-
tion of Duncan's opinion testimony.

     The prosecutor framed the question to Duncan as "in [his] 
experience as a patrol officer."  Duncan had testified earlier 
that he had made gun charge arrests about "six or seven 
times."  Tr. 3/3/99 at 148.  He added that he had "recovered 
more than one weapon on a person" and then revised his 
previous estimate to "anywhere from ten to eleven, just a 
general amount."  Id.  After hearing defense counsel's late 
objection to Duncan's response and commenting that she 
would have overruled the objection had it been timely made, 
the trial judge denied defense counsel the opportunity to 
recross-examine Duncan.

__________
     5 As noted, evidence at trial established that Williams was a drug 
user.  See, e.g., Tr. 3/3/99 at 50, 68-69.

     The foundation of Duncan's opinion linking drug users and 
possession of weapons is anything but firm.  Fewer than one 
dozen arrests involving possession of a firearm is not suffi-
cient grounding to qualify him as an expert under Rule 702 of 
the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE), particularly without 
evidence establishing that any of those arrests involved a 
drug user.  If, instead, we view his testimony as having been 
admitted under Rule 701,6 FRE, we question whether Dun-

__________
     6 Rule 701, FRE, allows lay opinion testimony that "is limited to 
those opinions or inferences which are (a) rationally based on the 
perception of the witness and (b) helpful to a clear understanding of 
the witness' testimony or the determination of a fact in issue."  Fed. 
R. Evid. 701.  We afford trial judges broad discretion in admitting 
opinion testimony of lay witnesses.  See, e.g., United States v. 
Pierson, 503 F.2d 173, 176 (D.C. Cir. 1974) (trial judge should have 
broad discretion and "[o]nly a clear abuse of discretion" warrants 
reversal);  see also United States v. Pierce, 136 F.3d 770, 773 (11th 
Cir.) (" 'The ultimate decision as to the admissibility of lay opinion 
testimony is committed to the sound discretion of the district court 
and will not be overturned on appeal unless there is a clear abuse of 
discretion.' ") (quoting United States v. Myers, 972 F.2d 1566, 1576-
77 (11th Cir. 1992)), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 974 (1998).  The leeway 
is due in large part to the opportunity the trial judge ordinarily 
affords opposing counsel to expose a weak foundation through 
cross-examination of the witness.  See, e.g., Pierson, 503 F.2d at 176 
(" 'It is hardly ever reversible error to admit such evidence;  its 
foundation may generally be as conveniently left to cross-
examination.' ") (quoting Central R.R. Co. of N. J. v. Monahan, 11 
F.2d 212, 214 (2d Cir. 1926) (Hand, J.));  see also Daubert v. Merrell 
Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 596 (1993) ("Vigorous 
cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and careful 
instruction on the burden of proof are the traditional and appropri-
ate means of attacking shaky but admissible evidence.").  Neverthe-
less, to admit lay opinion evidence rationally based on the witness's 
perception, a sufficient factual foundation must exist.  See, e.g., 
Carter v. United States, 252 F.2d 608, 617 (D.C. Cir. 1957) (lay 
witnesses may testify "only upon the basis of facts known to them").

 The Office of Legal Education of the Executive Office for United 
States Attorneys provides guidelines to establish a proper founda-
tion for the opinion testimony of a skilled lay observer:

can's answer was rationally based on his perceptions.  He did 
not establish a factual basis for credible opinion testimony 
regarding the likelihood of drug users being armed.7  More-
over, as noted above, trial judges generally rely on the 
structural check of cross-examination in permitting opinion 
testimony with a weak foundation and, for that reason, enjoy 
broad discretion.  But here the trial court refused to grant 
defense counsel's request for an opportunity to recross-
examine Duncan which would have allowed counsel to expose 
Duncan's lack of experience.  We conclude that the district 
court's ruling admitting arguably relevant testimony8 over 
__________
     1. That the witness has, on prior occasions sufficient in num-
     ber to support a reasonable inference of knowledge of or 
     familiarity with a subject, observed particular events, condi-
     tions, or other matters.
          2. That the witness on a certain occasion observed a specific 
     event, condition, or matter of the same nature as previously 
     observed.
          3. That on the basis of his knowledge or familiarity with the 
     event, condition or matter, he has an opinion as to the event, 
     condition or matter involved in the case.
          4. That the statement of the opinion will be helpful to a clear 
     understanding of the testimony of the witness [or] the determi-
     nation of a fact in issue.
     
J. Randolph Maney, Jr. & Ruth E. Lucas, Courtroom Evidence 130 
(Office of Legal Education, Executive Office for United States 
Attorneys (1998) (citing Murl A. Larkin, Federal Evidence Foun-
dations 119-20 (1988)).  Here the prosecutor established neither 
the first nor the second premise above.  She elicited no testimony 
from Duncan regarding any "prior occasions," much less occasions 
"sufficient in number to support a reasonable inference of knowl-
edge," in which he arrested drug users carrying guns or otherwise 
observed drug users carrying guns.

     7 The lack of foundation for this testimony is especially clear 
when compared to the government's practice of eliciting expert 
testimony to establish drug dealers' habits.  See, e.g., United States 
v. Fennell, 53 F.3d 1296, 1300 (D.C. Cir. 1995), order on reh'g, 77 
F.3d 510 (1996).

     8 Assuming a proper foundation, the testimony would tend to 
make less probable the scenario defense counsel had suggested, 
that is, area violence accounted for the gun found in the creekbed.

objection despite the lack of foundation, especially in light of 
its subsequent denial of defense counsel's request for "a very 
brief re-cross," constitutes error.  Cf. United States v. Stock, 
948 F.2d 1299, 1302 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (error to deny cross-
examination of police officer for impeachment).  We now 
consider if the error was harmless.

                                B.

     In determining whether a non-constitutional trial error is 
harmless, we ask whether " 'with fair assurance, after ponder-
ing all that happened without stripping the erroneous action 
from the whole, that the judgment was not substantially 
swayed by the error.' "  United States v. Schaffer, 183 F.3d 
833, 852 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (quoting Kotteakos v. United States, 
328 U.S. 750, 765 (1946)).  In other words, we ask "whether 
the error 'had a substantial or injurious effect or influence in 
determining the jury's verdict.' "  Smart, 98 F.3d at 1390 
(quoting Brecht v. Abrahamson, 507 U.S. 619, 637 (1993) 
(quoting Kotteakos, 328 U.S. at 776)).  If the error had such 
an effect, or if we are left in " 'grave doubt' " about the 
harmlessness of the error,9 we must reverse the conviction.  
Id. (quoting O'Neal v. McAninch, 513 U.S. 432, 435 (1995)).

     On the record below, we can identify only one factor (apart 
from the testimony itself) suggesting the testimony may have 
affected the jury verdict, that is, the prosecutor's reminding 
the jury of Duncan's testimony during her closing argument 
in rebuttal.  See United States v. Rhodes, 886 F.2d 375, 382 
(D.C. Cir. 1989) (prosecutor's closing argument reference to 

__________
     9 The United States Supreme Court has said:  "By 'grave doubt' 
we mean that, in the judge's mind, the matter is so evenly balanced 
that he feels himself in virtual equipoise as to the harmlessness of 
the error."  O'Neal v. McAninch, 513 U.S. 432, 435 (1995).  Ex-
plaining further, the Court described "grave doubt" as "unusual" 
because "[n]ormally a record review will permit a judge to make up 
his or her mind about the matter ... [a]nd indeed a judge has an 
obligation to do so."  Id.

improperly admitted evidence contributed to conclusion that 
error was not harmless).  Because the testimony was elicited 
during redirect examination and recross-examination was de-
nied, defense counsel could have responded to the testimony 
only in her closing argument and could not have responded at 
all to the prosecutor's rebuttal reference to Duncan's testimo-
ny.  Although defense counsel did not, perhaps understand-
ably, request a limiting instruction regarding Duncan's chal-
lenged testimony, she did obtain a limiting instruction as to 
other portions of Duncan's testimony.  See Tr. 3/1/99 4-5, 8-9 
and Tr. 3/4/99 at 105 (instruction limiting use of testimony 
regarding radio call).  The absence of an instruction limiting 
the jury's use of the challenged testimony may have rein-
forced it.  Cf. United States v. Spinner, 152 F.3d 950, 961-62 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (limiting instruction given for some but not 
other "bad acts" evidence may enhance latter's influence on 
jury).  Notwithstanding the prosecutor's statement reminding 
the jury of Duncan's testimony linking drug users and guns, 
we believe the statement, viewed in the context of the entire 
rebuttal closing argument (only one sentence in an argument 
covering ten pages in the record, see Tr. 3/4/99 at 150-59) had 
minor impact.  The prosecutor made the comment in re-
sponse to the defense explanation for discovery of the gun.  
The thrust of her response, however, was the lack of evidence 
to support Williams's theory that guns are endemic to a high 
crime area.

     The most significant factor that negates the error's impact 
is the weight and nature of the evidence against Williams.10  
See generally Stock, 948 F.2d at 1304 (refusal to allow cross-
examination of officer violated confrontation clause but was 

__________
     10 Our dissenting colleague speculates that because the first trial 
resulted in a hung jury, the second trial necessarily presented a 
close case.  See Dis. Op. at 1-2.  We advise caution in assigning 
critical significance to the failure of a different jury, which heard 
different evidence and argument, to reach agreement.  We should 
also hesitate to connect the length of deliberations with the strength 
of the government's case.  But cf. id. (relying on Dallago v. United 
States, 427 F.2d 546 (D.C. Cir. 1969) (five-day deliberation after six-
week trial with 37 witnesses and 175 exhibits)).

harmless because other prosecution evidence "was so much 
more credible than the defense testimony that [the court 
concluded] without reasonable doubt that the jury would have 
found [defendant] guilty").  The government's case was based 
on Duncan's and Reid's observations of Williams as he got out 
of the car and as he fled.  The officers testified that Williams 
first disregarded Duncan's order to remain in the car.  When 
Williams got out, he was "in a crouched position," Tr. 3/3/99 
at 39, and "immediately grabbed for his waistband," id. at 
166.  He "was holding something of some girth," id., and 
refused to obey Duncan's command to show his hands, see id. 
at 167, instead running away with his hands still at his 
waistband.  See id. at 44.  Recounting his pursuit, Duncan 
said that Williams's bumping into the metal railing of the 
footbridge caused a clanking noise as Williams slowed down 
and appeared to discard something.  See, e.g., id. at 45-48.  
When Duncan finally apprehended him, Williams first stated 
"that [Duncan] didn't see him throw anything, and that 
[Duncan] had no case," and then claimed he had thrown his 
drug "works" from the bridge.  Id. at 50.

     As a passenger in a car stopped by the police, Williams's 
immediate flight does not weigh in his favor.11  See Illinois v. 
Wardlow, 120 S. Ct. 673, 676 (2000) (defendant's unprovoked 
flight from officers in area of heavy narcotics trafficking 
supported reasonable suspicion defendant was involved in 
criminal activity).  More significant was the ready discovery 
of a handgun (without rust and slightly damaged--both fac-
tors consistent with having recently fallen from the bridge 
above) where Duncan suspected it would be found and the 
fact that Williams did not deny that he threw something from 
the bridge or that the police found the gun below the bridge.  
Rather, Williams offered an alternative explanation for what 
he threw, which was not found, and for why it was not found.  
The properly admitted evidence leaves little doubt that the 
erroneous admission of the testimony linking drug users and 

__________
     11 The trial judge instructed the jury that evidence of flight may 
be properly considered as a circumstance suggesting guilt but that 
it does not raise a presumption of guilt.  See Tr. 3/4/99 at 104.

guns was harmless.  See United States v. Sanchez-Sotelo, 8 
F.3d 202, 211 (5th Cir. 1993) (error in admitting lay opinion 
testimony without foundation harmless where evidence ali-
unde permitted inference establishing element of crime);  cf. 
United States v. Rhodes, 62 F.3d 1449, 1453 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(error in admitting without foundation prior inconsistent 
statement of witness admitting he and defendant had been 
selling drugs and firearms not sufficiently prejudicial to war-
rant reversal where prosecution established drugs and weap-
ons seized belonged to defendant);  United States v. McCon-
nell, 988 F.2d 530 (5th Cir. 1993) (admission of coconspirator 
statement without foundation constituted reversible error in 
conspiracy conviction where hearsay testimony was "crucial 
link in the chain" between appellants and conspiracy) (em-
phasis added).

     Moreover, although, as noted earlier, defense counsel re-
quested no limiting instruction, the trial judge gave standard 
instructions that the jury is the "sole judge" of the credibility 
of the witnesses, Tr. 4/4/99 at 102, a determination that may 
be affected by whether a witness had an opportunity to 
observe matters about which he testified, see id., and that the 
questions, statements and arguments of the lawyers are not 
evidence.  See id. at 100, 101.  We believe these instructions 
further mitigated any potential prejudice.  See United States 
v. Hawkins, 595 F.2d 751, 755 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (similar 
instructions "provided at least some mitigation of any preju-
dice ... which might have arisen from the prosecutor's 
closing remarks");  Barkley v. United States, 323 F.2d 804, 
808 (D.C. Cir. 1963) (no plain error for failure to give caution-
ary instruction on lay testimony in absence of request and 
where general credibility instruction given).  But cf. United 
States v. Watson, 171 F.3d 695, 700-02 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
(standard jury instructions notwithstanding, prosecutor's mis-
statement of evidence in closing regarding central issue in 
close case not harmless error).

     In addition, Duncan's testimony elicited by the prosecution 
was only partially objectionable.  The reference to drug users 
did not stand alone;  rather, the prosecution referred to drug 
users and drug dealers.  The fact that the jury heard unob-

jectionable testimony together with objectionable testimony 
may have "buried," and therefore minimized, the objectiona-
ble portion.

     For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the brief 
testimony and argument linking drug users and guns did not 
have a "substantial effect" on the verdict nor are we left in 
"grave doubt" regarding the harmlessness of the error.  Re-
viewing the evidence against Williams, we are confident the 
jury focused on Duncan's and Reid's observations of Williams 
during the stop and pursuit and on other inculpatory evi-
dence, including the location and condition of the gun re-
trieved, not on Duncan's affirmative response to a general 
proposition made at the very end of his lengthy testimony.  
Accordingly, we find the error harmless and affirm Williams's 
conviction.

                                                      So ordered.

     Silberman, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  I agree with the 
majority that the trial judge committed error in this case, but 
I disagree that the error was harmless.

     This was a close case.  Although the officers testified that 
appellant was acting as if he had a gun, no one saw appellant 
with one, and there were no fingerprints on the gun.  See 
Maj. Op. at 3.  Appellant's flight is neither here nor there 
with respect to whether he possessed a firearm;  flight is 
equally indicative of appellant's possession of the illegal drugs 
he claimed to have.  See Maj. Op. at 11.  There is a vast 
difference between using flight as the basis for a reasonable 
suspicion of some unknown criminal activity, see Illinois v. 
Wardlow, 120 S. Ct. 673, 676 (2000), and using flight here to 
link appellant to a gun found in his vicinity.  While some 
evidence was at least suggestive of appellant's guilt (his 
behavior, the condition of the gun), it was hardly overwhelm-
ing.  I find it difficult to believe a jury found defendant guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt.

     The majority considers the possibility that the jury did not 
pay attention to Officer Duncan's statement with respect to 
drug users and guns, hypothesizing that the officer's state-
ment with respect to drug dealers overshadowed it.  See Maj. 
Op. at 12-13.  But I find that unlikely.  If, as we all agree, a 
statement that "drug dealers commonly carry weapons for 
protection raises no eyebrows," Maj. Op. at 6, it is probable 
the jury focused on the new information that the same is true 
of drug users.  Since appellant was an admitted drug user--
he argued as much to the jury--the likelihood that the jury 
glossed over Officer Duncan's statement is minuscule.  And 
the prejudicial statement cuts right to the heart of the case:  
Was this drug user in possession of a gun?

     It is particularly troubling that, as the court's opinion 
recounts, the first jury to consider this case could not reach a 
decision, resulting in a mistrial.  See Maj. Op. at 3-4.1  It 

__________
     1 The majority does not contend-nor could it-that the first trial's 
hung jury is irrelevant.  See Maj. Op. at 10 n.10.  Combined with 
the weakness of the government's case it should trouble the majori-
ty as much as it does me.

was only in the second trial, in which Officer Duncan's 
prejudicial statement about drug users and weapons was 
introduced, a statement repeated by the prosecutor during 
her summation, that appellant was convicted.  Since the 
inquiry we undertake asks whether "with fair assurance, after 
pondering all that happened without stripping away the erro-
neous action from the whole, ... the [jury's] judgment was 
not substantially swayed by the error," the original mistrial is 
undoubtedly relevant.  United States v. Schaffer, 183 F.3d 
833, 852 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  The difficulty the first jury had 
with this case amply demonstrates that we are not consider-
ing "an error [that] may be more freely disregarded [because] 
the evidence of defendant's guilt was overwhelming, since in 
such a case the outcome would almost surely have been the 
same despite the error."  Charles A. Wright, 3A Fed. Prac. & 
Proc. Crim.2d s 854 (1982).  If we are willing to take into 
consideration the length of jury deliberations in our harmless 
error review, see Dallago v. United States, 427 F.2d 546, 559 
(D.C. Cir. 1969) ("The jury deliberated for five days, and one 
would expect that if the evidence of guilt was overwhelming 
the jury would have succumbed much sooner."), surely we 
must consider the import of the hung jury.

     Under these circumstances, I would remand for a new trial.

                                                                      