                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 3, 2000       Decided July 25, 2000 

                           No. 99-1236

             Chemical Manufacturers Association and 
                Cement Kiln Recycling Coalition, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                            Respondent

             Environmental Technology Council, Inc., 
                            Intervenor

                        Consolidated with 
                             99-1514

On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
Environmental Protection Agency

     Richard G. Stoll argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
him on the briefs were David F. Zoll, Ronald A. Shipley, 

Michael W. Steinberg, Joshua D. Sarnoff and David P. 
Novello.

     Christopher S. Vaden, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief 
were Peter D. Coppelman, Acting Assistant Attorney Gener-
al, and Steven E. Silverman, Attorney, Environmental Pro-
tection Agency.

     David R. Case was on the brief for intervenor Environmen-
tal Technology Council, Inc.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Dissenting Opinion filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners challenge an Environ-
mental Protection Agency rule establishing an unusual bifur-
cated schedule for hazardous waste combustors to comply 
with strict new emission standards.  To meet the new stan-
dards, combustors must either modify existing facilities and 
processes to bring emission levels below the new limits or 
cease burning hazardous waste altogether.  Combustors 
electing to make the necessary changes have three years to 
comply, but under EPA's "early cessation" program, combu-
stors that find it not cost-effective to make the required 
modifications must cease burning hazardous waste within two 
years.  Although we reject petitioners' argument that EPA 
lacks statutory authority to implement an early cessation 
program, we vacate the rule because, as the Agency concedes, 
it failed to establish that this particular early cessation pro-
gram, which imposes substantial costs on hazardous waste 
combustors, will have any environmental or health benefits.

                                I.

     Three types of businesses burn hazardous waste.  Profes-
sional hazardous waste treatment and disposal companies 
operate large commercial incinerators, charging fees to dis-

pose of hazardous wastes generated by their customers.  
Some hazardous waste producers, such as chemical manufac-
turers, operate their own on-site incinerators to dispose of 
waste generated in the manufacturing process.  Cement man-
ufacturers operate kilns in which they occasionally supple-
ment the fossil fuels they burn with hazardous waste to 
generate additional heat energy, to recover usable materials 
from treated waste, and to earn additional revenue from 
disposal fees.  Petitioners Chemical Manufacturers Associa-
tion and Cement Kiln Recycling Coalition represent the latter 
two types of hazardous waste combustors.  Environmental 
Technology Council, intervenor in support of EPA's rule, 
represents commercial waste incinerators.

     All three types of hazardous waste combustors are regulat-
ed by Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery 
Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. ss 6901 et seq., which "establishes a 
comprehensive 'cradle-to-grave' regulatory program for the 
treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous waste."  Horse-
head Resource Dev. Co. v. Browner, 16 F.3d 1246, 1252 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994).  Existing EPA standards, promulgated pursuant 
to RCRA and upheld for the most part in Horsehead, require 
hazardous waste combustors to operate under conditions suf-
ficient "to protect human health and the environment."  42 
U.S.C. s 6924(a).

     The Clean Air Act ("CAA"), 42 U.S.C. ss 7401 et seq., 
foregoing RCRA's risk-based approach in favor of technology-
based regulation, directs EPA to establish emission standards 
for hazardous air pollutants based on the "maximum achiev-
able control technology" known as MACT.  42 U.S.C. 
s 7412(g)(2).  The EPA Administrator must list categories 
and subcategories of hazardous air pollutant emissions 
sources, then set MACT standards for each category at a 
level

     requir[ing] the maximum degree of reduction in emis-
     sions of the hazardous air pollutants subject to this 
     section (including a prohibition on such emissions, where 
     achievable) that the Administrator, taking into consider-
     ation the cost of achieving such emission reduction, and 
     any non-air quality health and environmental impacts 
     and energy requirements, determines is achievable for 
     
     new or existing sources in the category or subcategory to 
     which such emission standard applies.
     
42 U.S.C. s 7412(d)(2).  Once EPA sets the emission stan-
dards, the Act, in language central to this case, requires the 
Agency to establish a "compliance date or dates for each 
category or subcategory of existing sources, which shall pro-
vide for compliance as expeditiously as practicable, but in no 
event later than 3 years after the effective date of such 
standard."  42 U.S.C. s 7412(i)(3)(A).  Sources demonstrat-
ing a need for additional time to complete installation of 
pollution control equipment qualify for a one-year extension.  
42 U.S.C. s 7412(i)(3)(B).

     Acting pursuant to RCRA and the Clean Air Act, EPA 
promulgated revised emission standards for hazardous waste 
combustors.  See Revised Standards for Hazardous Waste 
Combustors, 61 Fed. Reg. 17,358 (1996).  In the original 
notice of proposed rulemaking, EPA predicted that most 
affected combustors would have to make substantial modifica-
tions to their equipment in order to reduce emissions to levels 
mandated by the new standards.  In order to allow sufficient 
time for combustors to implement necessary modifications, 
EPA proposed its usual three-year compliance period.  Id. at 
17,416.

     The Agency recognized that because certain combustors, 
namely kilns and on-site incinerators, burn hazardous waste 
as an adjunct to their primary business, they might find it 
more feasible to stop burning hazardous waste altogether 
rather than invest in new pollution controls.  Cement kilns 
could switch to non-hazardous fuels, and operators of on-site 
incinerators might find it more cost-effective to contract with 
commercial hazardous waste incinerators.  To "ensure that 
only those facilities that plan to comply with the new regula-
tions are allowed to burn hazardous waste during the [three-
year] compliance period," id., EPA proposed an early cessa-
tion program under which kilns and on-site incinerators that 
decide against making the improvements necessary to contin-
ue burning hazardous waste under the new standards would 
be required to "immediately stop burning hazardous waste 
when the owner or operator first determines that [compliance 
will not be achieved] by the applicable date."  Id.

     After considering public comment, EPA adopted a final 
rule requiring owners and operators of hazardous waste 
combustion facilities to submit a Notification of Intent to 
Comply, known as a "NIC," within a year of the new stan-
dards' effective date.  See Hazardous Waste Combustors;  
Revised Standards;  Final Rule, 63 Fed. Reg. 33,782, 33,806-
09 (1998).  Each combustor must indicate in the NIC whether 
it plans to comply, i.e., whether it plans to continue burning 
hazardous wastes under the new standards, and if so, what 
emission-control measures it will take to ensure timely com-
pliance.  Combustors indicating an intent to comply must file 
a two-year Progress Report describing in detail all compli-
ance modifications planned and undertaken;  they must com-
ply with the new standards within three years.  Id. at 33,806.  
Kilns and on-site incinerators that indicate an "intent not to 
comply"--the focus of this case--must cease burning hazard-
ous waste within two years of the effective date.  The Agency 
explained the process as follows:

     The source can use the NIC to notify either the source's 
     intent to come into compliance with the new standards, 
     or the source's intent not to come into compliance with 
     the new standards. The NIC must be submitted to the 
     permitting agency within a year of the final standards 
     being promulgated, and the Progress Report within two 
     years.
     
     ....
     
     The NIC will not serve as a basis for requiring facilities 
     to cease burning hazardous waste if they intend to 
     comply with the emission standards of this Subpart....  
     EPA would like to clarify that its intent has never been 
     to shut a source down completely.  The source might be 
     required to cease burning hazardous waste;  however, it 
     would not be precluded from burning non-hazardous 
     waste or other alternative fuels. However, those sources 
     who indicate in the NIC their intent not to comply with 
     the applicable emission control requirements of this Sub-
     part will be required to stop burning hazardous waste 
     
     within two years of the effective date of the emission 
     control requirements.
     
Id. at 33,806-07.

     Until this rulemaking, EPA had always set a single compli-
ance date for each category of emission source;  never before 
had it required emission sources to choose between complying 
or ceasing the regulated activity.  Several commenters ob-
jected to the early cessation program, arguing that EPA lacks 
statutory authority to impose such an unprecedented require-
ment.  The Agency responded:

     EPA believes that compliance as expeditiously as practi-
     cable will have numerous benefits for human health and 
     the environment.  In particular, for those sources that do 
     not intend to ultimately come into compliance with the 
     emission standards of this Subpart, expeditious compli-
     ance would be achieved by ceasing to burn hazardous 
     waste.  The Agency anticipates that numerous sources 
     will choose not to come into compliance with the require-
     ments of this rule, and will cease burning hazardous 
     waste prior to issuance of the rule or at some later date, 
     but prior to the compliance date.  This section is intend-
     ed to expeditiously limit the burning of hazardous waste 
     by those sources who do not intend to come into compli-
     ance with the requirements of the emission standards of 
     this Subpart, but continue to burn hazardous waste after 
     the effective date of the emission standards of this 
     Subpart.  These sources are, quite simply, able to meet 
     the standards earlier than the three years allowed for 
     sources which will continue to burn hazardous waste.  
     Thus, for this class of facilities, EPA is creating a means 
     of compliance "as expeditiously as practicable."
     
Id. at 33,810.

     Petitioners challenge the early cessation program, claiming 
that although it imposes substantial costs, it will produce no 
environmental benefits because hazardous waste currently 
burned by kilns and on-site incinerators will simply be shifted 
to commercial incinerators operating under the same emission 

standards.  Petitioners also contend that because CAA sec-
tion 112(i)(3), 42 U.S.C. s 7412(i)(3), requires EPA to set 
compliance dates based on the technical feasibility of attain-
ing the MACT standards, once EPA set a three-year dead-
line, it had no authority to require earlier cessation.  Finally, 
petitioners challenge the Notice of Intent to Comply and the 
two-year Progress Report filing requirements.

     EPA, supported by intervenor Environmental Technology 
Council, responds that because some sources will choose to 
comply by ceasing to burn hazardous waste rather than 
installing new pollution controls, and because that method of 
compliance can be achieved well before the three-year compli-
ance date, early cessation is required by section 112(i)(3)(A)'s 
"compliance as expeditiously as practicable" mandate.  EPA 
defends the NIC and Progress Report requirements as not 
only critical to enforcing the early cessation rule, but also as 
an important means of increasing public participation in 
RCRA's permit modification process.

                               II.

     We begin with Petitioners' argument that the early cessa-
tion program is arbitrary and capricious and exceeds EPA's 
authority under the Clean Air Act.  According to petitioners, 
CAA section 112(i)(3)(A) requires EPA to set compliance 
dates based only on "the technical ability of facilities to attain 
timely compliance with the MACT standards."  Once EPA 
determined that combustors need three years to comply, 
petitioners argue, then "no provision of the CAA provides any 
support for (1) specifying early compliance dates based on 
intentions to comply or (2) forcing facilities to cease burning 
waste prior to the established compliance date."

     This argument requires little discussion.  Petitioners point 
to nothing in either the CAA or RCRA that requires EPA to 
set a single uniform compliance date for all combustors.  In 
fact, as the Agency points out, the CAA speaks in terms of 
"compliance date or dates" and requires "compliance as expe-
ditiously as practicable, but in no event later than 3 years 
after the effective date of such standard."  42 U.S.C. 

7412(i)(3)(A) (emphasis added).  Responding to this directive, 
the Agency determined that combustors can achieve "compli-
ance" not just through installation of pollution controls, but 
also through cessation of hazardous waste combustion.  The 
Agency also determined that cessation can be accomplished 
more "expeditiously" than other compliance methods such as 
pollution controls.  "These sources are, quite simply, able to 
meet the standards earlier than the three years allowed for 
sources which will continue to burn hazardous waste."  63 
Fed. Reg. at 33,810.  Thus, the Agency argues, its early 
cessation rule is just an alternative compliance date tailored 
to an individual source's chosen method of compliance.  "As a 
practical matter," the Agency explains in its brief, the early 
cessation rule simply "established two subcategories for com-
pliance purposes here:  sources complying by ceasing to burn 
hazardous wastes, and sources complying by other means 
(adding air pollution control devices, adopting waste mini-
mization process changes, etc.)."  Because EPA determined 
that compliance by cessation requires less time than compli-
ance through installation of pollution controls, it in effect set 
two different compliance dates depending on which route a 
particular combustor elects to take.

     Were there nothing more to this case, we would agree with 
EPA that section 112(i)(3)(A)'s requirement of "compliance as 
expeditiously as practicable" can be read to provide authority 
for an early cessation program.  Indeed, at oral argument 
petitioners conceded that even under their reading of the 
CAA, EPA could accomplish precisely the same result by 
setting the compliance date for all combustors at two years 
rather than three and then granting one-year extensions to 
combustors electing to comply by installing emission control 
devices.  See 42 U.S.C. 7412(i)(3)(B) (authorizing the Admin-
istrator to issue extension permits to sources "if such addi-
tional period is necessary for the installation of controls.")

     But this case is not so simple.  EPA claimed in the 
rulemaking that its early cessation requirement would have 
"numerous benefits for human health and the environment."  

63 Fed. Reg. at 33,810.  Yet as the Agency now acknowl-
edges, it neither pointed out what those benefits would be nor 
explained how any such benefits might result from the early 
cessation program.  In issuing the rule, moreover, EPA 
expressly recognized that the early cessation program would 
result in hazardous waste being shifted away from kilns and 
on-site incinerators that comply with existing RCRA stan-
dards but elect to cease burning hazardous waste rather than 
meet the new MACT standards.  During the year between 
the early cessation and compliance dates, hazardous waste 
will simply be redirected to other facilities to be burned under 
essentially the same conditions.

     Combustion systems that can no longer cover costs ... 
     are projected to stop burning hazardous waste.  Hazard-
     ous wastes from these systems will likely be reallocated 
     to other viable combustion systems at the same facility if 
     there is sufficient capacity, alternative combustion facili-
     ties that continue burning, or waste management alterna-
     tives (e.g., solvent reclamation).  Because combustion is 
     likely to remain the lowest cost option, we expect most 
     reallocated wastes will continue to be managed at com-
     bustion facilities.
     
NESHAPS:  Final Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants 
for Hazardous Waste Combustors, 64 Fed. Reg. 52,828, 
53,017 (1999).  In other words, the early cessation rule will 
not significantly reduce the amount of hazardous waste pro-
duced, the amount of hazardous waste burned, or the levels of 
hazardous air pollutant emissions.  It will instead merely 
reallocate which combustion facilities process the same haz-
ardous waste under the same conditions.  At oral argument, 
EPA counsel candidly conceded that we must resolve this 
case on the assumption that the early cessation program may 
have no environmental benefits at all.  Indeed, as petitioners 
point out, to the extent that transporting hazardous waste to 
commercial incinerators increases the risk of leakage, spills, 
or contamination, early cessation might even result in net 
environmental damage.

     In view of the state of this record and EPA's concessions, 
we think that the Agency's action represents a classic case of 
arbitrary and capricious rulemaking.  Not only did the Agen-
cy fail to "articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action 
including a rational connection between the facts found and 
the choice made," Motor Vehicle Mfr. Ass'n v. State Farm 
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (internal quotation 
marks omitted), but by claiming "numerous benefits for hu-
man health and the environment," 63 Fed. Reg. at 33,810, 
where none were found, EPA "offered an explanation for its 
decision that runs counter to the evidence before the agency," 
State Farm, 463 U.S. at 43.

     According to EPA, however, petitioners' arguments based 
on the absence of health or environmental benefits "miss the 
point."  The point, the Environmental Protection Agency tells 
us, is not environmental protection.  Instead, the Agency 
argues, it must implement the early cessation program re-
gardless of environmental impact because CAA section 
112(i)(3)(A) requires "compliance as expeditiously as practica-
ble" and that phrase "appears to mandate EPA's selection of 
a two-year compliance date for sources choosing the compli-
ance option of ceasing to burn hazardous wastes."  EPA's 
argument goes like this:  (1) "Compliance" with an emission 
standard must include "virtually any means of avoiding non-
compliance."  (2) "Compliance date" can thus be interpreted 
to include "the date that a source, subject to the rule because 
it burns hazardous waste, ceases air emissions attributable to 
burning those wastes."  (3) Since "compliance" means cessa-
tion as well as installation of pollution controls, then "compli-
ance as expeditiously as practicable" must require early ces-
sation because cessation can be accomplished sooner than 
installation of emission-control equipment.  (4) Allowing com-
bustors intending to cease burning hazardous waste a full 
three years to continue burning would violate the statute's 
command to "provide for compliance as expeditiously as 
practicable" regardless of the environmental effect of requir-
ing early cessation.

     As with any question of statutory interpretation, we first 
ask "whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise 
question at issue."  Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984).  In 
this case, the answer is no.  Nothing in the Clean Air Act 
addresses whether "compliance as expeditiously as practica-
ble" requires early cessation.  Indeed, as the Agency con-
cedes, neither the Act nor its legislative history suggests that 
Congress ever considered early cessation or the possibility 
that if EPA imposes a cessation deadline before a compliance 
deadline, sources not subject to early cessation but which 
burn no cleaner would take up the slack during the interim 
and produce the very same emissions level.

     Since the Clean Air Act is "silent or ambiguous with 
respect to the specific issue," id. at 843, we ask whether the 
Agency's interpretation of section 112(i)(3)(A) to mandate 
early cessation absent environmental benefit is "a permissible 
construction of the statute," id., i.e., whether it is "reasonable 
and consistent with the statute's purpose."  Independent Ins. 
Agents of Am., Inc. v. Hawke, 211 F.3d 638, 643 (D.C. Cir. 
2000).  The Clean Air Act's purpose is "to protect and 
enhance the quality of the Nation's air resources so as to 
promote the public health and welfare and the productive 
capacity of its population," 42 U.S.C. s 7401(b)(1), constrained 
of course by section 112(i)(3)'s explicit concern over practica-
bility.  In its rulemaking, EPA, apparently recognizing that 
its regulations must be consistent with the Clean Air Act's 
goals, claimed that early cessation "will have numerous bene-
fits for human health and the environment."  63 Fed. Reg. at 
33,810.  But having realized it had made no findings to 
support this claim, the Agency simply abandoned any attempt 
to reconcile its reading of section 112(i)(3)(A) with the stat-
ute's objectives.  Indeed, nothing in the record suggests the 
early cessation program will, directly or indirectly, further 
the Clean Air Act's environmental goals.

     We think it unreasonable for the Agency to have interpret-
ed the phrase "compliance as expeditiously as practicable" as 

requiring it to impose costly obligations on regulated entities 
without regard to the Clean Air Act's purpose.  See, e.g., 
United States Nat'l Bank of Oregon v. Independent Ins. 
Agents of Am., Inc., 508 U.S. 439, 455 (1993) ("Over and over 
we have stressed that '[i]n expounding a statute, we must not 
be guided by a single sentence or member of a sentence, but 
look to the provisions of the whole law, and to its object and 
policy.' ") (quoting United States v. Heirs of Boisdore, 49 U.S. 
(8 How.) 113, 122 (1849)).  As we said in Continental Air 
Lines, Inc. v. DOT, "the critical point is whether the agency 
has advanced what the Chevron Court called 'a reasonable 
explanation for its conclusion that the regulations serve the 
... objectives [in question].' "  843 F.2d 1444, 1452 (D.C. Cir. 
1988) (quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 863) (alteration in origi-
nal).  Here, EPA has failed to do so.  See also, e.g., Dole v. 
United Steelworkers of America, 494 U.S. 26, 37 (1990) 
(rejecting agency's interpretation of a statute where "none of 
Congress' enumerated purposes would be served").

     Unlike Chevron, see dissenting op. at 2-3, this case does 
not involve a policy disagreement between this court and 
EPA over which of two possible interpretations would best 
achieve the Clean Air Act's goals.  Here, the Agency readily 
concedes it has no evidence to suggest the challenged pro-
gram is consistent with the Act's aims.  See Continental Air 
Lines, 843 F.2d at 1453 ("A judicial decision to the effect that 
an agency's interpretation frustrates the policies of Congress 
(or is inconsistent with the statutory mandate) is a far cry 
from a decision that the agency's approach fails best to 
promote Congress' purposes.").  Given the absence of envi-
ronmental benefits--indeed, the possibility of environmental 
harm--EPA violated the basic requirement that its actions 
must "not deviate from or ignore the ascertainable legislative 
intent."  Small Refiner Lead Phase-Down Task Force v. 
EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 520 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (internal quotation 
marks omitted).

     In reaching this conclusion, we emphasize that we do not 
question EPA's authority under the Clean Air Act to imple-

ment an early cessation program if it determines through 
reasoned decisionmaking that the program would produce 
environmental or health benefits.  For example, if hazardous 
waste combustors who elect to comply with the MACT stan-
dards by modifying their processes or equipment, phase in 
their new controls gradually over the three-year compliance 
period, it may well be that during the third year, these 
sources would be burning under much cleaner conditions.  In 
that case, the hazardous waste that would have been burned 
by kilns and on-site incinerators would be redirected to 
facilities that are closer to compliance with the new stan-
dards, thus producing real environmental benefits.  As the 
Agency concedes, however, the record contains no evidence of 
such benefits.

                               III.

     We turn finally to petitioners' challenge to the NIC and 
Progress Report requirements.  EPA asserts that although 
these requirements were implemented primarily as means of 
enforcing the early cessation rule, they serve the independent 
purpose of increasing public participation in the RCRA per-
mit modification process which this rule streamlined.  Peti-
tioners disagree, claiming not only that the reporting require-
ments are integrally related to the early cessation rule, but 
that they go far beyond the level of disclosure and public 
participation required under previous RCRA regulations.

     Because it is impossible for us to determine from this 
record that EPA would have promulgated the NIC and 
Progress Report requirements absent the early cessation 
rule, we must vacate these provisions as well.  See, e.g., Davis 
County Solid Waste Management v. E.P.A., 108 F.3d 1454, 
1459 (D.C. Cir. 1997) ("Severance and affirmance of a portion 
of an administrative regulation is improper if there is sub-
stantial doubt that the agency would have adopted the sev-
ered portion on its own." (internal quotation marks omitted)).  
Of course, this leaves EPA free to promulgate new reporting 
requirements if it has some independent basis for doing so, 
consistent with the statutes' purposes.

     The petition for review is granted and the rule is vacated.

                                                                          So ordered.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  While the majority 
correctly describes EPA's bifurcated compliance program as 
"unusual," EPA sees the compliance mechanism as an innova-
tive approach to implementing a congressional command.  
However it is styled, as judges, we cannot second guess 
EPA's approach as long as the agency acted pursuant to 
statutory authority and did so reasonably.  Here, EPA de-
vised a reasonable approach to implement a reasonable inter-
pretation of a congressional mandate to achieve "compliance 
as expeditiously as practicable."  Therefore, I would uphold 
the early cessation program as permissible under Chevron 
U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 
U.S. 837 (1984), and as a reasonable, lawful agency action.

     I agree with the majority that section 112(i)(3)(A) vests 
EPA with the statutory authority to implement a bifurcated 
early cessation program.  See Maj. Op. at 7-8.  I also agree 
that EPA failed to substantiate its claim of health and envi-
ronmental benefit associated with the implementation of the 
program.  See id. at 9.  I part company with the majority 
when it reads section 112(i)(3)(A) to require EPA to conduct 
an environmental impact analysis before ordering "compli-
ance as expeditiously as practicable."  I accept the majority's 
general premise that Congress intended the Clean Air Act, 42 
U.S.C. s 7401 et seq. (1994), to further the goals of achieving 
environmental and health benefits.  However, nowhere in 
section 112(i)(3)(A) does Congress order EPA to consider 
separately environmental or health benefits in carrying out 
the command to implement "compliance as expeditiously as 
practicable."  It thus would appear at least reasonable to 
conclude that Congress itself determined that the statutorily 
mandated action by EPA of requiring such compliance is in 
furtherance of the general goal of the statute, without the 
agency's considering anew whether its specific acts also fur-
ther general goals.

     For the reasons set forth by the majority, tempered by 
Congress's decision not to impose a regulation-specific re-
quirement concerning environmental and health benefits, I 
agree that "section 112(i)(3)(A)'s requirement of 'compliance 
as expeditiously as practicable' can be read to provide author-
ity for an early cessation program."  Maj. Op. at 8.  Once 
that is said, I do not see that we have any other choice than 
to deny the petition for review and uphold the interpretation 
of EPA.  This is precisely the teaching of Chevron.  In 
Chevron itself, the Supreme Court reviewed a decision of this 
court setting aside an interpretation by EPA of a Clean Air 
Act provision in a fashion that did not in the view of this court 
advance the overall goals of the statutorily established pro-
gram that EPA was administering.  See Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc. v. Gorsuch, 685 F.2d 718, 727 (D.C. Cir. 
1982).  In the landmark Chevron decision, the Supreme Court 
reversed, and established the overriding principle to which 
the majority pays lip service.  In Chevron, the High Court 
emphasized that the sort of policy considerations inherent in 
decisions as to means of implementation "are more properly 
addressed to legislators or administrators, not to judges."  
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 864.  Just so here.  Where the interpre-
tation by the agency otherwise survives the two-step analysis 
under Chevron, I do not see how this court can strike that 
interpretation as unreasonable merely on the basis that it 
does not in our view advance the overriding policy of the 
statutory scheme.

     True, Congress passed the Clean Air Act "to protect and 
enhance the quality of the Nation's air resources so as to 
promote the public health and welfare and the productive 
capacity of its population."  42 U.S.C. s 7401(b)(1);  see Maj. 
Op. at 11.  However, the Clean Air Act contains hundreds of 
specific commands to EPA from Congress.  Some directives 
explicitly tell EPA to consider, inter alia, environmental 
impact, cost considerations, or technological feasibility.  Oth-
ers direct EPA to engage in managerial functions pursuant to 
the environmental, cost, technological, or other factors which 

prompted Congress to move EPA to action.  Here, EPA 
created a rule to execute a managerial function established by 
statute.  EPA did nothing to frustrate the Clean Air Act's 
broader goal of promoting the health, welfare, or productivity 
of the public.  We can ask no more.

     Nor is American Petroleum Institute v. EPA, 52 F.3d 1113 
(D.C. Cir. 1995), relied upon by petitioners to the contrary.  
Indeed, that decision supports the position of EPA, not that 
of the petitioners.  In API, we considered a petition seeking 
review of EPA regulations promulgated pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
s 7545(k)(1).  That section, also part of the Clean Air Act, 
empowered EPA to "establish[ ] requirements for reformulat-
ed gasoline to be used in gasoline-fueled vehicles in specified 
nonattainment areas."  42 U.S.C. s 7545(k)(1).  The statute 
mandated that the regulations were to be directed toward 
"the greatest reduction in emissions of ozone forming volatile 
organic compounds ... and emissions of toxic air pollutants 
... achievable through the reformulation of conventional 
gasoline...."  Id.  EPA issued regulations directed toward 
achieving not only the specified statutory goals, but also 
toward an increase in the use of renewable resources--no 
doubt a laudable goal, but not one specified by Congress in 
the empowering Act.  We granted the petition for review, and 
struck down the regulations, precisely because EPA had used 
its regulatory proceeding to pursue goals beyond those set 
forth in the empowering statute.  Today, the majority vacates 
another set of EPA regulations because EPA did not pursue 
goals not specified by Congress in the empowering sections 
under which EPA operated in the promulgation of the regula-
tions.  I am not suggesting that it would have been unreason-
able for EPA to have considered the overall goals as urged by 
the majority, but I do not see how under Chevron analysis it 
is within our jurisdiction to demand that EPA pursue the 
general statutory goals.  The majority embarks on a danger-
ous course by using 42 U.S.C. s 7401(b)(1) as the means for a 
court to act as a superlegislator and rewrite the Clean Air Act 
to impose substantive requirements on EPA--a course forbid-
den by the Supreme Court in Chevron.

     Finding nothing illegal in EPA's choice of means to imple-
ment "compliance as expeditiously as practicable," I dissent.

                                                                      