                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 5, 2002   Decided October 18, 2002 

                           No. 01-5376

                     Tulare County, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

           George W. Bush, in his official capacity as 
       President of the United States of America, et al., 
                            Appellees

           Natural Resources Defense Council, et al., 
                           Intervenors

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv02560)

     Gary G. Stevens argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellants.

     Susan Pacholski, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellees.  With her on the brief were 
Ellen J. Durkee, Michael Gheleta and Ann Navaro, Attor-
neys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Andrew E. Wetzler argued the cause for intervenors Natu-
ral Resources Defense Council, et al.  With him on the brief 
were Nathaniel S.W. Lawrence, Michael R. Sherwood, Anne 
Harper and James S. Pew.

     Raissa S. Lerner, Deputy Attorney General, Attorney Gen-
eral's Office of the State of California, argued the cause for 
intervenor People of the State of California.  With her on the 
brief were Bill Lockyer, Attorney General, Richard M. 
Frank, Chief Assistant Attorney General and Theodora Ber-
ger, Senior Assistant Attorney General.

     Before:  Edwards and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  This is the second case we decide 
today involving a challenge to Presidential authority under 
the Antiquities Act of 1906 ("Act"), 16 U.S.C. s 431 (2000).  
In Mountain States v. Bush, slip op. at 1, ___ F.3d ____ (D.C. 
Cir. Oct. 18, 2002), the court, upon de novo review, affirmed 
the dismissal of the complaint, holding that the complaint, 
which challenged a series of monument designations under 
the Act, contained insufficient factual allegations under Fed-
eral Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a) to trigger ultra vires review 
of the President's Proclamations.  Id. at 8-10.  The court also 
held that the complaint failed as a matter of law insofar as it 
alleged that the Proclamations violated the plain terms of the 
Antiquities Act and other federal statutes.  Id. at 8, 10-11.  
We likewise hold, upon de novo review, that the complaint in 
the instant case fails for the same reasons.  Accordingly, we 
affirm the dismissal of the complaint for lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction and for failure to state a claim upon which 
relief may be granted pursuant to Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6).

                                I.

     In April 2000 President Clinton established by proclama-
tion the Giant Sequoia National Monument pursuant to his 
authority under the Antiquities Act. Proclamation 7295, 65 
Fed. Reg. 24,095 (Apr. 15, 2000).  The Monument, which 
encompasses 327,769 acres of land in the Sequoia National 
Forest in south-central California, contains groves of giant 
sequoias, the world's largest trees, and their surrounding 
ecosystem.  Id. at 24,095-97, 24,100.

     Tulare County, which contains land near and within the 
Grand Sequoia National Monument ("Monument"), along with 
a number of other public and private entities that use the 
Monument area for business or recreational purposes (herein-
after "Tulare County"), filed a complaint seeking declaratory 
and injunctive relief.  Tulare County alleged that the Procla-
mation violated various provisions of the Antiquities Act and 
the Property Clause of the Constitution, as well as the 
National Forest Management Act, the National Environmen-
tal Policy Act, and the parties' existing rights under a prior 
mediated settlement agreement.  The district court, conclud-
ing that only facial review was appropriate, dismissed the 
complaint.  Tulare County v. Bush, 185 F. Supp. 2d 18 
(D.D.C. 2001).

                               II.

     On appeal, Tulare County contends that in dismissing its 
complaint prior to discovery, the district court erred in failing 
to accept as true the facts alleged in the complaint and in 
limiting its review to the face of the Proclamation rather than 
reviewing the President's discretionary factual determina-
tions.  Tulare County does not contend that the President 
lacks authority under the Antiquities Act to proclaim national 
monuments like Giant Sequoia, as the Supreme Court has 
long upheld such authority.  Cappaert v. United States, 426 
U.S. 128, 142 (1976);  Cameron v. United States, 252 U.S. 450, 
455 (1920).  Rather, in Counts 1-4 of the complaint, Tulare 
County alleged that the Proclamation violated the Antiquities 
Act because it:  (1) failed to identify the objects of historic or 

scientific interest with reasonable specificity;  (2) designated 
as the basis for the Monument objects that do not qualify 
under the Act;  (3) did not confine the size of the Monument 
"to the smallest area compatible with proper care and man-
agement of the objects to be protected," 16 U.S.C. s 431;  and 
(4) increased the likelihood of harm by fires to any objects of 
alleged historic or scientific interest within the Monument 
rather than protecting those objects.  In Count 5, Tulare 
County argued that, absent judicial review of the President's 
action under the Antiquities Act, the statute constitutes an 
unconstitutional delegation of congressional authority.  The 
remaining counts alleged that other federal statutes barred 
the Proclamation and that the Proclamation violated extant 
legal rights arising from a mediated settlement agreement 
with the National Forest Service prior to the Proclamation.

     The Antiquities Act provides, in relevant part, that the 
President, "in his discretion" may declare "historic landmarks 
... and other objects of historic or scientific interest ... 
situated upon [federal] lands ... to be national monuments, 
and may reserve ... parcels of land ... confined to the 
smallest area compatible with the proper care and manage-
ment of the objects to be protected...."  16 U.S.C. s 431.  
The court pointed out in Mountain States, after reviewing 
Supreme Court authority discussing the scope of judicial 
review of discretionary Presidential decisionmaking, that the 
court "is necessarily sensitive to pleading requirements 
where, as here, it is asked to review the President's actions 
under a statute that confers very broad discretion on the 
President and separation of powers concerns are presented."  
Mountain States, slip op. at 9, ___ F.3d at ____.  Acknowl-
edging that Congress has entrusted the courts with responsi-
bility for determining the limits of statutory grants of author-
ity, id. at 8, the court nonetheless declined to engage in ultra 
vires review in light of the absence of allegations or argu-
ments in the record to indicate any infirmity in the challenged 
Proclamations.  Id. at 9.  Consequently, we review Tulare 
County's complaint to determine whether it contains factual 
allegations to support an ultra vires claim that would demon-

strate the district court erred in declining to engage in a 
factual inquiry to ensure that the President complied with the 
statutory requirements.

     Count 1 of Tulare County's complaint is premised on the 
assumption that the Antiquities Act requires the President to 
include a certain level of detail in the Proclamation.  No such 
requirement exists.  The Act authorizes the President, "in his 
discretion, to declare by public proclamation historic land-
marks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects 
of historic or scientific interest."  16 U.S.C. s 431.  The 
Presidential declaration at issue complies with that standard.  
The Proclamation lyrically describes "magnificent groves of 
towering giant sequoias," "bold granitic domes, spires, and 
plunging gorges," "an enormous number of habitats," "lime-
stone caverns and ... unique paleontological resources docu-
menting tens of thousands of years of ecosystem change," as 
well as "many archaeological sites recording Native American 
occupation ... and historic remnants of early Euroamerican 
settlement."  Proclamation at 24,095.  By identifying historic 
sites and objects of scientific interest located within the 
designated lands, the Proclamation adverts to the statutory 
standard.  Hence, Count I fails as a matter of law.

     Count 2 alleges that the President has designated nonquali-
fying objects for protection.  The Antiquities Act provides 
that, in addition to historic landmarks and structures, "other 
objects of historic or scientific interest" may qualify, at the 
President's discretion, for protection as monuments.  16 
U.S.C. s 431.  Inclusion of such items as ecosystems and 
scenic vistas in the Proclamation did not contravene the 
terms of the statute by relying on nonqualifying features.  In 
Cappaert, 426 U.S. at 141-42, the Supreme Court rejected a 
similar argument, holding that the President's Antiquities Act 
authority is not limited to protecting only archeological sites.

     As relevant to Count 3 of the complaint, the Proclamation 
states that the Monument's 327,769-acre size "is the smallest 
area compatible with the proper care and management of the 
objects to be protected."  Proclamation at 24,097.  It also 

states that the sequoia groves are not contiguous but instead 
comprise part of a spectrum of interconnected ecosystems.  
Id.  Tulare County alleges that no one in the Clinton Admin-
istration "made any meaningful investigation or determina-
tion of the smallest area necessary to protect any specifically 
identified objects of genuine historic or scientific interest." 
Compl. p 149.  Instead, it alleges, President Clinton "bowed 
to political pressure ... in designating a grossly oversized 
Monument unnecessary for the protection of any objects of 
genuine historic or scientific interest."  Compl. p 150.  This 
allegation is a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation.  
"Although in reviewing the dismissal of a complaint the court 
must take 'all factual allegations in the complaint as true,' the 
court is 'not bound to accept as true a legal conclusion 
couched as a factual allegation.' "  Mountain States, slip op. 
at 9, ___ F.3d at ____ (quoting Papasan v. Allain, 478 U.S. 
265, 286 (1986)).

     Contrary to the assumption underlying Count 3, the Antiq-
uities Act does not impose upon the President an obligation to 
make any particular investigation.  And to the extent that 
Tulare County alleges that the Proclamation designates land 
that should not be included within the Monument, the com-
plaint fails to identify the improperly designated lands with 
sufficient particularity to state a claim.  Id.  Insofar as 
Tulare County alleges that the Monument includes too much 
land, i.e., that the President abused his discretion by desig-
nating more land than is necessary to protect the specific 
objects of interest, Tulare County does not make the factual 
allegations sufficient to support its claims.  This is particular-
ly so as its claim that the Proclamation covered too much land 
is dependent on the proposition that parts of the Monument 
lack scientific or historical value, an issue on which Tulare 
County made no factual allegations.  Cf. Dalton v. Specter, 
511 U.S. 462, 473-74 (1994);  United States v. George S. Bush 
& Co., 310 U.S. 371, 379 (1940).

     Count 4 of the complaint alleges that the Monument desig-
nation actually increases the risk of harm from fires to many 
of the objects that the Proclamation aims to protect.  Howev-
er, the Proclamation expressly addresses the threat of wild-
fires and the need for forest restoration and protection.  The 

Proclamation observes that forest renewal is needed because 
environmental change "has led to an unprecedented failure in 
sequoia reproduction," and that "a century of fire suppression 
and logging" has created "an increased hazard of wildfires of 
a severity that was rarely encountered in pre-Euroamerican 
times."  Proclamation at 24,095.  Count 4 contains no factual 
allegations, only conclusions, see, e.g., Compl. p 160, and it 
refers to current management rather than the designation 
under the Proclamation as the cause for likely increases in 
catastrophic fires, Compl. p 159.

     Count 5, alleging that if judicial review is not available 
under the Antiquities Act then the Act violates the Property 
Clause of the Constitution as an improper delegation of 
congressional authority to the President, fares no better.  As 
the court held in Mountain States, "[n]o Constitutional Prop-
erty Clause claim is before us, as the President exercised his 
delegated powers under the Antiquities Act, and that statute 
includes intelligible principles to guide the President's ac-
tion."  Slip op. at 8, ___ F.3d at ____ (citing Whitman v. Am. 
Trucking Ass'ns, Inc., 531 U.S. 457, 474 (2000);  Dalton, 511 
U.S. at 473-74 & n.6).

     Tulare County's remaining contentions, involving other fed-
eral statutes and contractual rights, fail as a matter of law.  
Contrary to Count 6 of the complaint, the Proclamation does 
not violate the National Forest Management Act of 1976 
("NFMA"), Pub. L. No. 94-588, 90 Stat. 2949 (codified as 
amended in scattered sections of 16 U.S.C.) (2000), by unlaw-
fully withdrawing land from the national forest system.  The 
NFMA provides that no national forest land "shall be re-
turned to the public domain except by an act of Congress."  
16 U.S.C. s 1609(a).  The Proclamation states that "[a]ll 
federal lands and interests in lands within the boundaries of 
this monument are hereby appropriated and withdrawn from 
entry, location, selection, sale, leasing, or other disposition 
under the public land laws...."  Proclamation at 24,097.  
The Proclamation also states that "[n]othing in this proclama-
tion shall be deemed to revoke any existing withdrawal, 
reservation, or appropriation;  however, the national monu-
ment shall be the dominant reservation."  Id. at 24,098.  The 

Proclamation thus conceives of the designated land as having 
a dual status as part of both the Monument and the Sequoia 
National Forest.  Cameron, 252 U.S. at 455;  Tulare County, 
185 F. Supp. at 27.  Compare United States v. California, 436 
U.S. 32, 40 (1978).  The Proclamation is therefore wholly 
consistent with NFMA.

     Tulare County alleges alternatively, in Counts 7 and 8, that 
if the Proclamation did not remove land from the national 
forest system, then the current management of the Monu-
ment by the National Forest Service violates the NFMA and 
the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 ("NEPA"), 42 
U.S.C. s 4332 (2000).  Neither NFMA nor NEPA provides a 
cause of action, so the claims must be brought under the 
Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), 5 U.S.C. s 702 (2000).  
Because Presidential actions, of course, are not subject to 
APA review, Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505 U.S. 788, 800-01 
(1992), Tulare County attempts to overcome this bar by 
challenging the non-presidential actions of the Forest Service, 
referring to two Forest Service documents--an internal For-
est Service memorandum interpreting the Proclamation and 
an interim plan that directs the day-to-day management of 
the Monument--allegedly showing that the Service is not 
acting consistently with the Proclamation.  Although Tulare 
County refers to the existence of foresters on the ground, the 
complaint does not identify these foresters' acts with suffi-
cient specificity to state a claim.

     Finally, regarding Count 9, the Proclamation explicitly 
states that "the establishment of the monument is subject to 
valid existing rights."  Proclamation at 24,097.  Tulare Coun-
ty alleges that the Proclamation violates existing rights that 
were established by the Mediated Settlement Agreement in 
1990, which provided that commercial logging would continue 
to be available in the Converse Basin area of the Monument.  
Tulare County ignores the fact that the settlement agreement 
did not create in any of the parties a right to actual timber 
harvest, cf. Ohio Forestry Ass'n v. Sierra Club, 523 U.S. 726, 
733 (1998), and it failed to allege that any of the appellants 
possess a contract for timber harvest.  The allegation that 

the Proclamation violates the Sequoia National Forest Trail 
Plan likewise fails for lack of sufficient particularity.

     Accordingly, because "[a]t no point has [Tulare County] 
presented factual allegations that would occasion ... ultra 
vires review of the Proclamation[ ]" Mountain States, slip op. 
at 8-9, ___ F.3d at ____ - ____, we affirm the dismissal of the 
complaint.

                                                         