                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 13, 2001   Decided February 8, 2002 

                           No. 99-1463

                         Grid Radio and 
                          Jerry Szoka, 
                            Appellants

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

              National Association of Broadcasters, 
                            Intervenor

                        Consolidated with 
                             99-1527

     Appeal from and Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Hans F. Bader argued the cause for appellants/petitioners.  
With him on the briefs was Michael E. Rosman.  Michael P. 
McDonald entered an appearance.

     Rodger D. Citron, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for appellees/respondents.  With 
him on the brief were Jane E. Mago, General Counsel, 
Daniel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, Jacob M. 
Lewis and Mark Davies, Attorneys, U.S. Department of 
Justice.  David Silberman, Counsel, Federal Communica-
tions Commission, entered an appearance.

     Henry L. Baumann and Jack N. Goodman were on the 
brief for intervenor National Association of Broadcasters.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge.*

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  An unlicensed operator of a low-
power FM radio station challenges a Federal Communica-
tions Commission order directing him to cease broadcasting.  
He contends the order and an ancillary $11,000 forfeiture are 
unenforceable because the Commission's ban on low-power 
FM stations, in place until January 2000, contravened the 
Communications Act of 1934 and the First Amendment, and 
because the forfeiture is unreasonable, excessive, and beyond 
his ability to pay.  We reject these claims and affirm.  Ab-
sent a demonstration that the low-power ban was indisputably 
unlawful or unconstitutional, the Commission had no obli-
gation to reconsider the ban in the context of an enforcement 
proceeding against a single unlicensed operator.  Moreover, 
the forfeiture is reasonable under the circumstances of this 
case, and the operator waived his inability-to-pay claim.

                                I.

     Section 301 of the Communications Act of 1934 makes it 
unlawful to operate a radio station without a license from the 

__________
     * Senior Circuit Judge Williams was in regular active service at 
the time of oral argument.

Federal Communications Commission.  47 U.S.C. s 301.  
Historically, the Commission's elaborate licensing scheme 
included four classes of licenses--A, B, C, and D--distin-
guished on the basis of such factors as station location, 
antenna height, and transmission power.  Until 1978, the 
Commission allocated Class D licenses to "microbroadcast 
stations," so called because they operate at power levels of 
less than one hundred watts and reach listeners within a two- 
to twelve-mile radius of the point of transmission.  In 1978, 
however, choosing to "str[ike] the balance in favor of licensing 
higher-powered stations to ensure that large audiences were 
served," the Commission adopted a "microbroadcasting ban" 
pursuant to which it stopped awarding Class D licenses.  
Creation of a Low Power Radio Serv., 15 F.C.C. Rcd. 19,208, 
19,236 (2000) (reconsideration) (discussing Changes in the 
Rules Relating to Noncommercial Educ. FM Broad. Stations, 
70 F.C.C.2d 972, 983 (1978) (codified at 47 C.F.R. 
s 73.512(d))).

     At all times relevant to this case, appellant Jerry Szoka 
knew of both the licensing requirement and the microbroad-
casting ban.  Yet from 1995 until mid-2000, Szoka operated 
Grid Radio, an unlicensed low-power station in Cleveland, 
Ohio.  He never applied for a license because he believed 
applying would be futile given the microbroadcasting ban.

     In early 1997, after receiving a complaint about Grid Radio, 
the Commission sent Szoka two successive letters warning 
him that if he continued to operate the station, he could face 
fines, forfeitures, or criminal sanctions.  Responding to the 
first letter, Szoka urged the Commission to "ignore" his 
unlicensed operations because Grid Radio "is top quality, 
provides a much needed community service without commer-
cials, and [does not] interfer[e] with other stations."  Jerry 
Szoka, 13 F.C.C. Rcd. 10,630, 10,630-31 (1998) (order to show 
cause).  Nothing in the record indicates whether Szoka re-
sponded to the second letter.

     Despite the Commission's letters, Szoka continued operat-
ing Grid Radio.  Id. at 10,631.  In response, the Commission 
issued an order directing Szoka to show cause why he should 

not be ordered to cease and desist from violating section 301.  
The show-cause order specified two issues for consideration 
at an upcoming hearing:  whether Szoka was "transmitt[ing] 
radio energy without appropriate authorization," and if so, 
whether he "should be ordered to cease and desist" from that 
activity.  Jerry Szoka, FCC 98D-3, 1998 FCC LEXIS 4563, 
*1 (1998) (ALJ summary decision).  The order also indicated 
that the Commission was considering "whether ... Szoka 
should forfeit $11,000"--the maximum daily penalty (adjusted 
for inflation) for a continuing violation of the Act.  Id. at *1, 
*8 (citing 47 U.S.C. s 503(b)(2)(C));  see also 47 C.F.R. 
s 1.80(b)(5) (detailing how to adjust forfeitures for inflation).

     The Chief of the Commission's Compliance and Information 
Bureau moved for summary decision of the issues identified 
in the show-cause order.  Although Szoka conceded he had no 
license to operate Grid Radio, he objected to the summary 
judgment motion, arguing he had no obligation to comply 
with Commission licensing rules because the microbroadcast-
ing ban was both unlawful and unconstitutional.  He also 
challenged the forfeiture as unreasonable and excessive in 
violation of the Fifth and Eighth Amendments to the United 
States Constitution.

     In light of Szoka's concession that he lacked a license to 
operate Grid Radio, the Administrative Law Judge concluded 
that no substantial issues of material fact remained, granted 
the Commission's motion for summary decision, issued a 
cease-and-desist order, and imposed the forfeiture.  Jerry 
Szoka, 1998 FCC LEXIS 4563, at *3-4.  In so doing, the ALJ 
rejected Szoka's constitutional challenges to the microbroad-
casting ban on two alternative grounds:  on the merits be-
cause the "right of free speech does not include the right to 
use radio facilities without a license";  and for lack of standing 
because Szoka failed to apply for either a license or a waiver 
of the microbroadcasting ban.  Id. at *6-8 (citing NBC v. 
United States, 319 U.S. 190, 227 (1943);  United States v. 
Dunifer, 997 F. Supp. 1235, 1241 (N.D. Cal. 1998);  Stephen 
Paul Dunifer, 11 F.C.C. Rcd. 718, 727 (1995)).  Rejecting 
Szoka's Fifth and Eighth Amendment claims, the ALJ found 

that "imposition of a forfeiture is civil and not a criminal 
penalty," and that "the statutory scheme authorizing the 
[Commission] to enforce forfeitures ... contains appropriate 
safeguards which satisfy due process requirements...."  Id. 
at *9-10.

     The Commission affirmed the ALJ's order, finding Szoka 
without standing to challenge the licensing regulations and 
rejecting his constitutional challenges to the microbroadcast-
ing ban and forfeiture.  Jerry Szoka, 14 F.C.C. Rcd. 9857, 
9857 (1999).  The Commission informed Szoka that he could 
file a claim of inability to pay the forfeiture by submitting tax 
returns or other financial statements covering the previous 
three years.  Id. at 9867.

     Szoka filed petitions for reconsideration and for a stay of 
the orders against him, claiming, among other things, that he 
was unable to pay the forfeiture.  In support, Szoka submit-
ted a financial statement and tax returns for 1996 through 
1998 showing $8,500 in assets and an annual adjusted gross 
income averaging about $12,000.  Jerry Szoka, 14 F.C.C. Rcd. 
20,147, 20,150 (1999) (reconsideration).  The Commission de-
nied Szoka's petitions for reconsideration and for a stay, and 
also rejected without a hearing his claim of inability to pay, 
finding that although Szoka's "stated assets and income do 
not appear to be large," he failed to "submit[ ] sufficient 
objective evidence and supporting information to sustain his 
claim that they are so inadequate as to render him unable to 
pay a forfeiture."  Id.  The Commission pointed out that 
although its Compliance and Information Bureau had invited 
Szoka to file further documentation in support of his financial 
claims, he failed to do so.  Id. at 20,150 n.2.

     Following the Commission's rejection of Szoka's motion for 
reconsideration and for a stay, the cease-and-desist order 
became effective.  Because Szoka continued to operate Grid 
Radio, the Commission filed suit in the United States District 
Court for the Northern District of Ohio to compel compliance.  
See 47 U.S.C. s 401(b) (authorizing Commission to "apply to 
the appropriate district court of the United States for the 

enforcement of [most orders of the Commission]").  Finding 
the cease-and-desist order "regularly made and duly served," 
the district court ordered Szoka to stop broadcasting by 
March 1, 2000.  United States v. Szoka, 260 F.3d 516, 523 
(6th Cir. 2001) (citing district court's affirmance of the Com-
mission's cease-and-desist order against Szoka) (internal quo-
tation marks omitted).  The Sixth Circuit affirmed, declining 
to reach Szoka's constitutional challenge to the microbroad-
casting ban because in its view, the D.C. Circuit has exclusive 
jurisdiction to "nullify a cease-and-desist order based on 
unconstitutional regulations promulgated by the [Commis-
sion]."  Id. at 528.

     In the meantime, Szoka filed this appeal of the cease-and-
desist order and forfeiture.  He alleges that:  (1) prior to 
issuing the cease-and-desist order, the Commission was obli-
gated to demonstrate that shutting down Grid Radio would 
further the public interest;  (2) the now-defunct microbroad-
casting ban contravened the Act's requirement that the Com-
mission regulate "in the public interest," 47 U.S.C. s 303(g);  
(3) the ban violated the First Amendment;  (4) the forfeiture 
constitutes an "excessive fine[ ]" in violation of the Eighth 
Amendment;  and finally, (5) the forfeiture is not the product 
of reasoned decision-making and should be reduced in light of 
Szoka's financial hardship.  Although the Commission recent-
ly abandoned its microbroadcasting ban and adopted new 
rules authorizing the licensing of low-power stations, see 
Ruggiero v. FCC, No. 00-1100, slip. op. at 3-5, __ F.3d __ 
(D.C. Cir. Feb. 8, 2002), Szoka has not applied for a license 
under the new regime, nor does he challenge that regime 
here.

                               II.

     The Commission argues that because Szoka failed to apply 
for a license or to seek a waiver of the microbroadcasting ban, 
he lacks standing to raise his constitutional and statutory 
challenges.  Since this argument implicates our jurisdiction, 
we consider it first.

     The Commission's standing argument rests on its assertion 
that Szoka could have challenged the microbroadcasting ban 
without operating illegally--and therefore without subjecting 
himself to the cease-and-desist order or incurring the forfei-
ture.  For example, the Commission points out that had 
Szoka applied for a waiver and the Commission denied his 
application, he could have appealed to this court and raised 
his constitutional and statutory challenges to the microbroad-
casting ban at that time.  47 U.S.C. s 402(b)(1).  Further, if 
Szoka had requested a waiver and the Commission dragged 
its feet in responding to the request, Szoka could have 
petitioned this court for a writ of mandamus to compel 
Commission action.  See Telecomm. Research & Action v. 
FCC, 750 F.2d 70, 79 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (discussing this court's 
jurisdiction to hear claims of unreasonable agency delay).  
Given the number of lawful avenues available to him to 
challenge the microbroadcasting ban, the Commission argues, 
Szoka cannot now claim that his unlawful broadcasts were 
necessary to obtain judicial review of the ban.  Thus, Szoka's 
injury is traceable not to the ban but to the more general 
prohibition against operating without a license, which Szoka 
does not challenge here.  Accordingly, the Commission con-
tends, Szoka has failed to demonstrate one of the prerequi-
sites to Article III standing:  a personal injury fairly tracea-
ble to the challenged Commission action.  Lujan v. Defenders 
of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992).

     We are unpersuaded.  To begin with, the cease-and-desist 
order and forfeiture are, as Szoka argues, present injuries, 
both of which are fairly, if circuitously, traceable to the 
Commission's microbroadcasting ban.  The record before us 
is clear:  But for the ban, Szoka would have applied for a 
license, and the Commission points to no individual character-
istics--of either Szoka or Grid Radio--that would have led it 
categorically to deny his application in the absence of the ban.  
Moreover, we agree with Szoka that applying for a waiver 
would have been futile.  See Prayze FM v. FCC, 214 F.3d 
245, 251 (2nd Cir. 2000) (noting that although a plaintiff must 
generally submit to a policy "to establish standing to chal-
lenge" its constitutionality, "[t]his threshold requirement ... 

may be excused ... where a plaintiff makes a substantial 
showing that application for the benefit ... would have been 
futile");  Ellison v. Connor, 153 F.3d 247, 255 (5th Cir. 1998) 
(same);  cf. DKT Mem'l Fund, Ltd. v. Agency for Int'l Dev., 
810 F.2d 1236, 1238 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (noting that "otherwise 
qualified non-applicants may have standing to challenge a 
disqualifying statute or regulation").  The Commission cites 
only two instances in the last two decades in which it granted 
a waiver to the microbroadcasting ban--once to an Indian 
village in Alaska, where the microbroadcasting ban does not 
apply, and once to a remote community in a Navajo-speaking 
area of New Mexico, where high-power, English broadcasts 
are of little relevance.  Turro v. FCC, 859 F.2d 1498, 1500 n.1 
(D.C. Cir. 1988) (noting these two instances).  Neither of 
these waivers suggests that the Commission would seriously 
consider granting a waiver for Szoka to broadcast in English 
in Cleveland, Ohio.  Finally, we agree with Szoka that be-
cause the Constitution permits a person faced with an uncon-
stitutional licensing law to "ignore it and engage with impuni-
ty in the exercise of the right of free expression for which the 
law purports to require a license," the illegality of his unli-
censed operations cannot, as the Commission implies, entirely 
preclude him from raising his constitutional claims.  Shuttles-
worth v. City of Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147, 151 (1969).

                               III.

     Turning to the merits, we begin with Szoka's argument that 
under the Communications Act the Commission should have 
considered whether shutting down Grid Radio would further 
the public interest.  According to Szoka, his station served a 
"niche audience" "not adequately serv[ed]" by full-power FM 
stations: "gay men and women and the arts community."  
Appellants' Br. at 11.  Valuable as Grid Radio's broadcasts 
may have been, we think it clear that the Commission had no 
obligation to consider the station's individual circumstances 
before shutting it down.  At the time this controversy began, 
the Commission had determined that the public interest was 
best served by uniformly denying licenses to low-power sta-
tions to promote "the establishment of more efficient, stable, 

full powered stations."  Creation of a Low Power Radio Serv., 
15 F.C.C. Rcd. at 19,236 n.93 (internal citations omitted).  
Although Szoka strenuously disagrees with that determina-
tion, the Commission need not reevaluate well-worn policy 
arguments each time it implements an existing rule in a 
narrow adjudicatory proceeding against an acknowledged 
rule-breaker.  Turro, 859 F.2d at 1500.  To hold otherwise 
would obligate the Commission to "examine an entire range 
of policy questions that are not unique to [Szoka] and are 
more appropriately considered in a rulemaking proceeding."  
Id.

     Nothing in C.J. Community Services v. FCC, 246 F.2d 660 
(D.C. Cir. 1957), requires a different result.  Although we 
concluded there that the Commission could not shut down an 
unlicensed, low-power television booster station without con-
sidering whether "public interest, convenience, and necessity 
would be served," our concern related to the Commission's 
failure to consider or establish any licensing procedure for 
booster installations.  Id. at 662 (complaining that the Com-
mission had "not made it possible, after all these years, for 
the issuance of a license to a booster installation, such as is 
here disclosed").  This case is very different.  Here, the 
Commission long ago established a licensing regime for 
broadcast stations and expressly decided not to issue licenses 
to low-power stations because of the risk of interference to 
higher-power stations.  Creation of a Low Power Radio Serv., 
15 F.C.C. Rcd. at 19,236 n.93.  That decision would have no 
import if the Commission had an independent obligation to 
consider on a case-by-case basis the pros and cons of shutting 
down each individual, unlicensed microradio operation.  
Where, as here, the Commission has evaluated the public 
interest in a rulemaking, it would be absurdly inefficient--and 
would invite confusion--to require it to perform the same 
evaluation each time it enforces the resulting rule.

     Szoka's broader claims--that the microbroadcasting ban 
itself was unlawful and unconstitutional, facially and as-
applied to him--present a harder question, for we generally 
permit "a party against whom a rule is [enforced] ... [to] 
pursue substantive objections to the rule" at the time of 

enforcement.  Indep. Cmty. Bankers of Am. v. Bd. of Gover-
nors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 195 F.3d 28, 34 (D.C. Cir. 
1999).  Permitting Szoka or anyone else to operate without a 
license as a means of challenging the microbroadcasting ban, 
however, could produce the very "chaos" that, according to 
the Supreme Court, the broadcast licensing regime was de-
signed to prevent.  Red Lion Broad. Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 
367, 375-76 (1969).  Moreover, we have no concern here that 
"limiting the right of review of the ... rule would effectively 
deny [Szoka] ... an opportunity to question its validity."  
Functional Music, Inc. v. FCC, 274 F.2d 543, 546 (D.C. Cir. 
1958).  Szoka could have petitioned for a rulemaking or 
applied for a waiver and, if the Commission denied his 
request, challenged that denial in the appropriate circuit 
court.  See supra p. 7;  28 U.S.C. s 2342(1);  47 U.S.C. 
s 402(a), (b)(1).  That he did neither, choosing instead to 
operate without a license, makes it inappropriate for us to 
consider his challenge to the microbroadcasting ban absent 
"an undisputable indication ..., either because of the reason-
ing of a Supreme Court decision or intervening legislation," 
that the microbroadcasting ban was unlawful or unconstitu-
tional.  Tribune Co. v. FCC, 133 F.3d 61, 68 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(applying a similarly narrow scope of review in a case involv-
ing an application for a waiver of certain broadcasting restric-
tions).  Had Szoka provided such an indication, we would 
invalidate the cease-and-desist order and forfeiture.  But 
none of his challenges to the microbroadcasting ban clears 
this high bar.

     Szoka first argues that the microbroadcasting ban conflicts 
with the Commission's "affirmative mandate to maximize use 
of the spectrum resource."  Appellants' Br. at 48.  Yet the 
Commission resolved just this issue in its 1978 rulemaking 
when it concluded that licensing low-power stations would 
interfere with the propagation of higher-power stations.  Be-
cause Szoka offers nothing to suggest that the 1978 policy 
was indisputably unlawful, we decline now to consider his 
challenge to it.

     Recasting his public-interest argument as a challenge to 
the ban itself, Szoka next claims that under the Act, the 

Commission must be "flexible and responsive in applying its 
[microbroadcasting] rule[ ], so that the public interest in a 
particular case is not undermined by a rigid adherence to 
preestablished rules and regulations."  Id. at 49.  Turro also 
answers this claim:  "Strict adherence to a general rule may 
be justified by the gain in certainty and administrative ease."  
859 F.2d at 1500.  Again, therefore, absent evidence that the 
microbroadcasting ban was indisputably unlawful, the Com-
mission was entitled to adhere to it.

     We reach a similar conclusion regarding Szoka's facial and 
as-applied constitutional claims.  According to Szoka, to sur-
vive First Amendment scrutiny, "the ban must have been at 
least a narrowly tailored method of achieving a substantial 
governmental interest."  Appellants' Br. at 35 (citing FCC v. 
League of Women Voters, 468 U.S. 364, 380 (1984)).  Under 
this intermediate scrutiny standard, he argues, the Commis-
sion "had an obligation to revisit the viability of microradio in 
light of rapid technological changes since [the ban was 
adopted in] 1978."  Appellants' Br. at 37.  That the Commis-
sion only began to reconsider its microbroadcasting ban in 
1999, he implies, indicates that the ban was not narrowly 
tailored to the interest it served.  Moreover, he claims that 
the original interest served by the ban--the need to promote 
stable, higher-power stations to ensure efficient use of scarce 
spectrum--is no longer substantial given advances in broad-
cast technology.

     We need not decide whether intermediate scrutiny is the 
appropriate standard of review, see, e.g., News America 
Publ'g Inc. v. FCC, 844 F.2d 800, 814 (D.C. Cir. 1988) 
(discussing the appropriate level of scrutiny to apply to a 
statute restricting broadcast speech), as we see two simpler 
responses to Szoka's arguments.  First, although the Su-
preme Court has "obliquely suggested it might [one day] 
reconsider" the scarcity doctrine on which the microbroad-
casting ban rests, judicial ambivalence falls far short of a 
"clear manifestation that [a] rule ... is [facially] illegal."  
Tribune, 133 F.3d at 68 (discussing League of Women Voters, 
468 U.S. at 376-77 n.11).  Second, Szoka offers no evidence to 

suggest that his circumstances were so unique as to impose 
on the Commission a constitutional obligation to apply the 
ban differently to him than to any other unlicensed micro- 
broadcaster.  Absent clear congressional or judicial signals 
that the microbroadcasting ban was unlawful, or unequivocal 
evidence that Grid Radio's circumstances warranted differen-
tial application of the ban, we think the Commission could 
continue to enforce the ban and the chaos-averting licensing 
regime.

                               IV.

     This brings us to Szoka's challenge to the $11,000 forfei-
ture.  Decrying this sum as "grossly disproportionate to the 
gravity of the offense," Szoka first argues that the forfeiture 
violates the Eighth Amendment's Excessive Fines Clause.  
Appellants' Br. at 50.  We disagree.  In the case on which 
Szoka relies, United States v. Bajakajian, the government 
imposed a fine of over $350,000 for failure to report the 
export of currency.  524 U.S. 321, 324 (1998).  Declaring that 
forfeiture unconstitutional, the Court was primarily concerned 
that the potential penalty for illegal export of currency would 
be indefinite and unlimited--and disproportionate to the of-
fense--if the government could seize whatever amount of 
currency the unwitting "exporter" happened to be carrying 
when caught.  Id. at 334-40.  No such problem exists here.  
The $11,000 represents the statutory penalty (adjusted for 
inflation) for unlicensed operation of a radio station, or for 
each day of a continuing violation.  47 U.S.C. s 503(b)(2)(C);  
47 C.F.R. s 1.80(b)(4)-(5).  The amount is neither indefinite 
nor unlimited, nor does it seem excessive in view of Szoka's 
continued and willful violation of the licensing requirement.

     Szoka next argues that the forfeiture is "[n]ot the [p]roduct 
of [r]easoned [d]ecisionmaking."  Appellants' Br. at 52.  As in 
any arbitrary-and-capricious challenge, we "presume the va-
lidity" of the agency's action, Kisser v. Cisneros, 14 F.3d 615, 
618 (D.C. Cir. 1994)--a presumption Szoka can overcome only 

by demonstrating that the forfeiture constitutes a "clear error 
of judgment," Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe, 401 
U.S. 402, 416 (1971), overruled on other grounds by Califano 
v. Sanders, 430 U.S. 99, 105 (1977).  Nothing in either the 
record or Szoka's briefs convinces us that the Commission's 
decision to impose the maximum one-day penalty was clearly 
erroneous:  Szoka intentionally operated a radio station with-
out a license for over five years, continued to operate the 
station after receiving two Commission warning letters, and 
even refused to shut down after the Commission imposed the 
cease-and-desist order and forfeiture.  In light of Szoka's 
"deliberate and willful" violation of section 301, the penalty 
seems entirely reasonable.  47 U.S.C. s 503(b)(2)(D) (indicat-
ing that in determining the amount of a forfeiture, the 
Commission "shall take into account," among other things, 
"the extent[ ] and gravity of the violation and, with respect to 
the violator, the degree of culpability[ and] any history of 
prior offenses").

     Finally, in support of his argument that the Commission 
should have reduced the fine because he demonstrated his 
"inability to pay," Szoka points to three years of tax returns 
showing adjusted gross income below the poverty line.  Ap-
pellants' Br. at 58.  He also argues that his three capital 
assets--radio equipment, a 37% interest in a nightclub lease, 
and a 1/12th interest in a commercial building--are illiquid 
and unavailable to pay the forfeiture.  When Szoka presented 
this evidence to the Commission, however, the agency noted 
certain "apparent contradictions" and concluded the evidence 
was "not ... sufficient to justify reduction of the proposed 
forfeiture."  Jerry Szoka, 14 F.C.C. Rcd. at 20,150.  More-
over, the Commission indicated that although its Compliance 
and Information Bureau had invited Szoka to supplement his 
financial information, he declined to do so.  Id. at 20,150 n.2.  
Indeed, Szoka's counsel confirmed at oral argument that 
Szoka neither submitted the requested supplemental informa-
tion nor requested a hearing at which to address the contra-
dictions.  We therefore find Szoka's inability-to-pay claim 
waived.

                                V.

     The decision of the Federal Communications Commission is 
affirmed.

                                                                      So ordered.

  