                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 8, 2001      Decided May 11, 2001 

                           No. 00-3076

                       In re:  Sealed Case

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00ms00409)

                            ---------

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  A witness before a grand jury 
sitting in the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia testified that he had received a copy of the qui tam 
complaint in a certain sealed civil proceeding then pending 
before a different federal district court.  Two prosecuting 
attorneys from the Department of Justice, acting upon their 
own initiative and without the approval of the court supervis-
ing the grand jury (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 
grand jury court), informed the judge hearing the qui tam 
case of the breach of the seal and provided him with a 

summary of the witness's testimony before the grand jury.  
That judge then sent a letter to the district court here 
requesting a copy of the relevant testimony, and the Govern-
ment moved the court ex parte to transmit the testimony 
pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(e)(3)(E).  
The court acceded and ordered the relevant portions of the 
grand jury transcript transmitted to the court that had 
requested them (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the qui 
tam court).

     The plaintiffs in this case, including the witness who testi-
fied before the grand jury about the breach of the seal, are 
also plaintiffs in the qui tam action;  they are aggrieved 
because divulgement and subsequent transmission of the 
grand jury testimony have jeopardized their entitlement to 
share in the financial settlement in the civil case.  The 
plaintiffs appeal from the district court's denial of two mo-
tions:  one requesting that the Government be ordered to 
show cause why it should not be held in contempt for 
violating Rule 6(e) by divulging to the qui tam court a matter 
occurring before the grand jury;  and another seeking vacatur 
of the district court's order transmitting the testimony to that 
court because the order did not comply with the requirements 
of Rule 6(e)(3)(E).

     As to the first motion, we hold that although the Govern-
ment violated Rule 6(e) when the two prosecutors sent a 
summary of the testimony to the qui tam court without the 
approval of the court supervising the grand jury, the latter 
court appropriately declined to order the Government to show 
cause why it should not be held in contempt;  the court had 
previously ratified the disclosure when it ordered transmis-
sion of the testimony.  As to the second motion, we hold that 
the court's transmission of the testimony failed to comply 
with Rule 6(e)(3)(E) because the court did not include the 
required "written evaluation of the need for continued grand 
jury secrecy";  only if the court upon remand properly makes 
and transmits such an evaluation will its transmission of the 
materials be valid.

               I. Background*

     In 1996 a certain party filed a qui tam complaint under the 
False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. s 3730, with a district court in 
another circuit.  That court ordered the proceedings sealed, 
as required by 31 U.S.C. s 3730(b)(2)-(b)(4).  The plaintiffs in 
this case later filed in that same district a separate qui tam 
complaint substantially similar to the first such complaint, 
and the two complaints were consolidated (along with other 
similar complaints).  Although the qui tam court ultimately 
dismissed the present plaintiffs' complaint on a jurisdictional 
ground, the parties later entered into a settlement agreement 
under which these plaintiffs were to share in the proceeds.

     Subsequently a grand jury was impaneled by the district 
court in the District of Columbia to investigate allegations 
that certain government employees had received payments 
out of the aforementioned settlement.  The Criminal Division 
of the Department of Justice handled the investigation.  One 
of the plaintiffs in this case testified before the grand jury 
that he had received from a government employee a copy of 
the first complaint filed under seal with the qui tam court.  
The witness (and present plaintiff) testified that he promptly 
returned the complaint to the sender and advised the sender 
that he should not have sent it.  Acting upon this testimony, 
agents from the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) in the 
Department of the Interior interviewed the sender, who said 
that he had indeed sent the complaint for the purpose of 
getting advice but that he had not known the complaint was 
under seal.

     On July 18, 2000 two prosecutors from the Department of 
Justice filed with the qui tam court, under seal and ex parte, a 
document they styled "Notice to the Court of A Breach of 
Seal."  In that document the prosecutors summarized the 
nature of the grand jury proceedings, the substance of the 
witness-plaintiff's testimony, and the answers the sender gave 
in the ensuing interview with OIG agents.  With respect to 
the grand jury testimony, they specifically stated "[the wit-

__________
* Certain factual details are necessarily omitted because this case is 
itself under seal.

ness] testified that he received a copy of the then-sealed ... 
qui tam from [the government sender]."  The prosecutors 
also explained that the grand jury proceeding was ongoing 
and asked the qui tam court, in order to avoid interfering 
with their criminal investigation, to afford the DOJ an oppor-
tunity to seek a stay of the civil proceedings should the court 
decide to disclose the breach of seal to the qui tam parties.

     In response, the qui tam court urged the Government to 
move the grand jury court under Rule 6(e) to transmit the 
grand jury testimony to it for review, which the Government 
did on July 26.  Immediately thereafter the qui tam court 
sent its own letter to the grand jury court requesting trans-
mission of the testimony.  On August 1 the grand jury court 
held a sealed, ex parte proceeding at which only the Govern-
ment was represented;  there the court balanced the need for 
grand jury secrecy against the public interest in avoiding an 
injustice in the qui tam case, and ordered transmission of the 
relevant grand jury materials to the qui tam court.

     On August 9 the qui tam court held a sealed, in camera 
hearing attended by counsel for all the plaintiffs sharing in 
the settlement.  Having considered the objections of the 
plaintiffs in this case and the public interest in grand jury 
secrecy, the qui tam court nonetheless decided to disclose to 
the other plaintiffs that the plaintiffs in this case had illicitly 
learned of the initial sealed complaint before filing their own:  
the "integrity of the court ha[d] been violated" and the 
plaintiffs in this case "should not be allowed to keep the gains 
that they have made because of their bad faith filing" of a 
copycat complaint.  At the same time, the qui tam court 
invited the other plaintiffs to consider initiating civil contempt 
proceedings against these plaintiffs;  it also suggested that it 
might initiate proceedings to sanction them for criminal con-
tempt.  The plaintiffs here represent that other plaintiffs in 
the qui tam case have indeed since "filed contempt motions 
against [them] and requested disgorgement of all past settle-
ment monies paid to [them]";  and that the qui tam court "has 
frozen all future settlement money" owed to them under the 
settlement agreement.

     Thus aggrieved by the disclosure of the grand jury testimo-
ny, these plaintiffs moved the grand jury court to (1) order 
the Government to show cause why it should not be held in 
contempt for disclosing the testimony in the "Notice" to the 
qui tam court;  and (2) vacate its order transferring grand 
jury testimony to the qui tam court.  The grand jury court 
denied both motions because it had already determined that 
the competing interests weighed in favor of transmission and 
it "s[aw] no good reason to revisit [its prior] ruling."  The 
plaintiffs now appeal from the denial of those motions.

               II. Analysis

     As the Supreme Court has said, "the proper functioning of 
our grand jury system depends upon the secrecy of grand 
jury proceedings."  Douglas Oil Co. v. Petrol Stops North-
west, 441 U.S. 211, 218 (1979).  That secrecy safeguards vital 
interests in (1) preserving the willingness and candor of 
witnesses called before the grand jury;  (2) not alerting the 
target of an investigation who might otherwise flee or inter-
fere with the grand jury;  and (3) preserving the rights of a 
suspect who might later be exonerated.  Id. at 219.  In order 
to protect these interests, "[b]oth Congress and th[e] Court 
have consistently stood ready to defend [grand jury secrecy] 
against unwarranted intrusion.  In the absence of a clear 
indication in a statute or Rule, we must always be reluctant to 
conclude that a breach of this secrecy has been authorized."  
United States v. Sells Engineering, Inc., 463 U.S. 418, 425 
(1983).

     Rule 6(e)(2) protects the secrecy of grand jury proceedings 
by specifying that "[a]n attorney for the government ... shall 
not disclose matters occurring before the grand jury, except 
as otherwise provided for in these rules."  The exceptions 
permit disclosure:  (i) to an attorney for the Government in 
the performance of that attorney's duty;  (ii) to such govern-
ment personnel as an attorney for the Government deems 
necessary to assist an attorney in enforcing federal criminal 
law;  or (iii) to another federal grand jury.  Rule 6(e)(3)(A) 
and (3)(C)(iii).  The Rule also permits, when directed by a 

court, disclosure:  (i) preliminary to or in connection with a 
judicial proceeding;  (ii) at the request of a criminal defendant 
if the defendant shows cause;  or (iii) to an appropriate state 
or local official for the purpose of enforcing state criminal law.  
See Rule 6(e)(3)(C).  It is against this legal background that 
we analyze the two motions here at issue.

     A.   Motion To Order Government To Show Cause Why 
          It Should Not Be Held in Contempt
          
     The plaintiffs moved the district court to order the Govern-
ment to show cause why it should not be held in civil 
contempt for disclosing grand jury testimony to the qui tam 
court.  The plaintiffs also sought equitable relief for the 
alleged civil contempt, thereby asserting a cognizable interest 
in preventing transmittal of the grand jury testimony.  Cf. 
Barry v. United States, 865 F.2d 1317, 1322 (D.C. Cir. 1989) 
(private party lacks cause of action for civil contempt without 
other equitable relief).

     We readily agree with the plaintiffs that the Government 
violated Rule 6(e)(2) when, without prior authorization from 
the grand jury court, it filed with the qui tam court the 
Notice summarizing the grand jury testimony of one of the 
present plaintiffs.  Indeed, the Government does not dispute 
that its summary of the plaintiff's testimony in the Notice 
embraces "matters occurring before the grand jury," Rule 
6(e)(2), or that its summary does not come within any excep-
tion enumerated in the Rule.

     The Government instead takes the untenable and disturb-
ingly cavalier position that "[a] sealed, ex parte, conveyance of 
grand jury information to a federal judge who is acting in his 
judicial capacity is not a 'disclosure' within the meaning of the 
grand jury secrecy rule."  For this the Government relies 
upon that eminent legal authority, Webster's New Collegiate 
Dictionary (1977), which defines to "disclose" as to "expose to 
view" or to "make known or public."  By this logic the 
Government presumably would have us read the Rule to 
permit any revelation of matters occurring before a grand 
jury as long as it is not made to "the public" or at least a 
member thereof.  That position, however, is foreclosed by the 

Rule itself, which expressly provides that grand jury informa-
tion may in specified circumstances be conveyed to "an attor-
ney for the government," "government personnel," "another 
federal grand jury," and "an appropriate official of a state or 
subdivision of a state";  the necessary implication is that 
absent such express exceptions, sharing grand jury informa-
tion with those persons would be a prohibited disclosure even 
though they are not "the public."

     Moreover, the Government's interpretation of the Rule 
defies the Supreme Court's clear instruction in Sells Engi-
neering, 463 U.S. at 425-27, that exceptions to Rule 6(e) must 
be narrowly construed and that secrecy concerns extend to 
disclosures made to (and indeed, within) the Government 
itself.  There the Court rejected the argument that Rule 
6(e)(3)(A)(i) permits the disclosure of grand jury material to 
an attorney on the civil -- as opposed to the criminal -- side 
of the DOJ:

     [D]isclosure to Government bodies raises much the same 
     concerns that underlie the rule of secrecy in other con-
     texts.  Not only does disclosure increase the number of 
     persons to whom information is available (thereby in-
     creasing the risk of inadvertent or illegal disclosure to 
     others), but it renders considerably more concrete the 
     threat to the willingness of witnesses to come forward 
     and to testify fully and candidly.  If a witness knows or 
     fears that his testimony before the grand jury will be 
     routinely available for use in governmental civil litigation 
     or administrative action, he may well be less willing to 
     speak for fear that he will get himself into trouble in 
     some other forum.
     
463 U.S. at 432.  The disclosure the Government made in this 
case clearly implicates the Sells Court's concern about penal-
izing a witness for testifying:  Although the disclosure was 
made to the qui tam court and not to a government attorney 
for use in a civil investigation, the result has been that civil 
contempt proceedings were brought against the plaintiffs in 
this case, they may be required to disgorge the proceeds of 
their settlement, and they face the possibility that the qui tam 

court itself will initiate criminal contempt proceedings against 
them.  Whatever the equities of the matter in the qui tam 
court, therefore, we have no doubt that this revelation is 
within the core concern of Rule 6(e).

     With respect to the specific provisions of the Rule, we 
simply do not understand how the Government can both 
concede the Rule "does not explicitly authorize a government 
attorney to give grand jury materials to the federal judge 
presiding over the civil litigation," and yet maintain the Rule 
does not "prohibit the prosecutor from communicating some 
grand jury information to the judge."  The Rule on its face 
prohibits such a communication because it does not except it 
from the general prohibition.  Again, to hold otherwise clear-
ly would contradict the teaching of the Court in Sells, 463 
U.S. at 425.  The Government's effort to show there is a place 
for implied exceptions to the Rule by noting that it "routinely 
includes grand jury information in sealed search warrant 
affidavits" comes to naught:  as the plaintiffs point out, that 
use of grand jury information is expressly authorized by Rule 
6(e)(3)(A)(i) ("Disclosure otherwise prohibited ... may be 
made to ... such government personnel ... as are deemed 
necessary by a[ government] attorney to assist ... in the 
performance of such attorney's duty to enforce federal crimi-
nal law").

     The Government's remaining arguments from the Rule 
itself are easily dispatched.  It argues that because Rule 
6(e)(3)(C) excepts certain disclosures when "permitted [or 
directed] by a court," the Rule necessarily excludes from the 
definition of "disclos[ure]" any communication of grand jury 
information to a court;  the Government's reasoning is that 
the permitting or directing court must have "some knowledge 
of the grand jury material" in order to decide whether it 
should be disclosed.  In this case, however, the grand jury 
material is to be used in another "judicial proceeding," as 
provided in Rule 6(e)(3)(C)(i);  and because Rule 6(e)(D) 
specifies the federal district court "in the district where the 
grand jury convened" as the court that may authorize such a 
disclosure, the Government's unauthorized disclosure of the 
material to any other court is indeed a prohibited disclosure.  

We therefore need not decide whether revelation of grand 
jury materials to a different court pursuant to another of the 
exceptions enumerated in Rule 6(e)(3)(C) necessarily consti-
tutes a disclosure, but we do note that the Government cites 
no precedent -- nor do we know of any -- holding that it does 
not.  The Government also argues that use of the word 
"transmit[ ]" in Rule 6(e)(3)(E) to describe the movement of 
grand jury material from a court supervising a grand jury to 
a federal district court in another district for use in a judicial 
proceeding there means that the revelation of information to 
a court is not a "disclosure."  This argument is plainly 
misconceived because Rule 6(e)(3)(E) specifically requires 
that the court supervising the grand jury transmit to the 
other court "a written evaluation of the need for continued 
grand jury secrecy" along with the grand jury material;  that 
prescription would be meaningless if free movement of grand 
jury information among courts were permitted in any event.

     For the foregoing reasons there can be no doubt that the 
two prosecutors violated the proscription of Rule 6(e) on July 
18 when they sent their Notice to the qui tam court.  The 
proper course would have been for the Government to peti-
tion the grand jury court to transmit the materials pursuant 
to Rule 6(e)(3)(E).  And on July 26 -- as we have seen 
before -- the Government did just that.

     When the plaintiffs moved the grand jury court on August 
14 to order the Government to show cause why it should not 
be held in contempt, they undoubtedly made out a prima facie 
case that the Government had violated Rule 6(e) on July 18.  
Although the grand jury court's ultimate decision whether to 
hold the Government in contempt would be subject to review 
only for abuse of discretion, see Rule 6(e)(2) ("a knowing 
violation ... may be punished"), ordinarily "[o]nce a prima 
facie case is shown, the district court must conduct a 'show 
cause' hearing," Barry v. United States, 865 F.2d 1317, 1321 
(D.C. Cir. 1989) (emphases added);  at that hearing the Gov-
ernment's burden would be "to rebut the inferences drawn 
from the [evidence] establish[ing] the prima facie case" that it 
had violated the Rule.  In re Sealed Case No. 98-3077, 151 
F.3d 1059, 1075 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  In this case the grand jury 

court did not err in denying the plaintiffs' show cause motion, 
however, because there was no possibility the court would 
give the plaintiffs the relief they sought.  The overwhelming 
fact is that on August 1 the grand jury court had itself 
determined upon a proper request from the Government that 
the underlying testimony summarized in the Notice should be 
transmitted to the qui tam court.  As such, it would have 
been pointless for the grand jury court to hold a show cause 
hearing:  Because the Government could not undo the July 18 
disclosure, holding the Government in civil contempt would 
serve no useful purpose;  the court would in no event have 
ordered the recall and suppression of the materials, and it 
was quite right in "see[ing] no good reason to revisit [its 
prior] ruling [transmitting the testimony]."  Accordingly, not-
withstanding the Government's initial violation of the Rule, 
we affirm the district court's denial of the plaintiffs' motion to 
require the Government to show cause why it should not be 
held in contempt.

     B.   Motion To Vacate the Order To Transfer Grand 
          Jury Material
          
     Rule 6(e) specifies how and under what conditions one 
federal district court may transmit grand jury material to 
another federal district court for possible disclosure in a 
judicial proceeding in the transferee court:  A petition is to be 
filed in the district where the grand jury convened;  if the 
Government is the petitioner, then the court may hold an ex 
parte hearing to consider the petition.  See Rule 6(e)(3)(D).

     A matter occurring before a grand jury may not be dis-
closed unless there is a "particularized need" therefor;  that 
is, only if the "material [sought] is needed to avoid a possible 
injustice in another judicial proceeding, ... the need for 
disclosure is greater than the need for continued secrecy, and 
... the[ ] request is structured to cover only material so 
needed."  Douglas Oil Co., 441 U.S. at 222.  In the case just 
cited the Court held that the appropriate procedure generally 
is for the court of the district in which the grand jury 
convened,

     after making a written evaluation of the need for contin-
     ued grand jury secrecy and a determination that the 
     limited evidence before it showed that disclosure might 
     be appropriate, to send the requested materials to the 
     court[ ] where the civil cases were pending.  The [trans-
     feree] court, armed with [its] special knowledge of the 
     status of the civil actions, then [may] consider[ ] the 
     requests for disclosure in light of the supervisory court's 
     evaluation of the need for continued grand jury secrecy.  
     In this way, both the need for continued secrecy and the 
     need for disclosure [can be] evaluated by the courts in 
     the best position to make the respective evaluations.
     
Id. at 230-31.  Rule 6(e)(3)(E) now codifies this procedure:  
"The court [where the grand jury convened] shall order 
transmitted to the court to which the matter [i.e. the petition 
for disclosure] is transferred the material sought to be dis-
closed ... and a written evaluation of the need for continued 
grand jury secrecy."

     In this case, however, the order of the court transmitting 
grand jury material to the qui tam court did not comply with 
Rule 6(e)(3)(E).  The court failed to transmit a "written 
evaluation of the need for continued grand jury secrecy."

     The Government notes that later, in addressing the plain-
tiffs' motion to vacate its order transferring the grand jury 
materials to the qui tam court, the grand jury court said 
that prior to ordering the transfer it had "balanced such 
need [for continuing secrecy] against the asserted interest in 
avoiding injustice in another federal district court."  The 
grand jury court's performance under Rule 6(e) is nonethe-
less deficient in three respects:  First, it did not supply a 
"written evaluation" to the qui tam court, along with the 
grand jury materials, as contemplated by the Rule.  Second, 
the court's subsequent statement that it had balanced the 
competing interests -- even had it been made before rather 
than after the transmission -- was too conclusory to inform 
the qui tam court's balancing by conveying the grand jury 
court's knowledge of the continuing need for grand jury 
secrecy in the particular circumstances of this investigation.  

Third, the grand jury court overreached in balancing the 
interest in secrecy -- with which it was familiar -- against 
the need for disclosure, as to which the qui tam court had 
the comparative advantage;  it thereby intruded upon the 
role of the transferee court, which is to make a fully-
informed determination of the need for disclosure and to 
perform the ultimate balancing in accordance with Douglas 
Oil Co. and Rule 6(e)(3)(E).  The only way to cure these 
defects in any degree is for the grand jury court now to 
make a "written evaluation" of the nature and extent of the 
need for continued grand jury secrecy and to transmit it to 
the qui tam court for that court to make its own, more 
completely-informed determination in light of the former 
court's submission.

     The plaintiffs insist, however, that "no remedy other than 
recall of all material and total suppression will redress the 
harm" they incurred because of the district court's error, and 
that the court therefore should have vacated its August 1 
order transmitting materials to the qui tam court;  still fur-
ther, they argue that transfer cannot proceed anew at this 
point.  Neither of these propositions is well founded.

     First, the plaintiffs argue that "even a subsequent disclo-
sure that complied with Rule 6(e)'s mandates could not eradi-
cate the taint created by the government's initial, improper 
release of materials to the [qui tam] court."  The exclusionary 
rule from which the plaintiffs implicitly borrow is limited to 
the cure of constitutional violations;  no precedent supports 
its extension to this breach of a Federal Rule of Criminal 
Procedure with no constitutional underpinnings.  Nor is there 
any taint to eradicate:  The Government's July 26 motion for 
release by the grand jury court is in no way the fruit of its 
July 18 disclosure to the qui tam court;  the Government 
obtained no additional evidence because of its disclosure and 
was no better served than if it had properly petitioned the 
grand jury court in the first instance.  The plaintiffs' first 
cogent articulation of a rationale for their claim of "taint" 
came at oral argument, when they suggested that the letter 
the qui tam court sent to the grand jury court requesting 
transmission of the grand jury testimony was the fruit of the 

Government's improper disclosure and may have informed 
the district court's decision in favor of transmission.  This is 
too little, too late;  we are left with no reason to think the 
district court would not have ordered the transmission even if 
all it knew was that the qui tam court's seal -- unbeknownst 
to that court -- apparently had been breached.

     Second, the plaintiffs argue that Rule 6(e) categorically 
bars disclosure of grand jury materials while the grand jury 
is still sitting.  For this they claim support from the Second 
Circuit's inability some time ago to identify "a single case 
authorizing disclosure of a witness' testimony during the 
pendency of grand jury investigations."  In re Bonnano, 344 
F.2d 830, 834 (1965).  The Rule itself, however, draws no 
distinction between ongoing and completed grand jury pro-
ceedings.  The plaintiffs draw our attention to various places 
in the Advisory Committee's Notes on Rule 6 where the past 
tense is used, and to the reference in Rule 6(e)(3)(E) to "the 
need for continued grand jury secrecy" (emphasis added), 
which they see as suggesting that the grand jury proceedings 
must have been concluded;  but the Government reciprocally 
points to Rules 6(e)(2) and (3)(C), which speak in the present 
tense of "matters occurring before the grand jury" (emphasis 
added), and therefore just as strongly suggest that a proceed-
ing may be ongoing.  More important, however, the Supreme 
Court has clearly indicated the inquiry into "particularized 
need" would govern regardless whether the grand jury is 
ongoing.  See Douglas Oil Co., 441 U.S. at 222 (inquiry 
proceeds "even when the grand jury whose transcripts are 
sought has concluded its operations").

     Third, the plaintiffs insist the district court may not pro-
ceed ex parte in determining whether to transmit the materi-
als.  The Rule, however, expressly permits the court to 
proceed ex parte where the Government is the petitioner, as 
it was here.  See Rule 6(e)(3)(D).  The plaintiffs' sole basis 
for arguing to the contrary is the Ninth Circuit's statement 
that the Government must make "a specific showing of the 
need to make the disclosure ex parte," which could be done 
only in "the most unusual cases."  United States v. Nix, 21 
F.3d 347, 352 (1994).  Nix, however, is on its face limited to 

cases in which the Government petitions on behalf of a 
private litigant and therefore "must make the same showing 
as the private litigant would be required to make" -- that is, 
ordinarily in open court.  Id. at 351-52.  As it would be inapt 
to assimilate the qui tam court to a private litigant for this 
purpose, we see no reason to doubt the Government may here 
petition ex parte as authorized under the Rule.

     Fourth, the plaintiffs argue that because the judge of the 
qui tam court was effectively "the party petitioning for the 
material," there would be "an irreconcilable conflict of inter-
est for that selfsame judge to serve as" the ultimate decision-
maker who assesses "particularized need."  Here the plain-
tiffs conflate the qui tam court's legitimate concern for doing 
justice to the parties before it with a personal interest on the 
part of the judge;  any decision to disclose the grand jury 
materials to the parties in the civil action is for their benefit, 
not that of the court.  If the qui tam court -- once it receives 
the grand jury court's written evaluation of the need for 
continued secrecy -- in fact orders disclosure, it will be doing 
so only because it weighed the competing considerations and 
struck the balance on that side.  That is the very process 
dictated by the Supreme Court in Douglas Oil Co. and by the 
Rule itself, and no bias can be ascribed to the qui tam court 
for adhering to it.

     Finally, the plaintiffs maintain that the provisions of Rule 
6(e) authorizing the transmission of grand jury materials "in 
connection with a judicial proceeding" are inapposite to this 
case;  their claim is that a would-be transferee court cannot 
itself be a petitioner under Rule 6(e), nor can the Government 
act on its behalf.

     As to the first aspect of that claim, the plaintiffs try to 
make something of the Court's allusion in Douglas Oil Co. to 
the "occasional need for litigants" to obtain grand jury tran-
scripts, 441 U.S. at 220, but that obviously does not rule out 
the possibility that a district court might likewise need to 
obtain a transcript in connection with a "judicial proceeding" 
before it.

     As to the ability of the Government to petition on behalf of 
a transferee court, the plaintiffs again seek support from 
United States v. Nix.  But the Ninth Circuit did not there 
circumscribe the ability of the United States to petition under 
Rule 6(e);  quite the contrary, it held that the United States 
may petition not only on its own behalf, but also, as it had in 
that case, on behalf of a private party.  Id. at 351.  We see no 
reason the United States may not likewise petition on behalf 
of a federal district court, which has an important interest in 
the integrity of its seal.  (We note also, for what it is worth, 
that the private parties before that court are the immediate 
beneficiaries of any disclosure the qui tam court may make.)  
The plaintiffs then suggest that because the Sells Engineer-
ing decision, above, precludes the Government from using its 
access to the grand jury to further its interest in related civil 
litigation, "this Court should reject the interpretation that 
Rule 6(e)(3)(C)(i) permits disclosure of secret grand jury 
materials to a federal court in a collateral civil matter."  The 
lesson of Sells, however, is more nuanced than that:  the 
Government may not freely use grand jury materials for civil 
litigation, but it may obtain a court order for such use under 
Rule 6(e)(3)(C)(i).  See 463 U.S. at 442-44.  That is all the 
Government seeks in this case and all it may obtain in a 
properly conducted proceeding upon remand.

     Evidently the plaintiffs would have us believe that Rule 6(e) 
precludes the Government from doing anything to bring 
grand jury testimony regarding the breach of a court's seal to 
the attention of that court.  That is neither sensible nor 
consonant with the judgment reflected in the Rule that the 
Government may petition to disclose grand jury material "in 
connection with a judicial proceeding."

     Inexplicably, however, the Government does not character-
ize its motion to have the district court transmit the materials 
to the qui tam court as a "petition" within the meaning of 
6(e)(3)(D).  Instead, it represents that "[i]n this case, because 
no one had petitioned for disclosure, [the grand jury court] 
and [the qui tam court] followed a slightly different proce-
dure," the result of which was that the grand jury court 
decided sua sponte to transmit the materials to the qui tam 

court.  Although the Rule does nothing affirmatively to au-
thorize this procedure, the Government posits that "[s]ubsec-
tion D [of Rule 6(e)(2)] merely establishes a process when 
someone does 'petition for disclosure.' "

     We cannot possibly sanction that interpretation.  For one 
thing, it would be disingenuous to hold that the district court 
acted sua sponte when it ordered grand jury testimony 
transmitted in direct response to the Government's motion 
and its ex parte appearance (in support of the qui tam court's 
written request).  Worse still, we would do substantial vio-
lence to the Rule if we were to accept the Government's 
proposition that the specification of procedures governing a 
petition under Rule 6(e)(3)(C)(i) leaves room for a court to 
release materials to another court without having received 
such a petition whenever it sees fit and presumably uncon-
strained by the notice and hearing requirements applicable to 
a petition.  Therefore in keeping with the Rule, the district 
court should upon remand of this case proceed upon the 
understanding that the Government is acting under 6(e)(3)(D) 
as a petitioner on behalf of the qui tam court.

               III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the order of the 
district court denying the plaintiffs' motion to require the 
Government to show cause why it should not be held in 
contempt.  We nonetheless remand this matter to the district 
court because its order to transfer grand jury materials to the 
qui tam court did not comply with Rule 6(e)(3)(E).  Consis-
tent with this opinion, the district court shall transmit to the 
qui tam court "a written evaluation of the need for continued 
grand jury secrecy."

                                                        So ordered.

                                                                       