                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 4, 2002   Decided January 7, 2003 

                           No. 01-3011

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                          Robert Gale, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 95cr00297-02)

     A. J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender, argued the cause 
and filed the briefs for appellant.

     Mary B. McCord, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Roscoe C. 
Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, and Carolyn K. 
Kolben, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.  Mary-Patrice Brown, As-
sistant U.S. Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  Johnny St. Valentine 
Brown for years testified as an expert witness for the govern-
ment in narcotics cases.  But it later developed that Brown 
was something of a con man himself, so much so that he was 
charged with and pleaded guilty to having committed perjury 
about his educational background.  Among the trials at which 
he testified was that of Robert Gale, who was convicted of 
possession of marijuana and possession of heroin with intent 
to distribute.  Thus we again consider the effects of Brown's 
testimony on the adequacy of a trial.  Compare, e.g., United 
States v. Williams, 233 F.3d 592 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

     Gale challenges his convictions under the federal habeas 
corpus statute, 28 U.S.C. s 2255, arguing that the prosecution 
violated Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), by (1) 
knowingly offering perjured testimony by Brown at the trial 
itself, thereby fatally tainting the trial, and (2) failing to 
disclose Brown's past perjuries.  We will assume in Gale's 
favor that the government's connections to Brown were such 
that it could be said to have the requisite knowledge to 
trigger the precedents Gale invokes.  But Gale has offered no 
reason to think that Brown's testimony at his trial was 
perjurious.  And, again assuming that the government could 
be said to have had the kind of knowledge or notice of 
Brown's past perjuries to create an obligation to disclose 
them to Gale, the non-disclosure was irrelevant because there 
is no "reasonable probability that, had the evidence been 
disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would 
have been different."  United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 
682 (1985) (opinion of Blackmun, J.).

                             *  *  *

     The facts of Gale's case have been set out at length in his 
direct appeal, United States v. Gale, 136 F.3d 192 (D.C. Cir. 
1998), so we will repeat them here only as relevant to his 

s 2255 action.  He was arrested in an apartment where the 
police found drug-related paraphernalia, including bagging 
equipment, ziplock bags, white powder, cutting agents, razor 
blades, measuring equipment, electronic scales, plastic gloves, 
cellular phones, beepers, and nine Amtrak tickets in various 
names.  Although the police recovered no drugs from Gale 
himself, his co-defendant, who was with Gale in the apartment 
at the time, possessed both cocaine base and 118 ziplock bags 
of a mixture of cocaine and heroin.  The apartment also 
contained cocaine powder on a paper plate, more cocaine in a 
box in the kitchen, and marijuana in the living room and 
kitchen.

     Brown, who had no role in the arrest or other events 
leading to the prosecution, testified as an expert witness on 
narcotics.  He said that he was "presently a narcotics consul-
tant to the Metropolitan Police Department [("MPD")] in the 
District of Columbia."  As the prosecutor sought to establish 
Brown's qualifications as a narcotics expert, defense counsel 
said, "I have no objection if he's seeking to qualify Detective 
Brown.  If he wants to go on, that's fine, too."  The prosecu-
tor then continued briefly, establishing that Brown had previ-
ously been an active member of the MPD for 26 years, during 
which, Brown said, he "worked homicide, checking fraud, 
robbery, prostitution, gambling, and of course my last assign-
ment, which lasted for 22 years, was as a narcotics investiga-
tor with the Narcotics and Special Investigations Division 
[("NSID")]."

     Brown testified that in his 22 years at NSID, he probably 
had worked on 1,500 narcotics cases and had become familiar 
with how heroin and cocaine are packaged, sold, and used in 
the District of Columbia.  Brown did not testify about his 
educational background (the subject of his false testimony 
that ultimately led to his perjury convictions) nor about being 
qualified as an expert in other cases.  Without objection from 
the defense, the court allowed Brown to testify as an expert.

     Brown explained generally how cocaine and heroin are 
packaged and sold in the city, identifying how various items 
found at the apartment are used.  As is relevant to this 

appeal, Brown described "what we call a 'pev' in the pharma-
cy world," which he said was "used to crush items that are in 
a rock-hard form.  You pulverize it, you break it down into a 
crystalline or powder form."  He also explained that rubber 
gloves can be used in the drug preparation process to prevent 
transferring residue from hand to mouth.  And he testified as 
to the street values of various substances and explained the 
chain-of-custody procedures used by MPD and the Drug 
Enforcement Administration to safeguard narcotics evidence.

     In addition, Brown testified generally about the risks asso-
ciated with the drug business, including "being ripped off, 
stuck up or robbed, or the possibility of the substances being 
seized by the police."  Because of these risks, he testified, a 
drug trafficker "would never allow anyone that's not involved 
in the business to even be in any way associated, especially if 
the place where those substances are being prepared, what 
we call a 'bag-up house,' is being prepared for distribution 
purposes."

     The jury found Gale guilty, and he was sentenced to 121 
months of incarceration followed by three years of supervised 
release.  We upheld the conviction and sentence.  See United 
States v. Gale, 136 F.3d 192.

     In his petition under s 2255 Gale argued that the govern-
ment had violated the Brady rule in two ways.  First, he said, 
it had introduced testimony that it knew or should have 
known was perjured, specifically various aspects of Brown's 
self-identification as an expert.  Second, he said the govern-
ment violated Brady by failing to disclose that Brown had 
committed perjury in other cases and had lied in a prior 
application for re-employment at the MPD.  Gale also sought 
discovery "to determine the nature and extent of Brown's 
perjury."

     The district court rejected Gale's petition and denied his 
request for discovery.  We affirm for reasons similar but not 
identical to those given by the district court.

                             *  *  *

     Gale first contends that his trial was tainted because Brown 
committed perjury at that trial.  Gale cites three instances:  
while Brown used the phrase "we in the pharmacy world" 
(when referring to "what we in the pharmacy world call a 
'pev' "1), in fact he had no pharmacy degree;  while Brown 
said that he had "worked homicide," in fact he was never 
specifically assigned to the homicide division or as a homicide 
investigator;  and while he identified himself as a "narcotics 
consultant" to the MPD, he was at the time not officially 
employed by the MPD.

     Under United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97 (1976), "a 
conviction obtained by the knowing use of perjured testimony 
is fundamentally unfair, and must be set aside if there is any 
reasonable likelihood that the false testimony could have 
affected the judgment of the jury."  Id. at 103 (footnote 
omitted).  We assume arguendo that the government's use of 
the challenged testimony, to the extent it was false, could--
because of Brown's various professional links to the govern-
ment--be viewed as "knowing use" within the meaning of 
Agurs.  But as the district court found, Gale has failed to 
show that Brown's statements were false.

     While Brown did not possess a pharmacy degree, he didn't 
claim to:  rather, he merely implied an affiliation with "the 
pharmacy world," something he undoubtedly had in light of 
his years of investigating and testifying about the process of 
making, packaging, and distributing drugs, albeit illegal ones.  
Nor can we say that his statement about having "worked 
homicide" was perjury.  Brown testified that he "worked 
homicide, checking fraud, robbery, prostitution, gambling, 
and of course my last assignment, which lasted for 22 years, 

__________
     1  Gale does not contend that the use of the term "pev" consti-
tuted perjury.  At trial, Brown stated that a "pev" is a pharmaceu-
tical tool "used to crush items that are in rock-hard form."  While 
not characterizing this statement as perjury, Gale notes in his reply 
brief that he has been unable to find a definition of the term.  
Reply Br. at 9.  Our searches have been equally unavailing.

was as a narcotics investigator."  Gale has presented no 
argument that Brown did not work on homicide cases, only 
that he was never expressly assigned to a homicide division.  
That is not enough to make Brown's general statement 
perjury.  Finally, Gale presented no reason to doubt that 
Brown was a "narcotics consultant" to the government, as he 
was an expert appearing in numerous cases on the govern-
ment's behalf.  Nor is there any "reasonable probability" that 
any gap between Brown's statements and perfect truth on 
these trivial and peripheral issues could have affected the 
judgment of the jury.  Thus there can be no Agurs violation.

     Second, Gale argues that the government committed a 
Brady violation by failing to advise him of Brown's prior 
perjuries and the incomplete information on his job applica-
tion.  Again we assume in Gale's favor that it is possible to 
attribute Brown's knowledge of his past perjury to the prose-
cutors for Brady purposes.  Compare United States v. 
Brooks, 966 F.2d 1500, 1502-05 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (discussing 
scope of prosecutor's obligation to search for potentially 
exculpatory materials).  Gale's claim fails, nonetheless, be-
cause the non-disclosure was immaterial.

     Whereas the prosecution's knowing use of false testimony 
entails a veritable hair trigger for setting aside the conviction 
("any reasonable likelihood that the false testimony could 
have affected the judgment of the jury," see Agurs, 427 U.S. 
at 103), non-disclosure of exculpatory evidence (including 
impeachment evidence) is governed by a more general stan-
dard:  "[F]avorable evidence is material, and constitutional 
error results from its suppression by the government, 'if 
there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been 
disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would 
have been different.' "  Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U.S. 419, 433-34 
(1995) (quoting United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 682 
(1985) (opinion of Blackmun, J.);  Bagley, 473 U.S. at 685 
(White, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment 
and in the formula above).  The defendant bears the burden 
of showing a reasonable probability of a different outcome.  
See Strickler v. Greene, 527 U.S. 263, 291 (1999).  In applying 

this test, the court must consider the non-disclosure dynami-
cally, taking into account the range of predictable impacts on 
trial strategy.  See, e.g., United States v. Bowie, 198 F.3d 
905, 909-12 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

     Gale's arguments do not meet this burden.  He has offered 
no reason to believe that, had the impeachment evidence in 
question "been disclosed to the defense," the government 
would have foolishly charged ahead, blindly offering Brown 
and exposing itself to his inevitable demolition on cross.  Why 
would it have done so, rather than simply offering another 
expert?  Brown's expertise was drawn not from his command 
of some arcane field but from an experience that is widely-
shared in urban police forces:  he had investigated narcotics 
cases for many years.  Moreover, while the government has 
argued that it had several narcotics experts available from 
MPD (and identified one in particular, Sergeant Brennan, 
who is a 25-year veteran narcotics investigator), Gale has 
offered nothing suggesting that Brown could not have been 
replaced with a similarly qualified witness.  This case is thus 
unlike the ones cited by Gale, Kyles v. Whitley and Strickler 
v. Greene, 527 U.S. 263 (1999), in both of which the impeached 
witness was a fact witness who could not be readily replaced.  
By contrast, in our case of United States v. Williams, 233 
F.3d 592 (D.C. Cir. 2000), although applying a different 
substantive standard to a Rule 33 motion for a new trial, we 
noted the availability of other experts to offer exactly the 
same evidence as Brown.  Id. at 595.  For other cases 
involving readily replaceable witnesses, see United States v. 
Matthews, 168 F.3d 1234, 1242-43 (11th Cir. 1999);  United 
States v. Garcia, 13 F.3d 1464, 1472 (11th Cir. 1994).

     Gale raises two objections.  First, he cites hearsay from 
news articles suggesting that Brown was a particularly char-
ismatic expert witness, and argues that a replacement would 
have been less effective.  We see no reason to credit such 
hearsay--other defendants are convicted both in the District 
of Columbia and across the country when experts other than 
Brown testify.  Even if Brown had been the "best" expert 
witness, we have no reason (and no evidence) to believe that 
the "second best" witness would have been materially inferi-

or.  Furthermore, the "charisma" argument on which Gale 
relies is precisely the type of demeanor evidence that disap-
pears at the time of trial.  See, e.g., United States v. Zeigler, 
994 F.2d 845, 849 (D.C. Cir. 1993);  Dyer v. MacDougall, 201 
F.2d 265, 269 (2nd Cir. 1952).  Thus the evidence Gale offers--
hearsay regarding evanescent evidence of charisma--does not 
create a reasonable probability that government use of a 
different expert with similar experience in narcotics cases 
would have changed the result.

     Second, Gale argues that Brown's testimony that persons 
not involved in the drug trade would not be in an apartment 
used for packaging drugs was particularly damaging to Gale's 
defensive claim that he just happened to be present.  Gale 
goes on to suggest--but not affirmatively argue--that only 
Brown would have been willing to offer such testimony:

     His expert claim that only those "involved" in the drug 
     business would be present in an apartment containing 
     drugs--which was devastating to Mr. Gale's defense in 
     this case--seems particularly suspect.  The government 
     did not submit any declaration from any other expert 
     expressing agreement with Brown's testimony in Mr. 
     Gale's case.
     
     To the extent that Gale is simply arguing that the testimo-
ny in question may have been overstated, we assume that to 
be true.  Surely a non-participant might be present in an 
apartment containing drugs because, for example, the drugs 
and drug paraphernalia were hidden, or because the non-
participant's presence was momentary and accidental.  But 
Gale never articulates such an argument, likely because any 
such overstatement (besides being easily torpedoed on cross) 
was wholly irrelevant to him--who at the time officers en-
tered had been sleeping in the apartment, which was positive-
ly littered with drugs and drug paraphernalia in plain view.  
See United States v. Gale, 136 F.3d at 193-94.  In fact, until 
pressed at oral argument, Gale did not even claim that 
Brown's statement in this regard was false but merely that 
there are "questions about the truth of everything to which 
[Brown] testified."

     Further, any suggestion that, as a matter of substance, 
only Brown would give such testimony is plainly untrue.  
Indeed, in a case now on the court's docket, a Detective 
Tyrone Thomas from the MPD provided the following testi-
mony:

          Everybody who is a part of that has a role in that drug 
     operation, maybe one of those roles that I mentioned 
     earlier, and that's to oversee those operations.  I mean, 
     it's--nor would anyone want to go around and just be 
     hanging around a scenario where some large quantities 
     of narcotics are gonna be sold because they're not gonna 
     want to risk being caught up in a situation like that 
     unless they have some method or role involved in the 
     drug operation.
     
          Just like somebody going to rob a bank, they're not 
     gonna take a friend along just for the ride;  nor is that 
     friend gonna want to be going to where somebody is 
     gonna rob a bank.
     
United States v. Bailey, No. 99-164-4, Tr. Vol. VI, 1/26/01, p. 
5.  (We of course express no opinion as to the permissibility 
of testimony so formulated.)  In light of other experts who 
have offered substantively similar testimony and Gale's fail-
ure to even allege before argument that the cited testimony 
was false, we cannot say that Gale has shown a "reasonable 
probability" of a different result had the government dis-
closed the potential impeachment evidence against Brown.

     Finally, we reject Gale's argument that the trial court 
erred in denying his request for further discovery about 
Brown's alleged perjury in this and other trials, and materials 
"reflecting knowledge" of Brown's perjuries within the gov-
ernment.  We review the district court's denial of this request 
for abuse of discretion.  Bracy v. Gramley, 520 U.S. 899, 909 
(1997).  We find no such abuse, as there was no real chance 
that discovery could have turned up information altering the 
outcome.  As we have seen, there is no serious claim of 
perjury in Gale's trial.  And with respect to knowing use of a 
perjurer, additional discovery would be of no use because we 
have assumed in Gale's favor government knowledge of 

Brown's perjurious inclinations but found no Brady violation:  
were that assumption true and the information disclosed to 
the defense, the government would have replaced Brown with 
a different expert.

     The judgment of the district court is

                                                        Affirmed.

                                             