                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 25, 2002    Decided July 12, 2002 

                           No. 01-1275

        Department of the Air Force, 315th Airlift Wing, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Federal Labor Relations Authority, 
                            Respondent

     American Federation of Government Employees Local 1869, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority

     Robert D. Kamenshine, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for petitioner.  With him on the briefs 
was William Kanter, Deputy Director.

     William E. Persina, Attorney, Federal Labor Relations 
Authority, argued the cause for respondent.  On the brief 
were David M. Smith, Solicitor, William R. Tobey, Deputy 
Solicitor, and Ann M. Boehm, Attorney.

     Mark D. Roth and Stuart A. Kirsch were on the brief for 
intervenor.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  The Department of the Air 
Force petitions for a review of the Federal Labor Relations 
Authority's ("FLRA" or "Authority") decision in which the 
FLRA held that the Air Force committed an unfair labor 
practice by suspending for three days without pay an employ-
ee/union official who, while purporting to represent a fellow 
employee, among other acts, assaulted a supervisor and came 
into physical contact with her.  The Air Force argues that the 
conduct of the union official is unprotected under the applica-
ble federal labor laws, 5 U.S.C. s 7102, and that the FLRA 
has both misapplied its own precedent regarding "flagrant 
misconduct" and improperly interpreted 5 U.S.C. s 7102.  
Because we agree with the Air Force that the conduct of the 
union official is unprotected under any reasonable standard, 
we grant the petition for review and reverse the FLRA.

                          I. Background

     Sharon Richardson, a union-represented employee at 
Charleston Air Force Base, participated in a performance 
feedback session with Georgia Fallaw, an air reserve techni-
cian who also serves as aircraft overhaul supervisor, on 
October 1, 1998.  Fallaw had informed Richardson that she 
wanted to conduct a performance feedback session earlier 
that day, and Richardson arrived at Fallaw's office with 
Richard Egal, the local union president, purportedly to repre-
sent her.  Fallaw advised that this session was not going to 
be a disciplinary action and therefore Egal would not be 
allowed to attend the meeting.  Fallaw asked Egal to leave 

because she feared that he had accompanied Richardson to 
intimidate and harass her.  See Dep't of the Air Force, 315 
Airlift Wing, Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. 80, 87 
(2001) ("Charleston Air Force Base").

     When, apparently properly, Fallaw told Egal to leave, he 
became angry "and appeared at least somewhat out of con-
trol."  Id. at 91.  Egal "asked Fallaw whether she was 
denying Richardson's right to union representation." Id. at 
87.  Egal was "in [Fallaw's] face" and was "so forceful in his 
body language that [Fallaw] felt compelled to retreat from 
him as much as ... possible."  Id. at 90.  Further, there was 
physical contact between Egal and Fallaw, with his "stomach 
pressed up against her."  Id.  Egal was "belly to belly and 
toe to toe, in [Fallaw's] face," forcing her to arch backward 
over a counter.  Id. at 88.  His "total pattern of conduct at 
that moment, could reasonably have put Fallaw in fear of 
some unpredictable blow."  Id. at 90.  This confrontation 
went on somewhere between 10 and 20 seconds, id. at 91, 
after which Egal left. Fallaw and Richardson proceeded with 
the feedback session.

     Egal received a "Notice of Proposed Suspension" on No-
vember 30, 1998, stating that a three-day suspension without 
pay was proposed based on his "flagrant misconduct" toward 
Fallaw on October 1.  Id. at 89.  Egal disputed the factual 
allegations and claimed his conduct was within his rights as a 
union representative.  The Air Force conducted an investiga-
tion, concluded that the allegations of misconduct were sup-
ported, and issued a "Notice of Decision to Suspend" on 
January 15, 1999, implementing the proposed suspension for 
three calendar days without pay.  Id.

     The Union filed an unfair labor practice charge alleging 
that the Air Force violated 5 U.S.C. s 7116(a)(1) and (2) by 
suspending Egal for participating in protected activities, and 
the FLRA's Regional Director issued a complaint to that 
effect.  Summary judgment was denied and the case proceed-
ed before an Administrative Law Judge ("ALJ").  The ALJ 
made factual findings as to Egal's actions and considered 
whether Egal's activity was protected under the applicable 

labor laws.  He noted that 5 U.S.C. s 7102 "guarantees 
employees the right to engage in activities on behalf of a 
labor organization without fear of ... reprisal," but that 
"involvement in such activities does not immunize an employ-
ee from discipline."  Id. at 91.  The ALJ first determined 
that Egal's conduct occurred during the course of protected 
activity, and thus was to be evaluated under the FLRA's 
"flagrant misconduct" standard.  Id.  Second, he concluded 
that "Egal did not exceed the broad scope of intemperate 
behavior that remains within the ambit of protected activity."  
Id.

     In reaching his decision, the ALJ analyzed the "attack," as 
he characterized it, id. at 92, using the four factors for 
determining flagrant misconduct described in Department of 
the Air Force, Grissom Air Force Base, 51 F.L.R.A. 7, 11-12 
(1995) ("Grissom").  These factors are:  "(1) the place and 
subject matter of the discussion;  (2) whether the employee's 
outburst was impulsive or designed;  (3) whether the outburst 
was in any way provoked by the employer's conduct;  and (4) 
the nature of the intemperate language and conduct."  Id. at 
12.  He found that neither the place nor the subject matter of 
Egal's confrontation impinged on the Air Force's right to 
maintain order and respect and that the behavior was impul-
sive, not preplanned.  The ALJ suggested that although 
Fallaw did nothing in the nature of a direct provocation, it 
was "at least somewhat provocative for her to have told Egal 
that his very presence was designed to intimidate and harass 
her."  Id. at 92.  Finally, on the fourth factor, the nature of 
the language and conduct, the ALJ compared this incident to 
that considered in Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards Air 
Force Base, 53 F.L.R.A. 1455, 1464-65 (1998) ("Flight Test 
Center") and found it to be comparable.  The ALJ gave little 
weight to the touching, which he discounted as "marginal[ ]," 
because of the "evidence of provocation" and the "brevity of 
the attack."  Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 90, 
92.  Despite the fact that he found that there was "some 
'touching,' " "yelling," and "ranting and raving," and that 
Egal's "total pattern of conduct at that moment, could reason-
ably have put Fallaw in fear of some unpredictable blow," id. 

at 90, 92, the ALJ concluded that Egal's behavior, while 
misconduct, "was not 'flagrant' by Authority standards."  Id. 
at 93.  Thus, the ALJ determined the Air Force had commit-
ted an unfair labor practice and recommended that the FLRA 
order the Air Force to cease and desist, rescind the suspen-
sion, and clear Egal's record.

     The FLRA, by a 2-1 vote, agreed and adopted the ALJ's 
findings, conclusions, and recommended decision and order.  
Id. at 80.  The Authority noted that "the disputed conduct 
was 'assuming a physical position with respect to [the supervi-
sor] that was so close as to have involved some "touching" 
and ... his use of certain threat-like gestures and an angry 
demeanor, accompanied by a sort of ranting, all in the course 
of 10 to 20 seconds' " and that the ALJ "also found, however, 
that the touching was only 'marginal.' "  Id.  While "not 
condon[ing] what the [ALJ] described as 'both verbal out-
bursts and allegedly belligerent nonverbal conduct,' " the 
FLRA opined that "similar conduct has been found protect-
ed."  Id.  (citing Flight Test Center).  Moreover, the Authori-
ty observed that the physical contact that had occurred in 
United States Department of Labor Empl. and Training 
Admin., 20 F.L.R.A. 568, 569 (1985) ("USDOL") did not 
violate the Act.  Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 
81.  Although acknowledging the dissent of Chairman Caban-
iss as "correctly point[ing] out" that the FLRA "has consid-
ered physical responses by union and management represen-
tatives to be 'beyond the limits of acceptable behavior,' " the 
Authority stated it had "never adopted a per se rule that any 
touching violates the Statute."  Id.  (quoting United States 
Dep't of Justice, United States Marshals Service, 26 F.L.R.A. 
890, 901 (1987) ("U.S. Marshals")).  The FLRA concluded 
that even if this were an "assault and battery," a determina-
tion it was not willing to make, that fact would not be 
dispositive of the question of flagrant misconduct.  Id.  
Therefore the Authority upheld the ALJ's finding of an unfair 
labor practice.  In doing so, the FLRA "note[d] the dissent's 
suggestion that, even if the union representative did not 
engage in flagrant misconduct, the representative's activities 
could be found unprotected," but dismissed it, saying:  "We 

are not aware of any authority supporting this suggestion."  
Id. at n.3.

     Chairman Dale Cabaniss filed a dissent.

                           II. Analysis

     The statute governing review of a final order of the FLRA 
incorporates section 706 of the Administrative Procedure Act 
("APA").  See 5 U.S.C. s 7123(c);  5 U.S.C. s 706.  "Thus, 
when acting 'within its authority' and 'consistent with the 
congressional mandate,' the Authority's decision may only be 
set aside if it is found to be 'arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.' "  Ass'n 
of Civilian Technicians, Tx. Ch. 100 v. FLRA, 250 F.3d 778, 
782 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (quoting 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A);  Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms v. FLRA, 464 U.S. 89, 97 & n.7, 
98 n.8 (1983)).  "[T]he Court must consider whether the 
decision was based on a consideration of the relevant factors 
and whether there has been a clear error of judgment." 
Citizens to Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 
402, 416 (1971);  see Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm 
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983).  Review of the 
FLRA's interpretation of its own enabling statute is governed 
by the familiar two-step test of Chevron USA, Inc. v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  When 
Congress has spoken, we are bound by that pronouncement 
and that ends this Court's inquiry.  Id. at 842-43 (Chevron's 
step one).  Where "the statute is silent or ambiguous with 
respect to the specific issue, the question for the court is 
whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible con-
struction of the statute."  Id. at 843 (Chevron's step two).  
The agency's interpretation of the statute is entitled to defer-
ence only if it is reasonable and consistent with the statute's 
purpose.  See Independent Ins. Agents of Am., Inc. v. 
Hawke, 211 F.3d 638, 643 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  The FLRA's 
decision that the tortious if not criminal conduct committed 
by Egal in this case is protected by 5 U.S.C. s 7102 cannot 
survive even the forgiving standards of arbitrary-and-
capricious and Chevron review.

                        A. Chevron Review

     We begin with Chevron review, as the interpretation of the 
statute is fundamental to the final decision and as it provides 
precedent for future decisions of the Authority.  Section 
7102(1) establishes the right of a federal employee "to act for 
a labor organization in the capacity of a representative and 
the right, in that capacity, to present the views of the labor 
organization...."  As the ALJ recited, "Section 7102 ... 
guarantees employees the right to engage in activities on 
behalf of a labor organization without fear of penalty or 
reprisal."  Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 91.  
Certainly the language of that statute is of the ambiguous 
sort to which Chevron applies, and certainly the purpose is 
that declared by the ALJ.  Therefore, we readily move to the 
second step of Chevron to determine whether the FLRA's 
interpretation and application of the statute is reasonable.

     The ALJ (and the FLRA) identify " 'flagrant misconduct' 
as the standard" for conduct that exceeds the boundaries of 
protected activity under s 7102.  See id.  (emphasis in origi-
nal).  Given the factual findings of the ALJ as adopted by the 
FLRA, for this court to affirm the Authority's interpretation 
of s 7102(1) as applied in this case, we would have to hold 
that Congress, in adopting s 7102, encompassed the following 
intent:

     A woman in the federal workplace must be aware that if 
     one of her fellow male employees wishes to confront her 
     physically, force her to go belly-to-belly, place her in 
     reasonable fear of an unpredictable blow while ranting 
     and raving at her, and if her agency takes any action to 
     protect her, the male employee cannot be disciplined 
     provided only that he was purporting to act on behalf of 
     a labor organization when he committed the assault, 
     battery, and harassment of his female co-worker.
     
Is it reasonable to suppose that Congress, the same branch of 
government that enacted Title VII, 42 U.S.C. s 2000e-2(a)(1), 
a statute held to protect against sexual harassment, intended 
to immunize this employee conduct from agency discipline by 
the adoption of the language of s 7102?  See, e.g., Harris v. 

Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993) ("The phrase 
'terms, conditions, or privileges of employment' [of 42 U.S.C. 
s 2000e-2(a)(1)] evinces a congressional intent 'to strike at 
the entire spectrum of disparate treatment of men and wom-
en' in employment, which includes requiring people to work in 
a discriminatorily hostile or abusive environment.") (quoting 
Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 64 
(1986)).  To ask that question is to answer it.  Women in the 
workplace today do not have to tolerate offensive touching.  
If they complain of such they do not have to contemplate 
being accused of provoking the male co-worker by something 
they might have said.  No one in the workplace has to put up 
with the kind of conduct found as fact by the ALJ and 
adopted by the Authority.1

     Granted, the language of s 7102(1) is ambiguous.  Poten-
tially there could be many possible interpretations of what it 
means "to act for a labor organization ... [and] to present 
the views of the labor organization."  But it is not reasonable 
to suppose that Congress considered it permissible and im-
mune from consequence for an employee to commit an assault 
and battery against a co-worker while ranting, raving and out 
of control.  No employee, including a union official acting in a 
representational capacity, has the right to put another in fear 
of being struck or to commit a battery in order to "present 
the views of the labor organization" and "engage in collective 
bargaining."  5 U.S.C. s 7102.  If the FLRA's "flagrant 
misconduct" standard permits such conduct, as the FLRA 

__________
     1 Nothing herein is intended to suggest that Egal's assault would 
have been immunized had the victim been a male co-worker or that 
the conduct would have been immunized had it been that of a 
supervisor acting upon the part of management.  Cf. Oncale v. 
Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 78-80 (1998).  
Congress has not shown any intention to render any workers in the 
federal workplace defenseless against assault, battery, or other 
crimes or torts committed by their co-workers whether or not in the 
course of a labor dispute.  Employers may and must be allowed to 
punish such behavior to maintain basic civility.  See Adtranz ABB 
Daimler-Benz Transp. v. NLRB, 253 F.3d 19, 27-28 (D.C. Cir. 
2001).

held it did here, then that standard is an unreasonable 
interpretation of the limits of s 7102.

     To defend its surprising decision, the Authority can only 
argue that its "flagrant misconduct" standard provides a 
reasonable interpretation of s 7102.  While this begs the 
question as to whether the tortious and probably criminal acts 
of Egal constituted "flagrant misconduct," see Part II.B, 
infra, we note that the Authority has offered us little to 
justify the standard itself.  While reciting the formulation 
that the right to engage in protected activity permits "leeway 
for impulsive behavior," the Authority does nothing to tie that 
vague proposition to its conclusory standard other than to 
describe the standard as "long-held."  We are not persuaded.  
Of course flagrant misconduct is not protected by virtue of 
s 7102.  But the FLRA's tortured application of its standard 
here cannot be a reasonable interpretation of the limit of 
s 7102.  Before us the Authority relies in part on parallels 
from private sector labor law.  We find those precedents 
instructive on this point but not helpful to the Authority.  As 
we recently reminded the National Labor Relations Board 
("NLRB"), "merely applying an unreasonable statutory inter-
pretation for several years cannot transform it into a reason-
able interpretation."  Adtranz, 253 F.3d at 26 (citation and 
internal brackets omitted).

     The Adtranz decision is instructive on a specific issue of the 
present case as well.  In Adtranz, the NLRB had held that it 
was an unfair labor practice for an employer to issue a 
handbook barring abusive and threatening language from one 
employee to another, id. at 25, as the Board deemed that 
restriction to have the "potential to chill the exercise of 
protected activity...."  Id.  In rejecting the NLRB's inter-
pretation of the National Labor Relations Act, we held that 
"it is preposterous" for the Board to hold "that employees are 
incapable of organizing a union or exercising their other 
statutory rights under the NLRA without resort to abusive or 
threatening language."  Id. at 26.  It is at least equally 
preposterous for the FLRA to conclude that Congress could 
reasonably have contemplated that federal employees are 
incapable of exercising their rights under s 7102 without 

ranting, raving, assaulting, battering and harassing their co-
workers.

                          B. APA Review

     No matter what standard the Authority applies, nor what 
deference we apply in reviewing it, the FLRA's decision fails 
the arbitrary and capricious review applicable under the 
Administrative Procedure Act.  As the Authority's chairman 
advised its majority, no matter how carefully the ALJ and the 
majority of the Authority parsed its words:

     [T]he Union representative engaged in an "attack" ver-
     bally and physically against the supervisor by physically 
     touching up against her while not being in complete 
     control of himself and acting in an angry manner, effec-
     tively backing her up against a counter and forcing her 
     to lean backward in an attempt to get away from him, 
     and that the representative was using threat-like ges-
     tures so forcefully that she could reasonably fear being 
     hit by some unpredictable blow from him.
     
Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 83 (dissent of 
Chairman Cabaniss).  We further agree with the Chairman 
that one really does not need "to review a legal dictionary to 
conclude that the conduct above amounts to an assault as well 
as a battery, but the seventh edition of Black's Legal Dictio-
nary confirms the impact of improper touching and reason-
able apprehension of harm."  Id.

     With that in mind, we cannot understand what definition of 
"flagrant misconduct" would exclude the conduct set forth 
here.  Despite the attempts of the majority of the Authority 
to somehow erase the assault by calling it "marginal," any 
application of the "flagrant misconduct" standard which fails 
to encompass the facts of this case requires some explanation.  
Indeed, it is difficult to conceive what explanation could 
prevent the Authority's decision from being arbitrary and 
capricious and in default of its duty under the Administrative 
Procedure Act.  In its opinion the Authority hardly attempts 
any such analysis, limiting its justification to the descriptive 
facts

     that the incident:  (1) occurred in a private office, outside 
     the presence of any nonsupervisory employees other than 
     those involved;  (2) was impulsive;  (3) was somewhat 
     provoked by the supervisor.
     
Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 80.  The Authority 
does not explain how any of those factors prevent an assault 
and battery accompanied by ranting and raving in the work-
place from being flagrant misconduct.  In short, just as the 
Authority's legal interpretations fail Chevron review, its deci-
sionmaking process fails even the forgiving arbitrary-and-
capricious standard of the Administrative Procedure Act.

     Even if we accept the Authority's "flagrant misconduct" 
standard as articulated in Grissom, 51 F.L.R.A. at 11-12, as 
the only limitation on s 7102, the Authority's decision here 
makes no sense.  At least two components of the FLRA's 
"flagrant misconduct" standard have been misapplied:  wheth-
er there was provocation;  and the nature of the conduct.  
Under applicable Authority precedent, it was arbitrary and 
capricious for the FLRA not to deem the nature of the Egal's 
conduct flagrant.

     The FLRA's own precedent holds that "[a] physical re-
sponse, in the context of a labor-management dispute, by 
either the union representative or a manager is deemed 
beyond the limits of acceptable behavior."  U.S. Marshals, 26 
F.L.R.A. at 901.  Resort to such behavior has only been 
excused "in certain limited instances and in response to 
particular situations" such as "a highly charged situation" 
which is "provoked by the behavior of a union or management 
representative."  USDOL, 20 F.L.R.A. at 569.  Specifically, 
USDOL involved what could appropriately be characterized 
as an act of self-defense.  See Charleston Air Force Base, 57 
F.L.R.A. at 83 n.4 (dissent of Chairman Cabaniss).

     In the case at bar, though the ALJ and the FLRA both 
attempted to downplay it, Egal's behavior did not consist 
merely of inappropriate words, but also actual physical con-
tact and physical intimidation, so that his co-worker had a 
reasonable apprehension of "some unpredictable blow."  Al-
though the ALJ and the FLRA shy away from characterizing 

this as an "assault and battery" by definition, that is what it 
was.  See, e.g., Black's Law Dictionary 109 (7th ed. 1999).  As 
observed by Chairman Cabaniss, the physical contact and the 
apprehension of "some unpredictable blow" clearly distinguish 
this case from Flight Test Center, 53 F.L.R.A. 1455.  There 
the most the ALJ could conclude was that the employee's 
conduct "evidenced lack of respect."  Flight Test Center, 53 
F.L.R.A. at 1465.  The employee in Flight Test Center 
"lean[ed] over the supervisor's desk and point[ed] his finger 
at the supervisor," but there was no assault, much less 
physical contact.  Id. at 1456.  Moreover, applying the Gris-
som standard relied on by the FLRA itself, Grissom only 
held that protection extends to union representatives engaged 
in protected activity even when they use "intemperate, abu-
sive, or insulting language."  Grissom, 51 F.L.R.A. at 11.  In 
no way does Grissom suggest that physical intimidation or 
assaultive behavior is protected activity.  The assaultive be-
havior here also distinguishes this case from virtually all of 
the cases relied on by the intervenor Union.  For example, 
the intervenor Union cites Old Dominion Branch No. 496, 
Nat. Ass'n of Letter Carriers v. Austin, 418 U.S. 264, 283 
(1974), a libel case, for the proposition that "federal law gives 
a union license to use intemperate, abusive or insulting lan-
guage without fear of restraint or penalty if it believes such 
rhetoric to be an effective means to make its point."  But that 
says nothing about physical contact and assault--it only 
addresses language.  The only cases involving physical alter-
cations relied on by the FLRA or the Union are those where 
there was adequate provocation:  more than Fallaw's legiti-
mate inquiry as to Egal's presence at Richardson's feedback 
session.

     In contrast, the physical intimidation here, comprising the 
elements of an assault and battery, is the kind of behavior 
that the FLRA had said in U.S. Marshals and USDOJ was 
"beyond the limits of acceptable behavior."  26 F.L.R.A. at 
901;  20 F.L.R.A. at 569.  To the extent that there was any 
provocation, a dubious proposition, the record certainly does 
not reflect that Fallaw "conducted [her]self in any manner 

which warranted physical assault." U.S. Marshals, 26 
F.L.R.A. at 901.

     Moreover, we observe that not only is the FLRA's balanc-
ing test for "flagrant misconduct" the same standard applied 
by the NLRB in interpreting 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), but that 
test originates from NLRB precedent.  See Department of 
the Navy, Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, 2 F.L.R.A. 53, 76 
(1979) (referencing NLRB v. Thor Power Tool Co., 351 F.2d 
584, 587 (7th Cir. 1965)).  Indeed, the FLRA contends that its 
"flagrant misconduct" standard "has remained consistent with 
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) law regarding the 
boundaries of protected activity."  The Authority, far from 
striking out on its own with a unique standard, claims to be 
tracking with the NLRB.  Thus in determining whether the 
FLRA has arbitrarily and capriciously applied this "consis-
tent" standard, we may also examine our precedent reviewing 
NLRB application of the same standard.  This Court's deci-
sion in Felix Industries, Inc. v. NLRB, 251 F.3d 1051 (D.C. 
Cir. 2001), is persuasive.  There we found that the NLRB's 
"offhand treatment of the nature of [a union employee's] 
outburst depart[ed] from precedent," and was "arbitrary and 
capricious."  Felix, 251 F.3d at 1056.  The outburst there was 
"brief" and "verbal," consisting of calling his supervisor a "f-
king kid" three times.  Id. at 1054.  We remanded because 
the Board, in holding that conduct protected, failed to proper-
ly balance these statements against the other factors.  That 
mere words could (though we did not hold that it must) result 
in a loss of privilege under the "flagrant misconduct" stan-
dard, also suggests that the physical intimidation here was 
improperly weighed by the FLRA.

     If, as read by the Authority, the FLRA's "flagrant miscon-
duct" standard prohibits the Air Force from taking disciplin-
ary action under the facts of this case, then the Authority has 
altered, indeed, gutted, its "flagrant misconduct" standard 
without explanation.  The FLRA's suggestion that if an "as-
sault and battery occurred ... there is no reason to believe 
that it is dispositive of the question of flagrant misconduct," 
Charleston Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 81, is an unrea-

soned departure from U.S. Marshals and USDOL, which held 
such conduct "beyond the limits of acceptable behavior" ex-
cept when made from a defensive posture.  By any measure, 
the FLRA's decision was arbitrary and capricious.

                   C. Application of Standards

     In sum, we agree with Chairman Cabaniss that if the 
"Authority really intends to follow a test that could condone 
an assault and battery situation by not declaring it to be 
outside the boundaries of protected activity," then it is time 
for the FLRA to find a new test.  Charleston Air Force Base, 
57 F.L.R.A. at 83 (dissent of Chairman Cabaniss).  Physical 
intimidation and touching amounting to assault and battery, 
during the course of otherwise protected activity, is not 
condoned nor immunized by the federal labor laws, and any 
interpretation permitting such activity is inherently unreason-
able and due no deference.  As we stated in a related context, 
we "understand that labor negotiations produce occasional 
intemperate outbursts and, in a specific context, such lan-
guage may be protected," however, it "defies explanation that 
a law enacted to facilitate collective bargaining and protect 
employees' right to organize prohibits employers from seek-
ing to maintain civility in the workplace."  Adtranz, 253 F.3d 
at 27-28 (emphasis added). Here, we face not just intemper-
ate language, but assaultive, tortious, possibly criminal behav-
ior.  As Chairman Cabaniss concluded, "improper physical 
contact, with or without threatening gestures or conduct 
constituting an assault" does nothing to further the goal of 
"facilitat[ing] communication between the parties."  Charles-
ton Air Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 84 (dissent of Chairman 
Cabaniss).  Indeed, "it is preposterous" to suggest as the 
FLRA seems to, "that employees are incapable of organizing 
a union or exercising their other statutory rights ... without 
resort to abusive or threatening language" or without resort 
to a physical response.  Adtranz, 253 F.3d at 26.  To hold 
otherwise is not only error, but is "remarkably indifferent," 
id. at 27, to the basic need of employers to maintain decorum, 
not to mention the very safety of other employees.  See, e.g., 
Jerry Goldstein, Workplace Violence v. Employee Rights, Md. 

B.J. Jan.-Feb. 2002, at 46, 46 ("Nearly 1,000 workers are 
murdered and 1.5 million are assaulted in the workplace each 
year.").

     The Authority concludes that 5 U.S.C. s 7102 "protects 
those who conduct labor relations ineffectively as well as 
those who conduct it effectively, as long as they do not cross 
the line and engage in flagrant misconduct."  Charleston Air 
Force Base, 57 F.L.R.A. at 81.  This boilerplate language 
establishes nothing.  While it is not at all clear to us what 
definition of flagrant misconduct could exclude Egal's acts, 
even applying the Authority's standard by its most restricted 
terms, the Authority's conclusion cannot be upheld.  See Part 
II.A, supra.  This Court has "previously rejected a sugges-
tion from the [NLRB] that employees engaging in protected 
activity 'could not be dismissed unless they were involved in 
flagrant, violent, or extreme behavior.' "  Felix, 251 F.3d at 
1055 (quoting Aroostook Co. v. NLRB, 81 F.3d 209, 215 n.5 
(1996)).  The same is true here. Flagrant misconduct is a 
sufficient, but not necessary, condition for a loss of privilege 
under s 7102.  Even without reference to the "efficiency of 
the service" standard of 5 U.S.C. ss 7503(a), 7513(a), relied 
upon by the Air Force, it is not a reasonable interpretation of 
s 7102 to hold that it protects all union activity except 
"flagrant misconduct," particularly if flagrant misconduct 
does not include assault and battery in the workplace.  How-
ever, we do not read the Authority's earlier cases as holding 
that only "flagrant misconduct" crosses the line into unpro-
tected activity.  The FLRA has held, as noted in Chairman 
Cabaniss's dissent, that "[c]onsistent with section 7102 ... an 
agency has the right to discipline an employee who is en-
gaged in otherwise protected activity for remarks or actions 
that 'exceed the boundaries of protected activity such as 
flagrant misconduct.' "  Grissom, 51 F.L.R.A. at 11 (quoting 
U.S. Air Force Logistics Command, Tinker Air Force Base, 
34 F.L.R.A. 385, 389 (1990)) (emphasis added).  It is Grissom 
that the FLRA relied on here for its "flagrant misconduct" 
standard and Grissom identifies "flagrant misconduct" as 
only illustrative of exceeding the boundaries of protected 
activities.

     We have no occasion to determine what actions, other than 
"flagrant misconduct," result in a loss of privilege under the 
federal labor laws.  Indeed, as we held in Part II.B, supra, 
Egal's conduct falls within the scope of what, heretofore, the 
FLRA has characterized as flagrant misconduct.  We also 
note that it might be an unfair labor practice if an employer 
unevenly or selectively directs disciplinary action only against 
offending employees seeking to exercise their statutory 
rights, but there is no suggestion that this has happened 
here.  See Adtranz, 253 F.3d at 27-28;  cf. R.A.V. v. City of 
St. Paul, 505 U.S. 377, 383-84 (1992).  However, we hold that 
regardless of the scope of the Authority's "flagrant miscon-
duct" standard, or any other standard it might adopt to 
determine the outer limits of protected union activity under 
s 7102, one thing is clear:  Egal's assaultive behavior is 
unprotected by the federal labor laws.

                         III. Conclusion

     We grant the petition for review and reverse the FLRA.  
On remand the Authority is ordered to dismiss the unfair 
labor practice complaint against the Air Force and to rein-
state the disciplinary actions taken against Egal.

                                    