                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 16, 2001      Decided May 1, 2001 

                           No. 00-7149

                     Robert Louis Stevenson, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                District of Columbia Metropolitan 
                   Police Department, et al., 
                            Appellees

                    United States of America, 
                            Intervenor

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00093)

     Daryl L. Joseffer argued the cause for the appellant.  
Elizabeth Petrela was on brief.

     Edward E. Schwab, Assistant Corporation Counsel, the 
District of Columbia, argued the cause for the appellees.  
Robert R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, Charles L. Reischel, 
Deputy Corporation Counsel, Lutz Alexander Prager, Assis-
tant Deputy Corporation Counsel, and Thomas L. Koger, 
Assistant Corporation Counsel, were on brief.

     Lisa Wilson Edwards, Attorney, United States Depart-
ment of Justice, argued the cause for the intervenor.  Wil-
liam R. Yeomans, Acting Assistant Attorney General, was on 
brief.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Henderson, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  The appellant, 
Robert L. Stevenson, brought a section 1983 action, 42 U.S.C. 
s 1983, against the District of Columbia Metropolitan Police 
Department (MPD);  Sergeant Albert Gonzalez;  Officers 
Demetrius Cole, Alan Hill and Lewis Hagler;  Reserve Officer 
Johnny Gay;  and the District of Columbia (collectively, the 
District) alleging violations of his rights under the Fourth, 
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States 
Constitution as well as several state law claims.  After the 
district court granted partial summary judgment to the de-
fendants on some of the claims,1 the case was tried to a jury 
which found in favor of the defendants on all remaining 
counts.  The district court entered judgment on the jury 
verdict.

     Stevenson contends the district court erred during the trial 
by (1) revealing its view of the facts to the jury, (2) admitting 
irrelevant and highly prejudicial evidence and (3) excluding 
important impeachment evidence.2  For the reasons set forth 
below, we affirm.

__________
     1 Stevenson does not challenge the district court's summary judg-
ment ruling.

     2 In his opening brief, Stevenson also challenged the district 
court's denial of discovery of certain sealed documents prepared by 

          I. BACKGROUND

     The case arises from events that occurred on March 7, 
1996.  According to Stevenson's trial testimony, he and his 
friend Larry Wallace borrowed a Chrysler New Yorker from 
a friend and, after running some errands, stopped at the 
McDonald's restaurant located at 4301 Nannie Helen Bur-
roughs Avenue, N.E., Washington, D.C., to pick up something 
to eat before returning the borrowed car.  After waiting in 
the drive-through line, they obtained their food and were 
about to drive away.  Before they could, however, they found 
themselves surrounded by police officers who, with guns 
drawn, were "hollering" at them.  Joint Appendix (JA) 206.  
Instead of stopping, Stevenson became scared, put the car in 
reverse, backed up until he bumped into the car behind him, 
drove forward, backed up again and finally managed to turn 
the car around heading back toward the entry of the drive-
through lane.  At this point, he heard a police officer yell 
"shoot, shoot, shoot," JA 207, and the Chrysler he was driving 
became the target of 63 gun shots.  Stevenson and Wallace 
were wounded.  Stevenson spent one month in the hospital 
having been hit in the chest, left arm, right hand and left leg.  
He now suffers permanent nerve damage, loss of mobility in 
his left arm and other physical disabilities.

     The police officers testifying at trial told a different story.  
On March 7 Officer Demetrius Cole was working (off-duty 
but in uniform) as a security officer at the McDonald's 
restaurant.  He observed Stevenson's vehicle enter the drive-
through line and suspected it might be stolen because the 
passenger side window was broken.  Cole placed a call to the 
MPD to check the license plates.  After learning the plates 

__________
the United States Department of Justice (DOJ).  See Brief for 
Appellant at 33-36.  After the DOJ filed its intervenor brief, 
Stevenson modified his position, conceding that if, as the DOJ 
represented, the documents at issue consisted only of factual mate-
rial provided by the District or comments by DOJ experts, the 
district court's decision was proper and "there is no dispute here."  
Reply Brief at 26.  On review, we conclude the DOJ's representa-
tions were accurate and therefore need not address the discovery 
issue further.

had been reported stolen, he requested back-up and instruct-
ed the McDonald's clerk who was processing Stevenson's 
order to stall him.  Within minutes, Officers Alan Hill and 
Lewis Hagler arrived at the restaurant with their sirens on.  
They pulled into the exit of the drive-through lane to prevent 
the car from leaving.  Sergeant Albert Gonzalez and Reserve 
Officer Johnny Gay approached from the back of the line in 
an attempt to cut off the suspect's means of escape.  The 
officers, who were wearing their police uniforms, ordered 
Stevenson and his friend to stop the car and show their 
hands.  Instead of complying, Stevenson drove first in re-
verse and then forward, hitting Officer Hill.  Hill landed on 
the hood but was thrown back when the car went in reverse 
the second time.  Then, the car moved forward in the di-
rection of Cole.  Considering themselves and each other in 
danger, the officers began shooting until the car had come to 
a stop.

     In January 1997 Stevenson brought this action.  He now 
appeals the district court's entry of judgment in favor of the 
District.

          II. DISCUSSION

     Stevenson raises three arguments on appeal.  We address 
each in turn.

     A.   The District Court's Revelation of Its View of the 
          Facts to the Jury
          
     Stevenson's first challenge arises from a hypothetical ques-
tion the district court asked a defense expert witness.  After 
defense counsel had asked the witness several hypothetical 
questions, the district court interjected its own hypothetical.  
At a bench conference, Stevenson objected, claiming the 
court's hypothetical assumed as true the defendants' version 
of the facts.  He requested that the court "issue some sort of 
instruction to the jury [that] they're not to assume that's your 
opinion of the facts or those are the facts," JA 386, and also 
asked the court to ask the expert a hypothetical using Steven-
son's version of the facts.  The district court agreed to the 
first request and to consider a counter-hypothetical but in-

structed Stevenson to provide in writing the question he 
wanted asked.  Immediately after the bench conference, the 
court charged the jury that hypotheticals assumed facts that 
"may or may not be the facts of this case," that deciding the 
facts was the jury's task and "what the lawyers say are the 
facts, what [the judge says] are the facts, is immaterial to 
your decision."  JA 387-88.  At the end of the expert's cross-
examination, Stevenson failed to provide the court with any 
hypothetical questions.  In fact, when the court inquired 
whether he wanted the court to give an additional instruction, 
Stevenson replied "Your jury instructions were fine."  JA 
398.  Now Stevenson contends the district court's questioning 
of the expert witness was reversible error.

     We review the judicial questioning of a witness for abuse of 
discretion.  United States v. Tilghman, 134 F.3d 414, 417 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  Rule 614(b) of the Federal Rules of Evi-
dence expressly permits judges to question witnesses.3  
Tilghman, 134 F.3d at 416.  "Judges may do so repeatedly 
and aggressively to clear up confusion and manage trials or 
where testimony is inarticulately or reluctantly given."  Id. 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted).  Moreover, 
" '[t]he precepts of fair trial and judicial objectivity do not 
require a judge to be inert.  The trial judge is properly 
governed by the interest of justice and truth[ ] and is not 
compelled to act as if he were merely presiding at a sporting 
match.' "  United States v. Norris, 873 F.2d 1519, 1526 (D.C. 
Cir.) (quoting United States v. Liddy, 509 F.2d 428, 438 (D.C. 
Cir. 1974) (en banc), cert. denied, 420 U.S. 911 (1975)), cert. 
denied, 493 U.S. 835 (1989).

     Although, as we have noted before, "[d]istrict court authori-
ty to question witnesses and manage trials ... has limits," 
Tilghman, 134 F.3d at 416 (citing United States v. Wyatt, 442 
F.2d 858, 859-61 (D.C. Cir. 1971)), our review of the record 
here convinces us the district court acted well within its 
discretion.  Stevenson received the jury instruction he re-
quested.  Moreover, despite the district court's willingness to 

__________
     3 Rule 614 provides:  "The court may interrogate witnesses, 
whether called by itself or by a party."  Fed. R. Evid. 614(b).

consider asking a hypothetical question on Stevenson's behalf, 
Stevenson failed to provide the court with such a question.  
Under these circumstances, we find no fault with the district 
court's action.

     B.   Admissibility of the Gun
          
     Stevenson's second claim involves the district court's ruling 
on the admissibility of a Cobray MAC 11 semiautomatic 
weapon taken from Wallace when he was arrested.  In a 
motion in limine Stevenson argued the gun was irrelevant 
because the police officers did not know before the shooting 
that Wallace was armed and therefore the reasonableness vel 
non of their actions was not dependent on the gun's existence.  
Moreover, Stevenson argued that admitting the gun would be 
unfairly prejudicial because it would inflame the jury against 
him.  The District countered that the MAC 11 was relevant 
to show "plaintiff's motivations and intent to escape at all 
costs," JA 57, and to contradict his assertion that he tried to 
flee only because "he panicked when he saw the police."  JA 
63.  The district court concluded Wallace's possession of the 
gun was "more probative than prejudicial as evidence of the 
plaintiff's desperation, as a convicted felon on parole ... in 
the presence of a firearm, to avoid arrest and his intention to 
use his vehicle as a weapon."  JA 114.

     Stevenson presses before us the same arguments he ad-
vanced before the district court.  Reviewing the district 
court's evidentiary rulings for abuse of discretion, United 
States v. Clarke, 24 F.3d 257, 267 (D.C. Cir. 1994), we 
conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion.

     The Federal Rules of Evidence define "relevant evidence" 
as "evidence having any tendency to make the existence of 
any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the 
action more probable or less probable than it would be 
without the evidence."  Fed. R. Evid. 401.  Under this defini-
tion, the gun is relevant because, as the District argued 
below, it tends to support the proposition that Stevenson was 
intent on escaping at all costs and in so doing placed the 
officers at risk.  Moreover, there is no evidence in the record 
that the district court "gravely" abused its discretion in 

declining to exclude the gun under Rule 403.  See Clarke, 24 
F.3d at 265 ("We review the district court's Rule 403 determi-
nations 'with great deference, reversing only for "grave 
abuse" of discretion.' " (quoting United States v. Johnson, 970 
F.2d 907, 912 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (quoting United States v. 
Payne, 805 F.2d 1062, 1066 (D.C. Cir. 1986)))).  Although 
admission of the gun no doubt worked against Stevenson's 
interest, the risk of undue prejudice to Stevenson, we con-
clude, did not substantially outweigh the evidence's probative 
value.  Finally, Stevenson's reliance on Carter v. District of 
Columbia, 795 F.2d 116 (D.C. Cir. 1986), is misplaced.  There 
the court held that the district court abused its discretion in 
allowing counsel to read lengthy and detailed allegations of 
police misconduct contained in administrative complaints, 
pleadings in lawsuits and newspaper articles when the sole 
purpose of the exercise was to test whether the witnesses 
were familiar with the allegations.  The same result, the 
court noted, could have been achieved in a less prejudicial 
manner.  The facts here are far different.  The allegedly 
prejudicial evidence introduced was not extensive, as it was in 
Carter.  See id. at 126-28.  Moreover, unlike the challenged 
evidence in Carter, the gun was probative of an important 
issue in the case, namely which version of events-Stevenson's 
or the officers'-was true.  Accordingly, Carter does not win 
the day for Stevenson.

     C.   Exclusion of Impeachment Testimony
          
     Stevenson's third argument involves another evidentiary 
ruling.  At the conclusion of Officer Hill's testimony, Steven-
son's counsel sought to cross-examine Hill about an incident 
in which Hill "submitted a false report and was subsequently 
suspended from the D.C. Police Department for 20 days."  
JA 375.  The District objected, asserting that the incident 
had to do with Hill's failure to comply with a superior's orders 
and was irrelevant.  The District requested that the court 
examine the report and determine its admissibility.  After 
doing so, the court sustained the District's objection.  Steven-
son's counsel did not renew any attempt to cross-examine Hill 
about the incident.  Stevenson contends the court's ruling 
was error.

     Although the transcript reflects the exchange described 
above, the challenged report was not proffered into evidence.  
Nor does the record manifest that Stevenson was improperly 
barred from pursuing cross-examination and therefore we 
cannot say that the district court abused its discretion in 
sustaining the District's objection.  See Palmer v. Hoffman, 
318 U.S. 109, 116 (1943) ("Mere 'technical errors' which do not 
'affect the substantial rights of the parties' are not sufficient 
to set aside a jury verdict in an appellate court.  40 Stat. 
1181, 28 U.S.C. s 391.  He who seeks to have a judgment set 
aside because of an erroneous ruling carries the burden of 
showing that prejudice resulted.").  Accordingly, the district 
court's decision on this point stands.

     For the foregoing reasons, the district court's judgment is

                                                            Affirmed.

                                                                               