                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued December 4, 2000     Decided July 6, 2001 

                           No. 99-1252

                 Cerand & Company, Incorporated, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

            Commissioner of Internal Revenue Service, 
                             Appellee

             Appeal from the United States Tax Court 
                        (No. TAX-2767-97)

     Michael S. Fried argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellant.

     Joel McElvain, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief was 
Kenneth L. Greene, Attorney.  David E. Carmack, Attorney, 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Williams, Ginsburg and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Cerand & Co., Inc. (Cerand) 
appeals from a judgment of the tax court predicated upon 
that court's conclusion that payments Cerand made to three 
of its sister corporations were intended to be capital contribu-
tions rather than loans.  We hold that the tax court erred in 
failing to consider the fact seemingly most probative of the 
proper classification of the payments -- that the taxpayer 
over several years treated as taxable interest income more 
than $175,000 it received from its sister corporations.  Ac-
cordingly, we remand this matter to the tax court for further 
consideration.

                            Background

     Gerard Cerand is the president and sole shareholder of 
Cerand, which provides consulting services to owners and 
operators of airport parking lots.  Many of the airports at 
which Cerand provides services are small and are not served 
by regularly scheduled flights.  In order to facilitate travel to 
those airports, Gerard Cerand in 1984 formed three new 
corporations:  Cerand Aviation (CAI), which provided charter 
flights both to Cerand and to unaffiliated clients;  Airport 
Service Corporation (ASC), which provided aviation support 
services to CAI;  and First World Corporation (FWC), which 
provided administrative services both to CAI and to ASC.

     Between 1984 and 1991 Cerand transferred $1,413,374 to 
its three sister corporations through an "open account receiv-
able" it maintained for each one.  Cerand did not draw up a 
formal document describing the nature and terms of the 
transfer.  Over the years 1984 to 1990 the three corporations 
made occasional payments to Cerand, totaling $414,220.  Of 
this amount, Cerand reported $175,662 as interest income on 
its federal income tax returns.

     CAI and ASC went out of business in 1990 and FWC 
followed suit in 1991.  In 1992 Cerand recovered the single 
valuable asset owned by any of them -- a key man insurance 
policy on the life of Gerard Cerand, held by FWC and valued 
at $160,859.  In 1990 and 1991 Cerand claimed bad debt 

losses of $223,591 and $851,274, respectively, on its federal 
income taxes, and deducted those amounts from its ordinary 
income.  The Commissioner of Internal Revenue issued a 
notice of deficiency based upon his conclusion that the initial 
transfers from Cerand to its sister corporations were capital 
contributions rather than loans;  that would entitle Cerand to 
deduct the losses only from capital gains, if any, and not from 
ordinary income.  Cerand filed a petition in tax court chal-
lenging the deficiencies.

     The tax court, after a trial and briefing, stated that, in 
determining whether the transfers were loans or capital 
contributions, "[t]he ultimate question is whether there was a 
genuine intention to create a debt, with a reasonable expecta-
tion of repayment."  76 T.C.M. (CCH) 933, 935 (1998).  The 
court then examined three groups of factors -- relating to the 
original transfers, to the subsequent repayments, and to the 
objective likelihood of repayment -- that might bear upon the 
nature of the payments.

     The tax court first determined that the factors relating to 
the original transfers did not support Cerand's claim that the 
transactions were loans:  "Petitioner never used any certifi-
cate or instrument to memorialize the debt;  no loan agree-
ments or notes were ever signed.  Nor did petitioner set a 
fixed maturity date or repayment schedule .... [or] show 
that a predetermined interest rate applied."  Id.  The tax 
court next concluded that the factors relating to repayment 
also indicated that the transactions were not loans:  "The 
repayment to petitioner was inconsistent and appeared de-
pendent on financial success."  Id.  Finally, the court found 
that the objective likelihood of repayment was low:  "With 
thin capitalization and no historical success, there was consid-
erable risk in advancing the funds."  Id.  Accordingly, the tax 
court concluded that Cerand had intended that the original 
transfers be capital contributions, and it sustained the notice 
of deficiency.

     Cerand filed a motion to reconsider the judgment, arguing 
first that the transfers were loans and, second, that if they 
were capital contributions, then the court nonetheless should 

have allowed Cerand to take all the claimed deductions from 
ordinary income under s 165(g)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code (IRC).  Cerand also moved, in the alternative, to amend 
the decision in order to allow a partial deduction against 
ordinary income based upon a concession the Commissioner 
had made at trial.  The tax court rejected Cerand's two 
arguments for reconsideration but amended the judgment as 
requested to reflect the Commissioner's concession.  Cerand 
appealed to this court.

                           II. Analysis

     Cerand raises two arguments on appeal.  First, Cerand 
argues that the tax court erred in concluding that the pay-
ments were capital contributions rather than loans.  Second, 
Cerand argues that the tax court erred in refusing to consider 
its argument that, if the payments were capital contributions, 
then Cerand was nonetheless entitled to deduct them from 
ordinary income as "worthless securities" under IRC 
s 165(g)(3).

     The Commissioner contends that Cerand first raised the 
s 165(g)(3) argument in its motion for reconsideration.  In 
response Cerand states that its expert witness raised the 
issue in his report at trial, but it does not controvert the 
Commissioner's statement that, when the court excluded that 
portion of the expert's report because it was purely legal 
argument, "[t]he court specifically informed taxpayer [ ] that 
the exclusion ... did not prevent taxpayer from presenting 
the argument in its post-trial brief.  Despite this invitation 
... taxpayer did not [do so]."

     The tax court's practice is not to consider an argument 
raised for the first time in a motion for reconsideration, see, 
e.g., Estate of Quick v. Commissioner, 110 T.C. 440, 441-42 
(1998), and Cerand presents no reason for us to override that 
rule.  Therefore, we shall not pass upon Cerand's argument 
from s 165(g)(3).

     With respect to Cerand's primary argument, we note a split 
in the circuits over the standard of review:  Should the tax 
court's conclusion that a taxpayer intended a payment as debt 

or equity be reviewed as a question of fact or of law?  The 
Ninth and Sixth Circuits say the issue is one of fact, to be 
reviewed for clear error, see, e.g., Bauer v. Commissioner, 
748 F.2d 1365, 1367 (9th Cir. 1984);  Smith v. Commissioner, 
370 F.2d 178, 180 (6th Cir. 1966), but the Fifth Circuit says 
the issue is one of law, to be reviewed de novo.  See Estate of 
Mixon v. United States, 464 F.2d 394, 402-03 (5th Cir. 1972).

     "The [Supreme] Court has long noted the difficulty of 
distinguishing between legal and factual issues."  Cooter & 
Gell v. Hartmax Corp., 496 U.S. 384, 401 (1990) (citing 
Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 288 (1982)).  This 
recurrent difficulty arises in the present case because wheth-
er a transaction is properly characterized as debt or equity, 
like the question at issue in Cooter & Gell, requires the court 
"to marshal the pertinent facts and apply [a] fact-dependent 
legal standard."  Cooter & Gell, 496 U.S. at 402.  In part 
because "[f]act-bound resolutions cannot be made uniform 
through appellate review, de novo or otherwise," id. at 405 
(quoting Mars Steel Corp. v. Continental Bank N.A., 880 
F.2d 928, 936 (7th Cir. 1989)), and in part because the district 
court is better positioned to make the relevant factual deter-
minations, the Supreme Court in Cooter & Gell concluded 
that the appropriate standard of review was for abuse of 
discretion, with the appellate court reversing a ruling if that 
ruling was "based .. on an erroneous view of the law or on a 
clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence."  Id.

     In the present case, we hold that the tax court abused its 
discretion in assessing the evidence.  The critical flaw in the 
tax court's analysis is its failure, despite the taxpayer having 
pressed the point, to consider Cerand's contemporaneous 
treatment of sums received from its sister corporations as in 
part the payment of "interest," taxable as income to Cerand.  
Over a period of several years, Cerand received $414,220 
from the three corporations, of which it booked more than 
$175,000 as interest income.  Even though Cerand had tax-
able income in only two of the years in question (1986 and 
1987), treatment of the repayments as income in other years 
reduced the amount of the net operating loss Cerand could 
carry forward into years when it had taxable income.

     Although the tax court abused its discretion by omitting 
from its analysis a highly significant bit of evidence, we 
cannot say that, had the court properly weighed this evidence, 
it necessarily would have reached a different conclusion, 
because we do not know what weight it assigned to the other 
evidence.  Therefore, we remand this case for the tax court to 
weigh all the evidence in the first instance.*

                         III. Conclusion

     The appeal is granted and the case is remanded to the tax 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                                                 So ordered.

     * We also note that the tax court placed considerable weight upon 
the lack of documentation indicating that the transfers of funds 
from Cerand to its sister corporations were loans.  Because there 
were no documents recording the transfers there necessarily were 
no stated maturity dates, no repayment schedules, and no set 
interest rates.  As the Seventh Circuit recently observed in similar 
circumstances, "it is hazardous to say ... that an investment must 
be equity because it is not documented as debt;  lack of documenta-
tion does not help us choose."  J & W Fence Supply Co. v. United 
States, 230 F.3d 896, 898 (2000).  Cerand does not raise this 
argument, however, and we therefore do not consider it.

               