                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued January 14, 1999    Decided August 15, 2000 

                           No. 98-7093

                       The Keefe Company, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                 Americable International, Inc., 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 94cv01568)

     Griffith L. Green argued the cause for appellant.  With him 
on the briefs were Thomas C. Green and Mark D. Hopson.

     Robert P. Parker argued the cause for appellee.  With him 
on the brief was Gaela K. Gehring-Flores.  Swati Agrawal 
entered an appearance.

     Before:  Wald1, Silberman and Sentelle, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed Per Curiam.

     Per Curiam:  Appellant Keefe Company filed this action 
seeking recovery for installment payments arising from a 
contract under which appellant allegedly assisted appellee 
Americable in the obtaining of contracts for the provision of 
cable service to government installations.  The district court 
granted summary judgment in favor of the defense on two 
theories:  invalidity of the underlying contract, and the run-
ning of the statute of limitations.  We have heretofore vacat-
ed the decision insofar as it was based on invalidity, and 
certified a governing legal question on the statute of limita-
tions theory to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals.  
That court having ruled on the certified question, we vacate 
the judgment of the district court as to a portion of appel-
lant's claims and remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion and that of the District of Columbia Court of 
Appeals.

                             Analysis

     Except insofar as it is necessary to make our application of 
the law understandable, we will not rehash the facts underly-
ing this controversy as they are set forth in full in Keefe Co. 
v. Americable Int'l, Inc., 169 F.3d 34 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Tak-
ing the evidence as it appeared to the district judge on the 
summary judgment motion, Americable breached the agree-
ment between the parties in 1988 by its failure to make both 
one-time and monthly installment payments due under the 
agreement.  Keefe did not bring this action until 1994.  Am-
ericable argued, and the district court held, that the three-
year statute of limitations had run on all of Keefe's claims, 
holding that a breach of the contract as a whole had occurred 
with the first nonpayment and repudiation by appellee.  
Keefe argued, both before the district court and on appeal, 
that its early claims might be time-barred, but that those that 
were due within three years next preceding its filing of this 

__________
     1 Judge Wald was on the original panel but had left the court by 
the time this matter was decided and therefore did not participate 
in this decision.

action were still viable.  Everyone agrees that the law of the 
District of Columbia governs.  It is well established that we 
treat the District of Columbia as a state for purposes of the 
Erie Doctrine, Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 58 S. Ct. 
817, 82 L.Ed. 1188 (1938);  A.I. Trade Finance, Inc. v. Petra 
Int'l Banking Corp., 62 F.3d 1454, 1458 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(citing Lee v. Flintkote Co., 593 F.2d 1275, 1278-80 (D.C. Cir. 
1979)).  We therefore consulted the precedent established by 
the highest court of the District of Columbia, that is its Court 
of Appeals, but found none on point.  We therefore certified 
to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals the governing 
question:

     Under District of Columbia law, and upon the facts 
     described in this opinion, when parties have entered into 
     a contract in which payment is due on the first of each 
     month, calculated as a percentage of the promisor's 
     revenues from a specific service already rendered by the 
     promissee, does the limitation period begin to run sepa-
     rately on each missed payment, as is generally the case 
     with installment contracts, or, does repudiation or breach 
     of the contract as a whole trigger a single limitations 
     period?
     
Keefe Co. v. Americable Int'l, Inc., 169 F.3d 34, 40 (D.C. Cir. 
1999).  On July 13, 2000, the Court of Appeals published an 
opinion, Keefe Co. v. Americable Int'l, Inc., 2000 WL 963356 
(D.C. 2000), carefully considering the certified question and 
determined that the statute of limitations on each of the 
payments due under the contract ran separately, and that 
therefore, "the statute of limitations does not bar Keefe's 
action to recover installment payments that accrued within 
three years prior to the filing of the action."  Id. at *9.

     As we noted above, the controlling question is within the 
jurisdiction of the court of the District.  That court has 
spoken.  Therefore, we vacate the district court's judgment in 
favor of the defendant/appellee, and remand for further pro-
ceedings consistent with this opinion and that of the District 
of Columbia Court of Appeals.

                                                        So ordered.

                                                                              