                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 13, 2000   Decided January 26, 2001 

                           No. 99-1530

                   Petrochem Insulation, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

     United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the 
   Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States and 
               Canada, AFL-CIO, Locals 62, et al., 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Lawrence W. Marquess argued the cause for petitioner.  
With him on the briefs was Darin L. Mackender.

     Heather L. MacDougall and Daniel V. Yager were on the 
brief of amici curiae LPA, Inc. and Associated Builders and 
Contractors, Inc.

     Anne Marie Lofaso, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Aileen A. 
Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and David S. 
Habenstreit, Supervisory Attorney.

     Peter D. Nussbaum argued the cause and filed the brief for 
intervenor.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The National Labor Relations Board 
found that petitioner committed an unfair labor practice by 
bringing a RICO suit against unions that opposed construc-
tion and other permits sought by non-union contractors.  The 
Board ordered petitioner to pay the legal fees the unions 
incurred in defending the suit.  Because we agree with the 
Board that the unions' activities were protected by the Na-
tional Labor Relations Act, and because the Board's finding 
that petitioner's lawsuit was both unmeritorious and retaliato-
ry is supported by substantial evidence, we deny the petition 
for review and grant the Board's cross-application for en-
forcement.

                                I

     In the 1980's, construction unions in Northern California 
began filing environmental objections to zoning and construc-
tion permits sought by non-union developers and contractors. 
Among other things, the unions objected to inconsistencies 
between construction proposals and regional development 
plans, to the failure to prepare required environmental impact 
reports, and to use permits for facilities that the unions 
predicted would cause surrounding areas to exceed air pollu-
tion limits under the Clean Air Act.  An internal union report 
explained:  "we have seen irresponsible companies build pro-

jects which have caused more pollution than should be per-
mitted.  We are now threatened with construction moratori-
ums in many counties in California."  Report by Tom Hunter 
& Ray Foreman, Participation in the Permit Process 1 (1987) 
("Union Report").  Asserting that "the burden of these mora-
toriums falls on the construction worker," id. at 1, the unions 
described their goal in the permitting processes as "advocat-
ing regulatory action which will force construction companies 
to pay their employees a living wage, including health and 
other benefits, and to meet their responsibilities to the com-
munity and the environment."  Id. at 2.  A San Francisco 
newspaper article further explained that to prevent nonunion 
contractors from continuing to hire out-of-state workers at 
$10-$12 an hour less than prevailing union wages, "the unions 
are arguing [to local governments] that the economic rewards 
of development are lost when local people aren't hired at the 
prevailing wage.  Consequently, environmental shortcomings 
such as traffic and pollution should weigh heavy [sic] against 
such projects being approved, according to the union line of 
reasoning." See Bradley Inman, Unions Launch Attack on 
State Homebuilders, S.F. Examiner & Chron., May 31, 1987, 
at F1.

     A non-union California-based corporation, petitioner Petro-
chem Insulation, Inc. installs, repairs, and removes thermal 
insulation in construction and maintenance projects.  Accord-
ing to Petrochem, several contractors, seeking to avoid union 
permit protests, informed Petrochem that it could neither bid 
for nor perform subcontract work on their Northern Califor-
nia construction projects.  In response, Petrochem filed suit 
in the United States District Court for the Northern District 
of California, charging that twenty-one named unions, by 
filing environmental objections, were delaying and "threaten-
ing to delay" construction projects "unless and until the 
project developers and/or general contractors agreed to boy-
cott open-shop contractors such as Petrochem."  Compl. at 
23, Petrochem Insulation, Inc. v. N. Cal. & N. Nev. Pipe 
Trades Council, No. C-90-3628 (N.D. Cal. filed Dec. 20, 
1990).  According to the complaint, the unions' actions violat-
ed section 8(e) of the National Labor Relations Act.  29 

U.S.C. s 158(e).  Instead of seeking relief under the NLRA, 
however, the complaint claimed that the union permit objec-
tions amounted to criminal extortion under both state and 
federal law and charged that the extortion in turn constituted 
a predicate act under the Racketeering and Corrupt Organi-
zation Act.  18 U.S.C. ss 1961-1968.  Alleging that the un-
ions had injured Petrochem both by preventing it from ob-
taining contracts and by damaging its goodwill and business 
reputation, the complaint sought treble damages pursuant to 
RICO section 1964(c).  18 U.S.C. s 1964(c).

     The district court dismissed the complaint, finding the 
RICO claims preempted because the alleged predicate act 
rested on a violation of the NLRA.  Order Dismissing Compl.  
Without Prejudice, Petrochem Insulation, Inc., No. 
C-90-3628, at 12 (N.D. Cal. filed Apr. 30, 1991).  Petrochem 
sought leave to file an amended complaint realleging the same 
conduct but claiming this time that the unions had violated 
sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C. 
ss 1, 2, in addition to RICO.  Petrochem based this RICO 
claim on a different provision of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. s 186, 
which prohibits employers from making payments to unions.  
Although the district court denied leave to file the amended 
complaint, finding it facially inadequate, the court permitted 
Petrochem to file a second amended complaint provided that 
the company complied with four specific guidelines for plead-
ing antitrust claims.  Order Den. Recons. & Den. Leave to 
File First Am. Compl., Petrochem Insulation, Inc., No. 
C-90-3628, at 2-3 (N.D. Cal. filed July 30, 1991).  The court 
also instructed Petrochem that should it again allege a RICO 
violation, its complaint had to conform to the court's "Stand-
ing Order re:  RICO Actions."  Id. at 3.

     Petrochem filed a second amended complaint, again alleg-
ing RICO and Sherman Act violations.  The district court 
dismissed, this time with prejudice, finding that the complaint 
failed to conform to the court's instructions and was legally 
inadequate for several other reasons.  Mem. & Order Grant-
ing Defs' Mot. to Dismiss, Petrochem Insulation, Inc., No. 
C-90-3628 (N.D. Cal. filed Mar. 9, 1992).  The Ninth Circuit 
affirmed in an unpublished opinion, and the Supreme Court 

denied certiorari.  Petrochem Insulation, Inc. v. United 
Ass'n of Journeymen & Apprentices of the Plumbing and 
Pipe Fitting Indus., 8 F.3d 29 (9th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 
510 U.S. 1191 (1994).

     The NLRB General Counsel then filed a complaint alleging 
that by bringing a suit "without merit ... to retaliate" 
against the unions for engaging in concerted activity protect-
ed by NLRA section 7, Petrochem committed an unfair labor 
practice in violation of NLRA section 8(a)(1).  29 U.S.C. 
s 158(a)(1).  Granting the General Counsel's motion for sum-
mary judgment, the Board found Petrochem's lawsuit not 
only without merit but also "motivated by an intent to retali-
ate against the Unions' protected concerted activity on behalf 
of its members and other employees."  Petrochem Insula-
tion, Inc., 330 N.L.R.B. No. 10, 1999 WL 1065426, at *7 (Nov. 
19, 1999).  The Board ordered Petrochem to cease filing such 
lawsuits or otherwise interfering with employees in the exer-
cise of their section 7 rights.  The Board also ordered the 
company to reimburse the unions for the legal expenses they 
had incurred.  Id.

     Petrochem petitions for review and the Board, supported 
by union intervenors, cross-applies for enforcement.  The 
company challenges each of the Board's key findings:  (1) that 
the unions' participation in permit proceedings was protected 
by section 7;  (2) that Petrochem's suit was meritless;  (3) that 
the suit was retaliatory;  and (4) that attorneys' fees were 
warranted.  We consider the first of these arguments in 
Section II and the others in Section III.  We affirm Board 
findings "unless they are unsupported by substantial evidence 
in the record considered as a whole, or unless the Board 
acted arbitrarily or otherwise erred in applying established 
law to the facts."  Reno Hilton Resorts v. NLRB, 196 F.3d 
1275, 1282 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (internal quotations and citations 
omitted).

                                II

     We can easily dispose of Petrochem's argument that the 
unions' permit objections were unprotected by section 7.  In 

relevant part, section 7 states:  "Employees shall have the 
right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organi-
zations, to bargain collectively through representatives of 
their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activi-
ties for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual 
aid or protection."  29 U.S.C. s 157.

     Petrochem first argues that unions, as opposed to employ-
ees, enjoy no section 7 rights.  In support, it points to the 
Supreme Court's statement in Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB that 
"the NLRA confers rights only on employees, not on unions 
or their non-employee organizers."  502 U.S. 527, 532 (U.S. 
1992).  As both the Board and union intervenors correctly 
respond, however, Lechmere holds only that non-employee 
union representatives have no affirmative NLRA right to 
trespass on employer property when they could reach the 
employees through usual off-site channels.  Indeed, Lechmere 
goes on to make clear that when employees are inaccessible, 
non-employee union representatives enjoy section 7 rights to 
enter employer property.  See id. at 537.  Of course, we face 
no question in this case of union access to private property.  
Under such circumstances, the Board has held, as it did here, 
that it would be a "curious and myopic" reading of the Act's 
core provisions "to hold that, although employees are free to 
join unions and to work through unions for purposes of 'other 
mutual aid or protection,' the conduct of the unions they form 
and join for those purposes is not protected by the Act." 
BE & K Constr. Co., 329 N.L.R.B. No. 68, 1999 WL 883851, 
at *12 (Sept. 30, 1999).  We cannot imagine a more reason-
able interpretation of section 7.  See Lucile Salter Packard 
Children's Hosp. at Stanford v. NLRB, 97 F.3d 583, 592 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996) (assuming that unions possess section 7 rights).

     Petrochem next argues that even if unions sometimes enjoy 
section 7 protection, the Board had no basis for concluding 
that the petitioning activity in this case "was clearly protect-
ed."  Petrochem Insulation, Inc., 1999 WL 1065426, at *4.  
In so concluding, the Board relied on the unions' statement 
that they were intervening before state environmental and 
other regulatory permit proceedings in order to "force con-

struction companies to pay their employees a living wage, 
including health and other benefits."  Union Report at 2.  In 
view of this objective, the Board found the unions engaged in 
a form of "area-standards activity"--concerted activity pro-
tected by section 7 because of the "legitimate interest" unions 
have in "protecting the employment standards [they have] 
successfully negotiated from the unfair competitive advantage 
that would be enjoyed by an employer whose labor cost 
package was less than those of employers subjected to the 
area contract standards."  See Petrochem Insulation, Inc., 
1999 WL 1065426, at *4 (internal quotation omitted).  If 
successful, the Board found, the unions "would not only 
expand union job opportunities for current union members 
but also would improve their ability to bargain for higher 
wages by mitigating employer resistance based on concerns 
about being undercut by non-union competitors."  Id.

     According to Petrochem, no record evidence supports the 
Board's finding that the unions were promoting employment 
standards they had negotiated in Northern California.  In 
particular, Petrochem argues that because the unions object-
ed to permits before projects had begun, the Board had no 
idea what wages and benefits actually would have been.  
Although this is true, we fail to see how the fact that 
construction had not yet started has anything at all to do with 
whether, in participating in permitting proceedings, the un-
ions were seeking to protect area standards.  Surely nothing 
in the NLRA prevents unions from obtaining commitments 
from employers about wages and benefits for future jobs.

     Citing a 1973 Board decision, Petrochem also argues that 
the unions must prove that the terms and conditions of 
employment maintained by the employers against whom they 
targeted their area standards activity were below those nego-
tiated by the unions.  Because the company failed to make 
this argument until its reply brief, however, it is not properly 
before us.  Corson & Gruman Co. v. NLRB, 899 F.2d 47, 50 
n.4 (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("We require petitioners and appellants to 
raise all of their arguments in the opening brief to prevent 
'sandbagging' of appellees and respondents and to provide 
opposing counsel the chance to respond.").  Even so, Petro-

chem itself supplied the very information it now claims is 
missing.  The San Francisco newspaper article, see supra at 
3, at F1, which Petrochem attached to its answer to the 
General Counsel's amended complaint to the Board, reports:  
"the prevailing union wage for plumbers is $22.72 per hour.  
Hunter [a union official] claims that some contractors are 
paying 'out-of-state workers $10-$12 an hour.' "

     In its final attempt to convince us that the union permit 
challenges were unprotected by section 7, Petrochem points 
to NLRA section 8(b)(4)(ii)(B), 29 U.S.C. s 158(b)(4)(ii)(B), 
which makes it unlawful for labor organizations to "threaten, 
coerce, or restrain" any person engaged in commerce where 
"an object thereof" is "forcing or requiring any person ... to 
cease doing business with any other person, or forcing or 
requiring any other employer to recognize or bargain with a 
labor organization as the representative of his employees."  
Id.  According to the company, the union petitioning activity 
violated section 8(b)(4)(ii)(B) because it coerced developers to 
cease doing business with Petrochem and other non-union 
companies.

     The Board rejected this argument, relying on DeBartolo 
Corp. v. Fla. Gulf Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council, 
where the Supreme Court interpreted section 8(b)(4)(ii)(B)'s 
coercion ban as not barring handbilling that urged consumer 
boycotts of secondary employers.  Any other interpretation of 
section 8(b)(4), the Court warned, would pose "serious ques-
tions ... under the First Amendment."  See 485 U.S. 568, 
575 (1988).  Concluding here that petitioning the government 
qualifies as political expression, the Board stated "in order to 
avoid the potentially serious First Amendment problems that 
would result if the Unions' governmental petitioning were 
found to constitute 'coercion' under Section 8(b)(4)(ii)(B), we 
shall follow DeBartolo and conclude that such conduct is 
lawful and, hence, protected by the Act."  1999 WL 1065426, 
at *5.  The Board emphasized that it was not deciding 
"whether the Unions' petitioning could be found to be coer-
cive for 8(b)(4) purposes if, as [Petrochem] alleges, the Un-
ions had filed, or threatened to file, 'sham' petitions and 
meritless environmental objections with a secondary objec-

tive."  Id. at *5.  Pointing out that the California federal 
district court had found that Petrochem failed to identify a 
single meritless objection to any construction project, the 
Board concluded that all of the petitioning was protected by 
the First Amendment and thus not barred by section 
8(b)(4)(ii)(B).  Again, we cannot imagine a more reasonable 
interpretation of the Act.  See NLRB v. United Food & 
Commercial Workers Union, Local 23, 484 U.S. 112, 123 
(1987) (explaining that courts must defer to the NLRB's 
"interpretation of the NLRA as long as its interpretation is 
rational and consistent with the statute").

                               III

     Having found no basis for upsetting the Board's conclusion 
that the permitting activity was protected by section 7, we 
turn to Petrochem's arguments that its lawsuit did not violate 
section 8(a)(1).  29 USC s 158(a)(1).  To constitute an unfair 
labor practice, Petrochem's lawsuit must have both lacked 
merit and have been brought to retaliate against the unions' 
exercise of section 7 rights.  See Summitville Tiles, Inc., 300 
N.L.R.B. 64, 65 (1990).

     Considering the first question--Did the company's lawsuit 
lack merit?--the Board relied on Bill Johnson's Restaurants, 
Inc. v. NLRB:  "If judgment goes against the employer in the 
state court ... or his suit is withdrawn or is otherwise shown 
to be without merit, ... the Board may then proceed to 
adjudicate the ... unfair labor practice case[, t]he employer's 
suit having proved unmeritorious...."  461 U.S. 731, 747 
(1983).  The Supreme Court, in other words, equates failing 
in state court with lacking merit, and the Board has found 
that reasoning applicable to failure in federal court as well.  
See BE & K Construction Company, 1999 WL 883851 at *8 
(finding that there is "no reason not to regard the rulings of 
the federal courts ... as equally determinative on the ques-
tion of whether the [employer's] federal court lawsuit lacked 
merit").  Applying the Bill Johnson's standard here, the 
Board found Petrochem's suit meritless because the Califor-

nia federal district court dismissed it and the Ninth Circuit 
affirmed.  1999 WL 1065426, at *4.

     Petrochem argues that instead of relying on Bill Johnson's, 
the Board should have applied the more rigorous standard 
used to determine whether a suit is so baseless as to rob a 
plaintiff of normal "Noerr-Pennington" antitrust immunity.  
See Professional Real Estate Investors, Inc. v. Columbia 
Pictures Industries, Inc., 508 U.S. 49, 60-61 (1993) (defining 
"sham" litigation as a lawsuit, brought with the intent to 
interfere directly with the business of a competitor, that is so 
objectively baseless that "no reasonable litigant could realis-
tically expect success on the merits" and that therefore fails 
to receive Noerr-Pennington immunity).  The company bases 
this argument on a sentence from Professional Real Estate 
Investors:  "[B]y analogy to [the antitrust] sham exception, 
we held [in Bill Johnson's] that even an improperly motivated 
lawsuit may not be enjoined under the National Labor Rela-
tions Act as an unfair labor practice unless such litigation is 
baseless." 508 U.S. at 59 (internal quotations omitted).  As 
the Board points out, however, see Petrochem Insulation, 
Inc., 1999 WL 1065426, at *3, this passage concerns when an 
active lawsuit can be "enjoined";  Bill Johnson's establishes a 
different standard for determining whether an adjudicated 
lawsuit was meritless.  Compare Bill Johnson's, 461 U.S. at 
744 (finding that baseless litigation can be enjoined as an 
unfair labor practice), with id. at 747 ("If judgment goes 
against the employer in the state court, however, or if his suit 
is withdrawn or is otherwise shown to be without merit, ... 
the Board may then proceed to adjudicate the ... unfair 
labor practice case.").  Under the standard for adjudicated 
litigation, like Petrochem's, if the employer lost, the lawsuit is 
deemed unmeritorious.

     We understand that this sets the bar for sham litigation--
litigation not protected by the First Amendment--lower than 
in Noerr-Pennington cases;  on proof of retaliation, employer 
suits that are better than baseless under Noerr-Pennington 
(ones for which "there is any realistic chance that the plain-
tiff's legal theory might be adopted," id. at 747), may evident-
ly be classified as sham litigation after the employer-plaintiff 

loses.  Perhaps the Supreme Court will one day create a 
uniform standard for sham litigation governing both NLRA 
and non-NLRA cases (or explain why the First Amendment 
protects erring litigants less in the NLRA context than 
others), but until that day the language in Bill Johnson's 
must control.

     This brings us to the second question and the only tricky 
issue in this case:  Did Petrochem file its lawsuit to retaliate 
against the unions for engaging in section 7 protected activi-
ties?  Answering affirmatively, the Board relied on three 
factors:  (1) Petrochem filed the lawsuit "in direct response" 
to the unions' participation in the permit proceedings;  (2) the 
lawsuit had no merit;  and (3) Petrochem sought RICO and 
antitrust treble damages instead of pursuing only compensa-
tory damages under the NLRA.  See 1999 WL 1065426, at *6.

     We agree with Petrochem that the first factor cannot 
support the Board's retaliatory motive finding.  Every law-
suit seeking to recover damages caused by union activity is, 
by definition, filed "in direct response" to that activity.  Yet 
not all meritless suits against unions or employees amount to 
unfair labor practices.  Otherwise, Bill Johnson's would not 
have required the Board to determine whether unmeritorious 
lawsuits were filed for retaliatory reasons.  Because the 
Board's directly-in-response-to factor exists in every case, it 
cannot help distinguish those suits that amount to unfair 
labor practices from those that do not.

     Challenging the second basis for the Board's finding, Petro-
chem argues that considering the loss of its suit as evidence 
of retaliatory motive collapses the first prong of the unfair 
labor practice analysis (lack of merit) into the second (retalia-
tion).  This is true, but also precisely what Bill Johnson's 
permits:  "The employer's suit having proved unmeritorious, 
the Board would be warranted in taking that fact into account 
in determining whether the suit had been filed in retaliation 
for the exercise of the employees' s 7 rights."  461 U.S. at 
747.  Calling this language dicta, Petrochem urges us to 
ignore it, arguing that it threatens to deter employers from 
exercising their First Amendment right to petition the gov-
ernment through litigation.  We share this concern, particu-
larly if Bill Johnson's is read literally to mean, for example, 

that an employer who files a colorable lawsuit could be guilty 
of an unfair labor practice simply because the suit happens to 
lose, and the Board, relying on the loss, concludes that the 
suit was meritless and therefore retaliatory.  We need not 
face this issue, however, for although we are bound by Bill 
Johnson's, this case does not involve a colorable, or even just 
an unsuccessful, lawsuit.  The Board found that Petrochem's 
suit was utterly meritless:

     [Petrochem's] lawsuit was found not just to have lacked 
     merit--that would be a charitable characterization of its 
     outcome.  The lawsuit's claims did not even get to a jury 
     ... because it was unable to plead a legally cognizable 
     cause of action, notwithstanding that the District Court 
     provided ... three opportunities to do so.  This degree 
     of failure undermines [Petrochem's] claim that it filed the 
     suit to defend its legally protectable interests and dem-
     onstrates instead its retaliatory purpose.
     
1999 WL 1065426, at *6 (internal quotations and citations 
omitted).  Thus, whatever merit Petrochem's First Amend-
ment argument might have in the abstract, it has no applica-
bility where, as here, the employer's suit was completely 
without merit.

     Citing a law review article that mentions in one sentence 
the possibility of RICO and antitrust suits against unions, see 
Stanley J. Brown & Alyse Bass, Corporate Campaigns:  Em-
ployer Responses to Labor's New Weapons, 6 Lab. Law. 975, 
983 (1990), Petrochem asserts that its suit was novel, not 
baseless.  "Novel" may well be one way to describe the 
company's suit.  Novelty, however, is not necessarily inconsis-
tent with meritlessness;  indeed, in view of the district court's 
total rejection of the suit, we agree with the Board that 
describing it as meritless would be "charitable."  Not only did 
the district court dismiss the company's first two complaints, 
but the many reasons it gave for dismissing the second 
amended complaint with prejudice demonstrate that, in the 
court's view, the suit had absolutely no merit.  In particular, 
the court gave three independent reasons for dismissing the 
RICO claim:  (1) Petrochem's theory that the manner in 

which the unions collected money to support their petitioning 
activity somehow violated NLRA section 186 was not only 
contrary to Ninth Circuit precedent but also unsupported by 
section 186's text, Mem. and Order Granting Defs' Mot. to 
Dismiss, at 5-6;  (2) even if the unions' activities did violate 
section 186, Petrochem would nonetheless have lacked stand-
ing to challenge such a violation, id. at 8;  and (3) the 
company failed to comply with the district court's specific 
orders for filing RICO claims,  id. at 11.  The court gave two 
reasons for dismissing the Sherman Act section 1 claim:  (1) 
Petrochem failed to identify the parties to and contents of any 
alleged contract, combination, or conspiracy in restraint of 
trade, thus violating the specific instructions the court gave 
when rejecting the company's first amended complaint, id. at 
12;  and (2) Petrochem failed to plead an injury to competition 
resulting from the alleged contracts,  id. at 16.  Apparently 
unconvinced even by the company's allegations of its own 
injuries, the court noted, "[a]t most, [the complaint] alleges 
that [Petrochem] could not submit bids to four projects out of 
the approximately 93 projects identified in the complaint.  It 
does not allege that [Petrochem] actually submitted a low bid, 
nor that any project awarded [the company] was withdrawn."  
Id. at 17.  Dismissing Petrochem's Sherman Act section 2 
claim, the court found:  (1) the company failed to identify the 
contractors who allegedly combined with the unions to mo-
nopolize the construction market, id. at 23;  and (2) despite 
having "premised its monopolization claim upon the theory 
that [the unions] engaged in sham petitions and baseless 
environmental objections," and having been warned by the 
court that it needed to provide factual support for that claim, 
Petrochem failed to identify a single meritless objection "or 
allege why such objection should be considered meritless,"  
id. at 25.

     Had Petrochem offered some reason other than the novelty 
of its approach to believe that, notwithstanding the district 
court's firm rejection of its claims, the suit was nevertheless 
not without merit, we would of course have taken it into 
consideration.  But in the absence of any such explanation 
and in view of the reasons the district court gave for dismiss-

ing Petrochem's complaints, we have no basis for questioning 
the Board's assessment of the company's litigation.

     Petrochem also challenges the Board's third basis for infer-
ring retaliatory motive:  the company's effort to obtain treble 
damages by trying to convert labor law claims into RICO and 
antitrust actions.  As the Board saw it, seeking treble dam-
ages undermined Petrochem's claim that it filed suit not to 
retaliate, but to "recover the economic losses caused by the 
Unions' illegal conduct."  Pet'r Br. at 40.  The Board ex-
plained:

     It was the selection of the RICO and antitrust claims, 
     with their provisions for treble damages, which under-
     scores the [company's] retaliatory intent. [Petrochem] 
     had available a less drastic means of recovering its 
     alleged losses;  it could have filed suit in Federal district 
     court under Section 303 of the Act to recover its actual 
     damages by alleging as unlawful what it now argues was 
     unprotected conduct, i.e., that the Unions' conduct violat-
     ed Section 8(b)(4).  Instead, its RICO and antitrust 
     claims constituted an attempt to obtain three-times its 
     actual damages.  In comparable circumstances where an 
     employer has sought punitive damages in addition to 
     alleged actual damages, the Board has inferred retaliato-
     ry intent.  We draw the same inference here.
     
1999 WL 1065426, at *6 (citations omitted).

     Petrochem argues that the Board should not have drawn 
any inferences from its decision to seek a remedy expressly 
authorized by federal law.  Had this been the sole basis for 
the Board's decision, Petrochem's argument might have some 
appeal.  The record is clear, however, that the Board did not 
rely solely on Petrochem's request for treble damages.  The 
Board specifically stated that "retaliatory motive can be 
inferred, in part, from the treble damages [Petrochem] 
sought."  Id. (emphasis added).  Because the Board's princi-
pal finding was that Petrochem's suit was utterly meritless, it 
was not improper for the Board to cite the company's decision 
to seek treble damages as additional evidence of retaliatory 
motive.  Cf. Diamond Walnut Growers, Inc. v. NLRB, 53 

F.3d 1085, 1089 (9th Cir. 1995) (finding the fact that an 
employer sought punitive damages in its suit against a union 
to be evidence that the suit was retaliatory);  Kline v. Cold-
well Banker & Co., 508 F.2d 226, 235 (9th Cir. 1974) (charac-
terizing antitrust treble damages as punitive).

     Given the special deference we owe NLRB findings of 
motive, Reno Hilton Resorts, 196 F.3d at 1282 (citing Laro 
Maintenance Corp. v. NLRB, 56 F.3d 224, 229 (D.C. Cir. 
1995)), we find the lawsuit's complete lack of merit together 
with Petrochem's effort to obtain treble damages sufficient to 
support the Board's finding of retaliatory motive.  Of course, 
were the circumstances different--for example, had the suit 
not been so meritless--our view might be different.  See 
NLRB v. International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 
520, 15 F.3d 677, 679-80 (7th Cir. 1994) (finding that although 
the employer's original lawsuit was ultimately dismissed on 
the basis of a privilege and so was deemed meritless under 
Bill Johnson's, the suit was not retaliatory because it was not 
entirely without merit).  But on the facts of this case, we 
have no basis for upsetting the Board's determination that 
Petrochem filed suit in retaliation for the unions' exercise of 
section 7 rights.

     Last, Petrochem challenges the requirement that it "reim-
burse the Unions for all legal and other expenses incurred in 
defending against [Petrochem's] lawsuit."  1999 WL 1065426 
at *7.  Section 10(c) of the NLRA authorizes the Board, upon 
finding an unfair labor practice, to "take such affirmative 
action ... as will effectuate the policies of [the Act]."  29 
U.S.C. s 160(c).  Not only does the Board have broad discre-
tionary power under this section to fashion remedies that 
effectuate the policies of the Act, but the Board's exercise of 
its discretion is subject to quite limited judicial review.  See 
Fibreboard Paper Prod. Corp. v. NLRB, 379 U.S. 203, 216 
(1964). We will not disturb a remedy ordered by the Board 
"unless it can be shown that the order is a patent attempt to 
achieve ends other than those which can fairly be said to 
effectuate the policies of the Act."  See Va. Elec. & Power Co. 
v. NLRB, 319 U.S. 533, 540 (1943).

     Petrochem argues that the fee award violates the "Ameri-
can rule," under which "attorney's fees are not ordinarily 
recoverable in the absence of a statute or enforceable con-
tract providing therefor."  Fleischmann Distilling Corp. v. 
Maier Brewing Co., 386 U.S. 714, 717 (1967).  As the Board 
correctly explains, however, the fee award in no way conflicts 
with the American rule because the award responds not to 
the company's loss of its suit, but to the fact that the suit 
itself amounted to an "illegal act."  See Local 32B-32J, Serv. 
Employees Int'l Union v. NLRB, 68 F.3d 490, 496 (D.C. Cir. 
1995) (finding that an award of attorneys fees did not violate 
the American rule because the litigation that the fees were 
incurred in defending against was itself illegal);  Gibson 
Greetings, Inc. v. NLRB, 53 F.3d 385, 394 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
("The NLRB can award a union the costs and fees it incurs in 
defending against an employer's baseless, retaliatory lawsuit 
... if it determines that the filing or maintenance of the 
lawsuit was an unfair labor practice.").  Indeed, Bill John-
son's expressly authorizes the Board to award attorneys' fees 
in just such situations:  "If [a labor law] violation is found, the 
Board may order the employer to reimburse the employees 
whom he had wrongfully sued for their attorney's fees and 
other expenses." 461 U.S. at 747.

                                IV

     We deny Petrochem's petition for review and grant the 
Board's cross-application for enforcement.

                                                           So ordered.

                                                        