                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 6, 2002    Decided January 17, 2003 

                           No. 01-7147

                       Amy Bettis, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                  Islamic Republic of Iran and 
          Iranian Ministry of Information and Security, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv00549)

     Steven R. Perles argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs was Thomas F. Fay.

     Abigail V. Carter argued the cause for amicus curiae in 
support of affirmance.  With her on the brief were Steven H. 
Goldblatt, appointed by the court, Lyndsy B. Rutherford, and 
Stephanie Cotilla.

     Before:  Edwards, Rogers, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court Filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  In 1985, Father Lawrence M. 
Jenco, an ordained Catholic priest who was working as the 
Director of Catholic Relief Services in Beirut, Lebanon, was 
abducted by Hizbollah, the Islamic terrorist organization.  
Hizbollah held Fr. Jenco captive for 564 days, and subjected 
him to near-constant blindfolding, beatings, and psychological 
torture.  Even after Fr. Jenco's release, he remained under-
weight and weak for a long period, had a changed disposition, 
and would suffer "flashbacks" to his kidnapping and torture.  
After Fr. Jenco's death, his estate and family members sued 
the Islamic Republic of Iran, which had "provided support, 
guidance, and resources to Hizbollah" in connection with Fr. 
Jenco's abduction.  Jenco v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 154 
F. Supp. 2d 27, 31 (D.D.C. 2001).  The District Court upheld 
the claims of Fr. Jenco's estate and his six siblings, awarding 
over $314 million in compensatory and punitive damages for 
battery, assault, false imprisonment, and intentional infliction 
of emotional distress suffered by Fr. Jenco and for intentional 
infliction of emotional distress suffered by the siblings.  The 
District Court rejected the claims of Fr. Jenco's 22 nieces and 
nephews, however.  The nieces and nephews now appeal.  
We affirm the judgment of the District Court, because the 
nieces and nephews are not members of Fr. Jenco's immedi-
ate family.  See Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46(2)(a).

                          I. Background

A.   Father Jenco's Abduction and Captivity

     Shortly before 8:00 a.m. on January 8, 1985, five armed 
men abducted Fr. Jenco as he was on his way to the office of 
Catholic Relief Services in West Beirut, Lebanon.  Hizbollah 
carried out the kidnapping as part of a widespread terrorist 
campaign that it conducted during the 1980s.  This campaign 
targeted journalists, university professors, members of the 
clergy, and United States servicemen.  See, e.g., Wagner v. 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 172 F. Supp. 2d 128, 131-32 (D.D.C. 

2001) (detailing the murder of a Navy officer stationed in 
Beirut by a Hizbollah suicide bomber);  Sutherland v. Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 151 F. Supp. 2d 27, 30-38 (D.D.C. 2001) 
(detailing Hizbollah's kidnapping, detention, and torture of an 
American academic in Beirut);  Polhill v. Islamic Republic of 
Iran, No. 00-1798 (TPJ), 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15322, at *2-
*7 (D.D.C. Aug. 23, 2001) (same);  Anderson v. Islamic Re-
public of Iran, 90 F. Supp. 2d 107, 109-11 (D.D.C. 2000) 
(detailing Hizbollah's kidnapping, detention, and torture of an 
American journalist in Beirut);  Cicippio v. Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 18 F. Supp. 2d 62, 63-66 (D.D.C. 1998) (detailing 
Hizbollah's kidnapping, imprisonment, and torture of three 
male U.S. citizens).

     As Hizbollah's prisoner, Fr. Jenco was subjected to inhu-
mane conditions.  The District Court described his treatment 
at some length:

          From the moment he was abducted, Father Jenco 
     was treated little better than a caged animal.  He 
     was chained, beaten, and almost constantly blind-
     folded.  His access to toilet facilities was extremely 
     limited, if permitted at all.  He was routinely re-
     quired to urinate in a cup and maintain the urine in 
     his cell.  His food and clothing were spare, as was 
     even the most basic medical care.
     
          He also withstood repeated psychological torture.  
     Most notably, at one point, his captors held a gun to 
     his head and told him that he was about to die.  The 
     captors pulled the trigger and laughed as Father 
     Jenco reacted to the small click of the unloaded gun.  
     At other times, the captors misled Fr. Jenco into 
     thinking he was going home.  They told him to dress 
     up in his good clothes, took pictures of him, and then 
     said "ha, ha, we're just kidding."
     
Jenco, 154 F. Supp. 2d at 29.

     Fr. Jenco's imprisonment also caused great suffering 
among his family members:

          While Father Jenco was being held prisoner, his 
     many siblings and relatives banded together and 
     
     fought for his release.  The family made a practice 
     of meeting every Monday night to discuss what 
     steps they could take to help secure his release.  
     Family members took on various responsibilities, 
     such as communicating with the public, dealing with 
     the media, maintaining contact with the State De-
     partment, and raising money to cover the various 
     costs of such a massive effort.
     
          Andrew Mihelich and John Jenco, both nephews 
     of Fr. Jenco, testified that, because of their massive 
     dedication to free Fr. Jenco, the whole family, in 
     effect, became a hostage in one way or another.  As 
     a result, many of the traditional family events, such 
     as birthdays, graduations, or religious holidays were 
     overshadowed - or overlooked altogether - on ac-
     count of the campaign to free Fr. Jenco.  Apart 
     from the campaign, the family felt the very personal 
     loss of not having their beloved relative at many 
     family milestones, such as weddings, births, and 
     baptisms.  On the whole, according to John Jenco, 
     the family spent the 19 months of Fr. Jenco's captiv-
     ity on an emotional roller coaster, never knowing 
     how close or far Fr. Jenco was to being released, not 
     to mention returning home unharmed.
     
          Jenco relatives also testified as to the specific 
     effects that the captivity had o[n] Fr. Jenco's broth-
     er, John Jenco.  John Jenco Jr. testified that, from 
     the first day of captivity to the last day of his own 
     life, John Jenco Sr. was distraught in a way he had 
     never been before.  He was able to celebrate the 
     return of Fr. Jenco, but was never fully able, accord-
     ing to John Jenco Jr., become himself again.  Simi-
     larly, Joseph Jenco testified that the stress of the 
     captivity on Verna Mae Mihelich likely was a factor 
     in her premature death.
     
Id. at 31-32.  The trial court also found that

     there is significant evidence of emotional distress 
     among the siblings.  Joseph Jenco, Fr. Jenco's 
     
     brother testified as to the great strain the captivity 
     imposed on himself as well as his brothers and 
     sisters....  As well, other witnesses testified as to 
     the stressful and extensive publicity campaign ...;  
     the stress of false alarms that Fr. Jenco had been 
     killed or freed ...;  and constant fear that the 
     campaign to free Fr. Jenco might also end up hurt-
     ing him and the other hostages.
     
Id. at 35.

     After Fr. Jenco's release, "he returned to the United States 
and served as a parish priest until his death on July 19, 1996."  
Id. at 29.  The District Court found, however, that even after 
his return home, Fr. Jenco never fully recovered from the 
grim experience of his imprisonment:

          Fr. Jenco continued to suffer the effects of his 
     captivity.  For a long period after his return, Father 
     Jenco remained underweight and quite weak.  Fa-
     ther Jenco's nephew, David Mihelich, testified that 
     his uncle's disposition was noticeably milder, and 
     indeed never returned to its pre-captivity state.  As 
     well, Christopher Morales, a Special Agent with the 
     United States Secret Service, became a close friend 
     of Jenco's after interviewing him about his experi-
     ence in Lebanon.  Agent Morales testified that he 
     witnessed Father Jenco have three separate "flash-
     backs", that is, moments where Jenco appeared to 
     be aloof of his surroundings and somewhat pos-
     sessed and disturbed by different images or experi-
     ences....  In sum, the last 11 years of Fr. Jenco's 
     life were indelibly marred by his kidnapping and 
     torture.
     
Id. at 29-30.

     Although the District Court's findings are more precise 
with respect to the effects of Fr. Jenco's ordeal on his siblings 
than on his nieces and nephews, there is no dispute that the 
nieces and nephews suffered emotional distress by virtue of 
the harm done to their uncle.

B.   The Statutory Framework

     Under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act ("FSIA"), 
foreign states generally enjoy immunity from suit in U.S. 
courts.  28 U.S.C. s 1604 ("Subject to existing international 
agreements to which the United States is a party at the time 
of enactment of this Act a foreign state shall be immune from 
the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States and of the 
States....").  However, in 1996 Congress enacted the "ter-
rorism exception" to the FSIA under 28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(7):

          In 1996, as part of the comprehensive Antiterrorism 
     and Effective Death Penalty Act ("AEDPA"), Pub. 
     L. No. 104-132, s 221(a), 110 Stat. 1214 (Apr. 24, 
     1996), Congress amended the FSIA to add a new 
     class of claims for which certain foreign states would 
     be precluded from asserting sovereign immunity.  
     Specifically, the amendment vitiates immunity in 
     cases
     
     in which money damages are sought against a 
foreign state for personal injury or death that 
was caused by an act of torture, extrajudicial 
killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, or the 
provision of material support or resources ... 
for such an act if such act or provision of 
material support is engaged in by an official, 
employee, or agent of such foreign state while 
acting within the scope of his or her office, 
employment, or agency[.]

          28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(7).  In enacting this provision, 
     Congress sought to create a judicial forum for com-
     pensating the victims of terrorism, and in so doing to 
     punish foreign states who have committed or spon-
     sored such acts and deter them from doing so in the 
     future.  See Daliberti v. Republic of Iraq, 97 
     F.Supp.2d 38, 50 (D.D.C.2000);  Molora Vadnais, The 
     Terrorism Exception to the Foreign Sovereign Im-
     munities Act, 5 UCLA J. Int'l L. & Foreign Aff. 
     199, 216 (2000).
     
     ....
     
          Section 1605(a)(7) has some notable features which 
     reveal the delicate legislative compromise out of 
     which it was born.  First, not all foreign states may 
     be sued.  Instead, only a defendant that has been 
     specifically designated by the State Department as a 
     "state sponsor of terrorism" is subject to the loss of 
     its sovereign immunity.  s 1605(a)(7)(A).  Second, 
     even a foreign state listed as a sponsor of terrorism 
     retains its immunity unless (a) it is afforded a rea-
     sonable opportunity to arbitrate any claim based on 
     acts that occurred in that state, and (b) either the 
     victim or the claimant was a U.S. national at the 
     time that those acts took place.  s 1605(a)(7)(B).
     
Price v. Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 294 F.3d 
82, 88-89 (D.C. Cir. 2002).

     Less than six months after passage of AEDPA, Congress 
passed an amendment designed to enhance the penalties 
available in suits implicating 28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(7).  See 
Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997, Pub. L. No. 
104-208, s 589, 110 Stat. 3009, 3009-172 (1997) (codified at 28 
U.S.C. s 1605 note);  Flatow v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 999 
F. Supp. 1, 12-13 (D.D.C. 1998) (describing amendments to 
FSIA);  see also Naomi Roht-Arriaza, The Foreign Sovereign 
Immunities Act and Human Rights Violations:  One Step 
Forward, Two Steps Back?, 16 Berkeley J. Int'l L., 71, 82-83 
(1998) (discussing the amendment).  This provision is known 
as the "Flatow Amendment," because its sponsor referred to 
the Flatow family - whose daughter, Alisa, was killed by a 
Palestinian suicide bomber while studying in Israel - when 
speaking in support of the statute.  Joseph W. Dellapenna, 
Civil Remedies for International Terrorism, 12 DePaul Bus. 
L.J. 169, 256 n.439 (1999-2000);  see also Flatow, 999 F. Supp. 
at 6-9 (describing Alisa Flatow's murder).  The Flatow 
Amendment allows for non-economic and punitive damages 
against an official, employee, or agent of a foreign state 
designated as "terrorist."  Price, 294 F.3d at 87;  Flatow, 999 
F. Supp. at 12-13.

     In Price, we noted that "[t]he FSIA is undoubtedly a 
jurisdictional statute which, in specified cases, eliminates 
foreign sovereign immunity and opens the door to subject 
matter jurisdiction in the federal courts....  There is a 
question, however, whether the FSIA creates a federal cause 
of action for torture and hostage taking against foreign 
states," or only against their "official[s], employee[s], or 
agent[s]" as specified in the Amendment.  294 F.3d at 87.  
Two District Court opinions in this circuit have reached 
different conclusions on the question of whether the Flatow 
Amendment furnishes a basis for a cause of action against a 
defendant state.  Compare Roeder v. Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 195 F. Supp. 2d 140, 171-73 (D.D.C. 2002), with Cronin 
v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 24115, at 
*24-*30 (D.D.C. Dec. 18, 2002).  Because this question had 
not been briefed or argued by the parties, the court in Price 
merely "flag[ged] the issue," leaving it for disposition by the 
District Court in the first instance on remand.  Id.  We need 
not reach the issue in this case either, because the District 
Court did not address the matter, Iran has not appealed the 
judgments in favor of Fr. Jenco's estate and his siblings, and 
the instant appeal by the nieces and nephews will be resolved 
against appellants on different grounds.

C.   The Litigation in District Court

     In this case, the parties do not appear to doubt that Iran is 
a proper defendant, at least with respect to the claims 
brought by Fr. Jenco's estate and his siblings.  Iran has been 
designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the Secretary of 
State.  See 22 C.F.R. s 126.1(d).  There is also weighty 
evidence in the record confirming the involvement of Iran in 
connection with Fr. Jenco's kidnapping and brutal imprison-
ment.  Jenco, 154 F. Supp. 2d at 31.  Because of Iran's 
culpability, Fr. Jenco's family brought suit against Iran and 
the Iranian Ministry of Information and Security ("MOIS") 
on March 15, 2000.  The District Court found that, because of 
Iran's material support for Hizbollah's hostage taking and 
torture, the terrorism exception stripped Iran's immunity 
from suit.  It also found the defendants liable "on most, but 
not all, counts alleged in the plaintiffs' complaint."  Jenco, 154 

F. Supp. 2d at 33.  The court ultimately awarded over $314 
million in compensatory and punitive damages to Fr. Jenco's 
estate and his siblings.  Id. at 40.

     The District Court rejected the claims of Fr. Jenco's nieces 
and nephews, who were seeking damages for intentional 
infliction of emotional distress.  The trial court recognized 
the "tremendous impact that Fr. Jenco's detention had on his 
nieces and nephews."  Id. at 36.  The court concluded, how-
ever, that these family members could not recover under 
common law because they were not among Fr. Jenco's imme-
diate family.  In reaching this decision, the District Court 
was guided by s 46 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, 
which purports to delineate common law claims for "Outra-
geous Conduct Causing Severe Emotional Distress," as fol-
lows:

     (1)  One who by extreme and outrageous conduct 
          intentionally or recklessly causes severe emo-
          tional distress to another is subject to liability 
          for such emotional distress, and if bodily harm to 
          the other results from it, for such bodily harm.
          
      (2)      Where such conduct is directed at a third per-
          son, the actor is subject to liability if he inten-
          tionally or recklessly causes severe emotional 
          distress
     
          (a) to a member of such person's immediate 
          family who is present at the time, whether or 
          not such distress results in bodily harm, or
     
          (b) to any other person who is present at the 
          time, if such distress results in bodily harm.
     
Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46 (1986).

     The District Court noted that in Sutherland, another ter-
rorism exception suit, the court allowed the wife of a man 
whom Hizbollah held hostage for six and a half years to 
recover damages from Iran for intentional infliction of emo-
tional distress even though the wife was not actually "pres-
ent" to witness the outrageous conduct against her husband.  
151 F. Supp. 2d at 50.  The "presence" requirement of 
s 46(2)(a) was construed liberally to include this claim, be-

cause the court found that the defendants' intent to cause 
distress to the wife was quite clear from their conduct.  Id.  
In the instant case, however, the District Court held that, 
although the "presence" requirement could be given a gener-
ous reading, the "immediate family" requirement of s 46(2)(a) 
could not:

          [S]ome lines must be drawn, if, for example, "mil-
     lions of people who are not present ... watch the 
     torture or murder of the President on television." 
     ...  In hostage cases, this Court finds that the line 
     is best drawn according to the plaintiff's relationship 
     with the victim of the outrageous conduct.  That is, 
     to collect for intentional infliction of emotional dis-
     tress in cases such as this one, the plaintiff need not 
     be present at the place of outrageous conduct, but 
     must be a member of the victim's immediate family.
     
          The Court draws the line with respect to family 
     relationship (and not presence) for two reasons.  
     First, hostage cases are unique in that they implicit-
     ly involve a physical separation of the plaintiff from 
     the victim of the outrageous conduct.  As a matter 
     of fact, a plaintiff's lack of presence is the exact 
     source of his emotional distress.  Thus, if the Court 
     were to limit recovery in hostage cases using a 
     "presence" test, plaintiffs would never recover de-
     spite there being extremely strong evidence of sig-
     nificant emotional suffering.
     
          Second, comparing the presence test to the family 
     relationship test, courts have been more willing to 
     stretch the boundaries of presence than family rela-
     tionship.
     
Jenco, 154 F. Supp. 2d at 36 (quoting Dan B. Dobbs, The Law 
of Torts s 307, at 834 (2000)).  And in applying the "immedi-
ate family" requirement of s 46(2)(a), the District Court 
adhered to the traditional definition of that term:

          This Court defines one's immediate family as his 
     spouse, parents, siblings, and children. This defini-
     tion is consistent with the traditional understanding 
     
     of one's immediate family.  See Dan B. Dobbs, The 
     Law of Torts, s 310 (2000) (addressing the scope of 
     recovery in consortium claims).
     
Jenco, 154 F. Supp. 2d at 36 n.8.  The court then found that 
the nieces and nephews did not satisfy the requirement.  Id.

     The nieces and nephews now appeal the District Court's 
decision to deny them recovery for intentional infliction of 
emotional distress.  Because Iran did not enter an appear-
ance, the court appointed the Georgetown University Law 
Center's Appellate Litigation Program as Amicus Curiae to 
present arguments in support of the District Court's judg-
ment.*

                           II. Analysis

     The sole issue on appeal is whether the District Court 
erred in denying Fr. Jenco's nieces and nephews recovery 
under the Flatow Amendment for intentional infliction of 
emotional distress caused by outrageous conduct directed at 
Fr. Jenco, where the requirement for recovery at common 
law - membership in Fr. Jenco's immediate family - is not 
met.  This question is a matter of law for this court to 
consider de novo.  See Princz v. F.R.G., 26 F.3d 1166, 1169 
(D.C. Cir. 1994).

     The parties agree that the District Court correctly applied 
common law (and not local District of Columbia law) to the 
nieces' and nephews' claims for intentional infliction of emo-
tional distress.  The brief of Amicus Curiae usefully explains 
the common law recognized pursuant to the FSIA:

__________
     * FSIA s 1608 states that "[n]o judgment by default shall be 
entered by a court of the United States ... against a foreign state 
... unless the claimant establishes his claim or right to relief by 
evidence satisfactory to the court."  28 U.S.C. s 1608.  The Law 
Center's efforts to assist the court in its statutory responsibility to 
evaluate the appellants' claims - both the brief submitted to the 
court and the oral argument presented by Ms. Abigail V. Carter - 
have been truly outstanding, for which the court is grateful.

     While there is an argument that state substantive 
     tort law may apply to claims brought under the 
     Flatow Amendment, see, e.g., First Nat'l City Bank 
     v. Banco Para El Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 462 
     U.S. 611, 622 n.11 (1983) (finding that under the 
     commercial exceptions to the FSIA, "where state 
     law provides a rule of liability governing private 
     individuals, the FSIA requires the application of that 
     rule to foreign states in like circumstances"), district 
     courts performing the traditional choice of law anal-
     ysis in Flatow Amendment cases have consistently 
     applied federal common law.  See Wagner v. Islamic 
     Republic of Iran, 172 F. Supp. 2d 128, 134-35 
     (D.D.C. 2001) (applying federal common law because 
     other possible choices "would eventually lead in oth-
     er cases to divergent measures of recovery for es-
     sentially identical claims against foreign defen-
     dants");  Flatow v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 999 
     F. Supp. 1, 15 (D.D.C. 1998) (applying "interstitial 
     federal common law" because Congress intended 
     "that the federal courts create coherent national 
     standards ... [i]n the interest of promoting unifor-
     mity of determinations with respect to the liability of 
     foreign states for the terrorist acts").  Application of 
     federal common law is particularly appropriate be-
     cause the District of Columbia, which is the dedicat-
     ed venue for actions against foreign states, see 28 
     U.S.C. s 1391(f)(4), does not recognize solatium 
     damages in wrongful death causes of action while 
     the Flatow Amendment does.  See Runyon v. Dis-
     trict of Columbia, 463 F.2d 1319, 1322 (D.C. Cir. 
     1972) (holding, in a wrongful death case, that "[t]he 
     parties so recovering may not be compensated for 
     their grief");  28 U.S.C. s 1605 note (specifying that 
     plaintiffs may recover "economic damages, solatium, 
     pain, and suffering, and punitive damages");  see also 
     Stethem v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 201 F. Supp. 2d 
     78, 89 (D.D.C. 2002) ("Because the District of Co-
     lumbia does not recognize claims for loss of solatium, 
     
     this Court has recognized this cause of action under 
     the federal common law by relying upon the Second 
     Restatement of Torts.").9
     
     _______
     
     9 [I]f District of Columbia law were to govern, neither the 
     nieces nor anyone other than Fr. Jenco himself would 
     recover for intentional infliction of emotional distress.  
     Amicus is aware of no case in the District of Columbia 
     permitting someone other than the direct victim of the 
     outrageous conduct to recover for intentional infliction of 
     emotional distress.
     
     _______
     
          Lacking a developed body of federal common law 
     regarding intentional infliction of emotional distress, 
     courts evaluating such claims under the Flatow 
     Amendment have looked to the Restatements, as 
     well as state decisional law.  See, e.g., Sutherland v. 
     Islamic Republic of Iran, 151 F. Supp. 2d 27, 48-52 
     (D.C. Cir. 2001) (applying the Second Restatement 
     of Torts to plaintiff's intentional infliction of emo-
     tional distress claim under the federal common law);  
     Flatow, 999 F. Supp. at 30 n.13 (collecting ALR 
     references on state law recovery for solatium dam-
     ages)[.]
               ... 
               In this case, the district court and nieces both rely 
     on section 46 of the Restatement for the substantive 
     law of intentional infliction of emotional distress.
     
Br. of Amicus Curiae at 18-21.

     We recognize that some of the cases addressing these 
FSIA claims refer to "federal common law."  Indeed, Amicus 
Curiae does as well.  The term "federal common law" seems 
to us to be a misnomer.  Indeed, it is a mistake, we think, to 
label actions under the FSIA and Flatow Amendment for 
solatium damages as "federal common law" cases, for these 
actions are based on statutory rights.  Without the statute, 
the claims could not arise.  Of course, because these claims 
are based on a federal statute, their "extent and nature" are 
"federal questions."  Burks v. Lasker, 441 U.S. 471, 476 

(1979).  But that does not, in this case, "authorize the federal 
courts to fashion a complete body of federal law."  Id. at 477.  
Rather, as we note in section II.B., infra, because the FSIA 
instructs that "the foreign state shall be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as a private individual under 
like circumstances," 28 U.S.C. s 1606, it in effect instructs 
federal judges to find the relevant law, not to make it.  In 
doing this, federal judges have looked to the common law of 
the states to determine the meaning of "intentional infliction 
of emotional distress."  And as we explain more fully below, 
federal courts in FSIA and Flatow Amendment cases have 
accepted s 46 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts as a 
proxy for state common law of intentional infliction of emo-
tional distress - as do both appellants and amicus.

     We will assume, arguendo, that the nieces and nephews 
may proceed against the State of Iran under the Flatow 
Amendment.  We will also accept that, in a case of this sort, 
"common law," grounded in s 46 of the Restatement (Second) 
of Torts, delineates the controlling substantive law.  We hold, 
however, that Fr. Jenco's nieces and nephews cannot recover 
damages for intentional infliction of emotional distress, be-
cause they are not members of Fr. Jenco's immediate family.  
In reaching this conclusion, it is unnecessary for us to reach 
the question left open in Price, i.e., whether the FSIA creates 
a federal cause of action against foreign states.  It is also 
unnecessary for us to decide whether the nieces and nephews 
satisfy the "presence" requirements of s 46(2).

A.   The Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46(1) - Actions 
     for Direct Harm

     As noted above, s 46(1) is limited to direct (not "third 
party") actions for outrageous conduct causing severe emo-
tional distress:

     One who by extreme and outrageous conduct inten-
     tionally or recklessly causes severe emotional dis-
     tress to another is subject to liability for such emo-
     tional distress, and if bodily harm to the other 
     results from it, for such bodily harm.
     
Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46(1).  Appellants claim 
that, although they were not abducted and caused to suffer 

the physical punishment that Fr. Jenco faced, they nonethe-
less were direct targets of Hizbollah, Iran, and MOIS during 
the 564 days of Fr. Jenco's captivity, and thus may seek relief 
for severe emotional distress under s 46(1).  In support of 
this contention, appellants argue, first, that the kidnapping of 
Fr. Jenco was used to manipulate his family to put pressure 
on United States Government officials to advance Iran's 
political goals, and, second, that disinformation released by 
Iran during the kidnapping was calculated to distress family 
members.

     The District Court focused solely on s 46(2) in rejecting 
appellants' claims, implicitly rejecting any suggestion that 
appellants could seek relief under s 46(1).  The District 
Court clearly did not err in declining to apply s 46(1) to 
appellants' claims.  As Amicus Curiae correctly notes,

     If any person that Iran hoped to distress by holding 
     and torturing Fr. Jenco could recover under section 
     46(1) as a direct victim of Iran's conduct, virtually 
     anyone claiming he or she was affected could recov-
     er.  Assuming the nieces are correct that "[a] ter-
     rorist organization does not expose itself to the 
     wrath of the world community simply to cause emo-
     tional distress to only the hostage's 'immediate fami-
     ly' " (Appellants' Br. at 40), anyone whom Iran and 
     MOIS intended to affect - and who was severely 
     distressed - could recover, including neighbors, pa-
     rishioners, and friends, the U.S. government, and 
     even the world community, in addition to the victim 
     and his immediate family.  Such a result would 
     contravene the parameters of the FSIA - "the for-
     eign state shall be liable in the same manner and to 
     the same extent as a private individual under like 
     circumstances," 28 U.S.C. s 1606 - because it would 
     be contrary to the limits placed on recovery for 
     intentional infliction of emotional distress by the 
     Restatement section 46(2) and the states.
     
Br. of Amicus Curiae at 27-28.  We agree.

     Moreover, permitting the nieces and nephews to recover 
under s 46(1) would undermine the limitations imposed on 

recovery under s 46(2) - most significantly, the "immediate 
family" requirement.  Under appellants' view, anyone who 
agitated for the hostages' release out of genuine concern, 
sympathy or grief could claim to be an intended "target," 
seek redress under s 46(1), and avoid the strictures of 
s 46(2).  Appellants argue that this expansive interpretation 
of s 46(1) can be avoided by limiting recovery to "family 
members."  This does not work, however, because it defies 
the terms of s 46, and, also, because there is no good reason 
to distinguish between aggrieved family members and other 
equally aggrieved persons under appellants' expansive inter-
pretation of s 46(1).  Cf. Restatement s 46(2), cmt. b ("Be-
cause of the fear of fictitious or trivial claims, distrust of the 
proof offered, and the difficulty of setting up any satisfactory 
boundaries to liability, the law has been slow to afford 
independent protection to the interest in freedom from emo-
tional distress standing alone.").

     Finally, the position espoused by appellants is at odds with 
the FSIA and the prevailing case law.  The statute states 
that a "foreign state shall be liable in the same manner and to 
the same extent as a private individual under like circum-
stances."  28 U.S.C. s 1606.  As Amicus Curiae demon-
strates in its brief, appellants can point to no specific line of 
cases in any jurisdiction that supports their right to recovery 
under subsection (1).  Indeed, the prevailing case law refutes 
appellants' claim.  See, e.g., Dornfeld v. Oberg, 503 N.W.2d 
115, 119 (Minn. 1993) (declining to find reckless driving to be 
"directed at" any particular motorist within the meaning of 
the Restatement, in part because "[a]llowing recovery under 
the present facts would raise the specter that any surviving 
family member in a car crash caused by a drunk or reckless 
driver could maintain an action against the driver for inten-
tional infliction of emotional distress").

     In support of their argument that subsection (1) should 
apply in this case, appellants point to Gill v. Brown, 695 P.2d 
1276 (Idaho Ct. App. 1985), for the proposition that a defen-
dant can directly target a plaintiff by striking someone or 
something, knowing that this conduct will emotionally distress 
the plaintiff.  In Gill, the court permitted a married couple to 

recover for intentional infliction of emotional distress after 
the defendant allegedly shot and killed their donkey.  Al-
though appellants are correct that the defendant in Gill 
targeted the plaintiffs by striking at something dear to them, 
the donkey was property and not another person with an 
independent legal right to be free from outrageous conduct.  
Thus, killing the donkey directly targeted the plaintiffs.  Gill 
is therefore consistent with the general rule that courts do 
not consider a plaintiff to be a direct victim of the defendant's 
conduct where that conduct more directly targeted another 
victim.  While appellants also cite to district court opinions in 
cases brought under the Flatow Amendment, none of the 
cited opinions purports to hold that family members are 
direct victims of terrorist conduct who may escape the re-
quirements of subsection (2) by recovering under subsection 
(1).

     It is clear that Fr. Jenco's nieces and nephews are not 
direct victims under s 46(1).  Therefore, the nieces and neph-
ews must satisfy the requirements of s 46(2) in order to gain 
recovery for intentional infliction of emotional distress.

B.   The Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46(2) - "Third-
     Party" Claims

     Section 46(2) provides that:

          (2) Where [outrageous conduct causing severe emo-
          tional distress] is directed at a third person, the 
          actor is subject to liability if he intentionally or 
          recklessly causes severe emotional distress
          
          (a) to a member of such person's immediate 
          family who is present at the time, whether or 
          not such distress results in bodily harm, or
     
          (b) to any other person who is present at the 
          time, if such distress results in bodily harm.
     
Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46(2).  Subsection (2)(a) 
sets forth the "immediate family" requirement, and subsec-
tions (2)(a) and (b) delineate the "presence" requirements.  
Because appellants do not suggest that their emotional dis-
tress resulted in bodily harm, they seek recovery under 

s 46(2)(a), not s 46(2)(b).  Because we affirm the District 
Court's construction of "immediate family" under subsection 
(2)(a), we offer no view on the substantive scope of the 
"presence" requirements under s 46(2).

     Appellants claim that the "immediate family" requirement 
of s 46(2)(a) is satisfied in this case, because "[t]he nieces and 
nephews were 'near relatives' or 'close associates' of Fr. 
Jenco."  Appellants' Br. at 47.  This, of course, is not the test 
enunciated in the Restatement.  Rather, s 46(2)(a) is perfect-
ly plain in its reference to "immediate family."  It does not 
refer to "family members," "near relatives," "close associ-
ates," or persons with whom the victim has "close emotional 
ties" - rather, it says, plainly, "immediate family."  And there 
is no doubt whatsoever that, in this case, nieces and nephews 
are not "immediate family" members.  Indeed, appellants do 
not dispute this point.  Rather, they claim that s 46(2)(a) 
should be construed liberally to afford "situational justice."  
Appellants' Br. at 46.  As much as we sympathize with 
appellants' claims, we have no authority to stretch the law 
beyond its clear bounds to satisfy our sense of justice.

     In addressing liability for intentional infliction of emotional 
distress, the Restatement took a progressive position, seeking 
to advance the common law of 1965.  "Academics, rather than 
courts, were the prime movers in the development of the 
tort...."  Daniel Givelber, The Right to Minimum Social 
Decency and the Limits of Evenhandedness:  Intentional 
Infliction of Emotional Distress by Outrageous Conduct, 82 
Colum. L. Rev. 42, 42 (1982);  see also Annotation, Modern 
Status of Intentional Infliction of Mental Distress as Inde-
pendent Tort;  "Outrage", 38 A.L.R.4th 998 s 2 (1985) ("Rec-
ognition of the tort by the drafters of the Restatement 
stimulated its recognition by the courts, the elements of the 
tort as described in the Restatement being widely accepted 
and quoted.").  The caveat to s 46 says that "[t]he Institute 
expresses no opinion as to whether there may not be other 
circumstances under which [an] actor may be subject to 
liability for the intentional infliction or reckless infliction of 
emotional distress."  Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46, 
caveat.  And the Comment to s 46 observes that the law of 

intentional infliction of emotional distress is "still in a stage of 
development, and the ultimate limits of this tort are not yet 
determined."  Restatement (Second) of Torts s 46, cmt. c.  
However, although the common law today has largely caught 
up with the Restatement, Br. of Amicus Curiae at 21, no 
cases in any federal or state court go beyond the Restatement 
to define "immediate family" as including nieces and nephews.

     The brief of Amicus Curiae furnishes an extraordinary 
survey of the common law of intentional infliction of emotional 
distress, with a chart showing the law in every state in which 
the tort has been elucidated.  On the basis of this survey, 
Amicus Curiae concludes, correctly, that there is no case that 
has permitted nieces or nephews to recover for third-party 
intentional infliction of emotional distress.  Br. of Amicus 
Curiae at 47.  See also "Amended Survey of State Law 
Relating to Recovery for Intentional Infliction of Emotional 
Distress (Sometimes Called 'The Tort of Outrage')," Br. of 
Amicus Curiae at Addendum.  Appellants' counsel conceded 
at oral argument that, so far as he knew, no cases include 
nieces and nephews in the definition of "immediate family" for 
the purpose of intentional infliction of emotional distress.  
Indeed, counsel conceded in oral argument that he was 
unaware of any cases in any context holding that nieces and 
nephews come within the well-understood concept of "imme-
diate family."

     We reject appellants' suggestion that the commentary to 
s 46 alters the common law definition of "immediate family."  
Restatement s 46, cmt. l, in addressing "[c]onduct directed at 
a third person," says that "the decided cases in which recov-
ery has been allowed have been those in which the plaintiffs 
have been near relatives, or at least close associates, of the 
person attacked."  Appellants argue that this "makes it clear 
that the 'immediate family' requirement was not intended to 
bar recovery of those who fall outside the definition of that 
term."  Appellants' Br. at 47.  None of the examples in the 
commentary support this claim.  Rather, as noted by Amicus 
Curiae,

     [f]ollowing the reference to "near relatives" or "close 
     associates," the commentary explains that "there 
     
     appears to be no essential reason why a stranger 
     who is asked for a match on the street should not 
     recover when the man who asks for it is shot down 
     before his eyes, at least where his emotional distress 
     results in bodily harm."  ...  Although no immedi-
     ate family relationship exists in the example, the 
     stranger is present during the extreme and outra-
     geous conduct and suffers bodily injury from his 
     emotional distress.  Because the nieces "do not con-
     tend that they suffered bodily harm" (Appellants' 
     Br. at 27 n.1), the commentary to section 46 does not 
     assist them.  At most, the commentary suggests 
     that when the plaintiff is present and suffers bodily 
     injury from the severe emotional distress, individu-
     als not within the immediate family may recover 
     damages.  Indeed the commentary merely provides 
     a gloss on section 46(2)(b), which permits recovery 
     "to any other person who is present at the time, if 
     such distress results in bodily harm."  Restatement 
     s 46(2)(b).
     
Br. of Amicus Curiae at 43-44.

     Furthermore, and more importantly, appellants concede 
that they cannot find a single case supporting their interpre-
tation of "immediate family."  In a few limited circumstances, 
some courts have allowed relatives who either resided in the 
same household with the victim or were legal guardians to 
recover for negligent infliction of emotional distress.  See, 
e.g., Sullivan v. Ford Motor Co., No.97-CIV-1593, 2000 WL 
343777 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 31, 2000);  Garcia v. San Antonio 
Housing Auth., 859 S.W.2d 78, 81 (Tex. Ct. App. 1993);  
Kriventsov v. San Rafael Taxicabs, Inc., 186 Cal. App. 3d 
1445 (1986).  And, recently, the District Court allowed recov-
ery for intentional infliction of emotional distress to a woman 
who, although not legally married to the victim, had lived with 
him for over 20 years in a "bond that was the functional 
equivalent of marriage."  See Surette v. Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2002 WL 31455114 (D.D.C. Nov. 4, 2002).  In these 
cases, the parties in issue were members of the victim's 
household, and they were viewed as the functional equivalents 

of immediate family members.  In this case, however, appel-
lants merely claim that the nieces and nephews enjoyed a 
close relationship with Fr. Jenco, which is far short of what 
s 46(2)(a) requires.

     To define "immediate family" to embrace nieces and neph-
ews who do not live in the immediate household or have any 
legal obligation to the victim would stretch the term too far.  
There is a commonly understood meaning of the term, as 
reflected in State and common law.  Appellants have not 
pointed to any other source of guidance to which a federal 
court could properly look in interpreting the FSIA.  In 
seeking to recover, appellants would transform the apparent-
ly settled meaning of the Restatement in a manner that would 
brook few limits, as the nieces and nephews are 22 in number, 
live in different States, and while suffering emotionally do not 
claim any further relationship to the victim.  Indeed, such 
expanded recovery in this case might also reduce the fund of 
Iranian assets accessible in this country to plaintiffs who are 
more closely related to victims of other cases of Iranian 
terrorism.

     It is not within our authority to extend liability for inten-
tional infliction of emotional distress beyond what has been 
allowed by the common law or authorized by the statute.  To 
choose to include nieces and nephews within the definition of 
"immediate family" over, for example, close friends who may 
be even more egregiously affected by state-sponsored terror-
ism, seems to us to be well beyond our appropriate role as 
judges on the federal bench.  First, appellants' claims are, at 
bottom, statutory in nature, founded on the FSIA and the 
Flatow Amendment.  We are obliged, therefore, to apply the 
statute as written.  As noted above, the FSIA provides that a 
"foreign state shall be liable in the same manner and to the 
same extent as a private individual under like circumstances."  
28 U.S.C. s 1606.  Therefore, we have no free-wheeling com-
mission to construct common law as we see fit.  Rather, we 
are bound to look to state law in an effort to fathom the "like 
circumstances" to which 28 U.S.C. s 1606 refers.  The statute 
instructs us to find the law, not to make it.  And, as we have 
shown, appellants can find no support for their claims in the 

established common law.  Second, the correct substantive 
foundation for appellants' claims is s 46(2)(a), which, as we 
have shown, furnishes the basis for much of the state common 
law.  What is most significant here is that s 46(2)(a) is clear 
in its terms, at least insofar as the "immediate family" 
requirement is concerned.

     We are mindful that state-sponsored terrorist groups such 
as Hizbollah transgress all bounds of human decency through 
the physical and psychological torture of their hostages.  
However, this fact is not a license for judges to legislate from 
the bench.  Assuming, arguendo, that appropriate parties 
may pursue a cause of action against a foreign state like Iran 
under the Flatow Amendment, and assuming further that the 
prevailing common law continues to mirror the requirements 
of s 46(2)(a), relief in cases of this sort will be limited to 
"immediate family" members.  As the law now stands, the 
nieces and nephews of a victim have no viable basis for a 
third-party claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress 
under the statute.

                         III. Conclusion

     The nieces and nephews are not direct victims under 
s 46(1), and they are not "immediate family" members under 
s 46(2).  Therefore, we affirm the judgment of the District 
Court rejecting appellants' claims for recovery based on 
intentional infliction of emotional distress.

                                                                            