                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 13, 2000      Decided June 2, 2000 

                           No. 99-5197

                     William G. Moore, Jr., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                           No. 99-5198

                     William G. Moore, Jr., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                        Joseph B. Valder, 
                             Appellee

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (92cv02288) 
                           (93cv00324)

                            ---------

     Paul M. Pohl argued the cause for appellant.  With him on 
the briefs were Bryan D. Kocher, Daniel H. Bromberg, and 
James E. Anklam.

     Richard Montague, Trial Attorney, U.S. Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellees.  With him on the 
brief were David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral, Andrea W. McCarthy, Senior Trial Counsel, and Wilma 
A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Silberman, Randolph, and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Our first opinion in this case 
affirmed in part and reversed in part the district court's 
dismissal of William G. Moore, Jr.'s complaint against a 
prosecutor and postal inspectors and his complaint against 
the United States.  See Moore v. Valder, 65 F.3d 189 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995).  On remand, the district court again dismissed the 
claims against the prosecutor, Joseph B. Valder, and granted 
judgment on the pleadings in favor of the government, rulings 
from which Moore now appeals.

                                I.

     Moore's basic grievance is that he was unjustly prosecuted 
on charges concerning his dealings with the United States 
Postal Service.  In the early 1980s, the company Moore 
headed--REI--wanted to sell the Postal Service multiple-line 
scanners, but the Service declined.  Moore publicly criticized 
the decision.  A Postal Service governor--Peter Voss--sug-
gested to REI that it hire the consulting firm GAI to promote 
its product.  REI did so.  Voss had a side deal with GAI:  
thirty percent of the fees REI paid to the consulting firm 
were kicked back to Voss.  After their crimes were discover-
ed, Voss and several GAI officials plead guilty.  William A. 
Spartin, GAI's president, negotiated an immunity deal in 
return for his cooperation.

     Postal inspectors and prosecutor Valder, seeking to estab-
lish that Moore and REI knew of the kickback scheme, were 
told instead by each of five of the admitted conspirators, 
including Spartin, that no one at REI had such knowledge.  
The postal inspectors later drafted, and the prosecutor pre-
sented to the grand jury, "witness statements" for these 
individuals, but without this exculpatory information.  Spar-
tin's refusal to implicate Moore prompted Valder to tear up 
his immunity agreement and threaten to prosecute Spartin's 
son.  Valder and the postal inspectors showed Spartin the 
government-drafted statements of the other witnesses.  
(Moore alleges this disclosure was a violation of grand jury 
secrecy rules.)  Spartin continued to deny that he had per-
sonal knowledge of Moore's involvement, repeating the point 
nineteen times during a polygraph test.  Spartin then said "I 
have no knowledge of that at all....  But, you know, I read 
that goddam[n] testimony and I'm not a lawyer but Jesus, 
there's enough there to seem to me to hang REI from the 
yardarm."  Spartin then testified before the grand jury that 
in his "opinion" Moore knew of the kickback scheme.

     Postal inspectors also provided witness interview state-
ments and lab results to Paul Carlin, a former Postmaster 
General dismissed by the Board of Governors during the 
scanner controversy.  Then, weeks before an indictment was 
returned against Moore, the inspectors passed along a draft 
indictment to Carlin.  Carlin later filed a civil RICO claim 
against Moore, alleging that Moore conspired to have the 
Board dismiss him.

     Moore, REI Vice President Robert Reedy, and REI were 
indicted by a federal grand jury in the District of Columbia in 
October 1988 for conspiracy to defraud the United States, 
theft, receipt of stolen property, mail fraud and wire fraud.  
Despite a court order to turn over even "borderline" Brady 
evidence, Valder failed to provide the defense with exculpato-
ry material, including the Spartin lie detector results and the 
amended statement of one witness denying any knowledge 
that REI officials were aware of the kickbacks.  The district 

court granted Moore's motion for judgment of acquittal at the 
close of the government's case, stating that "[m]uch of what 
the government characterizes as incriminatory evidence is not 
persuasive of guilt when viewed in its full context [and] some 
of the government's evidence is exculpatory and points to-
ward innocent conduct...."  United States v. Recognition 
Equip., Inc., 725 F. Supp. 587, 587-88 (D.D.C. 1989).

     Moore then brought his suits against Valder and the postal 
inspectors under Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of 
Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388 (1971), and against 
the United States under the Federal Torts Claims Act 
(FTCA), see 28 U.S.C. ss 2671-2680.  After proceedings 
unnecessary to recount, the district court dismissed the com-
plaints and Moore appealed.  This court considered whether, 
as the district court determined, Valder enjoyed absolute 
immunity from civil liability for malicious prosecution and for 
retaliatory prosecution.1  See Moore, 65 F.3d at 192-95.  Re-
lying on the Supreme Court's distinction between a prosecu-
tor's role as an advocate and his conduct as an investigator, 
see Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409 (1976), Burns v. Reed, 
500 U.S. 478 (1991), Buckley v. Fitzsimmons, 509 U.S. 259 
(1993), the court decided that absolute immunity shielded 
some, but not all, of Valder's conduct.  Absolute immunity 
protected Valder from liability for his "decision to prosecute 
Moore," "for allegedly concealing exculpatory evidence from 
the grand jury," "for allegedly manipulating evidence before 
the grand jury to create a false impression of what Moore 
knew about the alleged fraudulent schemes," and for failing to 
disclose exculpatory material before trial.  65 F.3d at 194.  
But absolute immunity did not apply to Valder's "[i]ntimidat-
ing and coercing witnesses into changing their testimony" or 
"disclosing grand jury information to unauthorized third par-
ties."  Id. at 194-95.

     With respect to Moore's claims under the Federal Tort 
Claims Act, the court took note of the FTCA's "discretionary 

__________
     1 Moore did not appeal the dismissal of his other Bivens claims.  
See 65 F.3d at 191 n.3.

function" exception, which protects the government from 
liability for "the exercise or performance or the failure to 
exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the 
part of a federal agency or an employee of the Govern-
ment...."  28 U.S.C. s 2680(a).  The following alleged con-
duct fell within the exception:  "Deciding whether to prose-
cute, assessing a witness's credibility to ensure that he is 
giving an accurate and complete account of what he knows, 
identifying the evidence to submit to the grand jury and 
determining whether information is 'exculpatory' and 'materi-
al' and therefore must be disclosed pursuant to a Brady 
request."  65 F.3d at 197.  "Disclosing grand jury testimony 
to unauthorized third parties, however, is not a discretionary 
activity nor is it inextricably tied to matters requiring the 
exercise of discretion."  Id.

     On remand, Valder moved for summary judgment on the 
retaliatory prosecution claim, contending that Moore could 
not make out an essential element--that he brought the 
prosecution at least in part to retaliate against Moore's First 
Amendment activity--because absolute immunity protected 
his decision to prosecute Moore.  The district court agreed 
and granted Valder's motion.  See Moore v. Valder, No. 
92CV-2288, memorandum opinion at 17-24 (D.D.C. Feb. 5, 
1998) ("mem. op.").

     As to the FTCA claims, the district court determined that 
only one aspect of Moore's complaint survived this court's 
application of the discretionary function exception--namely, 
the claim that "AUSA Valder and the Postal Inspectors 
violated Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(e)(2) ... by 
giving Spartin and former Postmaster General Paul Carlin 
access to the Grand Jury testimony of other witnesses for the 
purpose of influencing Spartin's testimony and for the appar-
ent purpose of assisting Carlin, a private plaintiff, to pursue 
civil litigation...."  FTCA Complaint p 26.  Moore argued 
that these two grand jury disclosures were sufficient to make 
out his malicious prosecution and abuse-of-process claims.  
Under the FTCA, however, claims of malicious prosecution 
and abuse of process can only arise from the conduct of 
"investigative or law enforcement officers of the United 

States government."  See 28 U.S.C. s 2680(h).  " '[I]nvestiga-
tive or law enforcement officer' means any officer of the 
United States who is empowered by law to execute searches, 
to seize evidence, or to make arrests for violations of Federal 
law."  Id.  Postal inspectors are so empowered, see 39 C.F.R. 
s 233.1, but the district court concluded that federal prosecu-
tors are not, see mem. op. at 32 & n.21 (citing Bernard v. 
United States, 25 F.3d 98 (2d Cir. 1994);  Gray v. Bell, 542 
F. Supp. 927, 932 (D.D.C. 1982), aff'd, 712 F.2d 490 (D.C. Cir. 
1983)).  The district court then ruled that the unprotected 
conduct of the postal inspectors did not establish a malicious 
prosecution or abuse-of-process claim and granted judgment 
in favor of the United States under Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 12(c).  See mem. op. at 32-43.

                               II.

     Two of the elements of a claim of retaliatory prosecution 
are "first, that the conduct allegedly retaliated against or 
sought to be deterred was constitutionally protected, and, 
second, that the State's bringing of the criminal prosecution 
was motivated at least in part by a purpose to retaliate for or 
to deter that conduct."  Haynesworth v. Miller, 820 F.2d 
1245, 1256 n.93 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (quoting Wilson v. Thomp-
son, 593 F.2d 1375, 1387 (5th Cir. 1979)).  Moore thinks the 
ground of the district court's dismissal of his claim--that 
absolute immunity protected Valder with respect to his deci-
sion to prosecute--contravened this court's initial decision, in 
violation of the mandate.  See LaShawn A. v. Barry, 87 F.3d 
1389, 1393 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (en banc).  The prior opinion 
did hold that some of Valder's conduct was not protected by 
absolute immunity and the court did remand the retaliatory 
prosecution claim.  But that opinion said nothing about the 
elements of such a claim, or whether Moore could succeed on 
his complaint.  Rather than dealing with those subjects, the 
opinion focused on the type of prosecutorial conduct for which 
there would be absolute immunity.  One such type of conduct, 
of course, was "the decision to prosecute Moore."  65 F.3d at 
192.  In his brief for that appeal, Valder had argued that if he 
had immunity for his prosecutorial decision, then Moore's 

retaliatory prosecution claim could not go forward.  But it is 
clear to us that the court did not pass judgment on the 
argument, explicitly or implicitly.  It follows that the district 
court did not contravene the mandate of this court.

     According to Moore the district court erred for another 
reason.  As he sees it, his retaliatory prosecution claim is not 
predicated upon Valder's decision to prosecute him.  Just as a 
police officer can be liable for malicious prosecution as a 
result of his investigatory conduct leading to the prosecution, 
so too, Moore contends, should a prosecutor be liable if his 
investigatory conduct leads to the prosecution.  See infra 
Part IIIA.  The problem for Moore is that we rejected this 
very argument in Dellums v. Powell, 660 F.2d 802, 805-07 
(D.C. Cir. 1981) ("Dellums II").  A "prosecutorial official," we 
ruled, could not be "held liable for causing a prosecution to be 
brought," despite the fact that Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 
409, 430-31 (1976), extended only qualified immunity to prose-
cutors acting in an investigatory capacity.2  660 F.2d at 806.  
Moore believes the law has changed since Dellums II, but he 
cites no cases in which a prosecutor has been held liable for 
malicious or retaliatory prosecution.  If a prosecutor cannot 
be sued for malicious or retaliatory prosecution, Moore asks, 
why would the Supreme Court continue to devote its time to 
discerning which prosecutorial actions are protected by abso-
lute immunity and which are not?  See Kalina v. Fletcher, 
522 U.S. 118 (1997);  Buckley v. Fitzsimmons, 509 U.S. 259 
(1993);  Burns v. Reed, 500 U.S. 478 (1991).  The answer is 
that there are potential causes of actions against prosecutors 

__________
     2 It may seem odd that the only official who could not be held 
liable for malicious or retaliatory prosecution is the prosecutor.  A 
similar point was made in Imbler, to which the Court responded 
with a quotation:  "As is so often the case, the answer must be 
found in a balance between the evils inevitable in either alternative.  
In this instance it has been thought in the end better to leave 
unredressed the wrongs done by dishonest officers than to subject 
those who try to do their duty to the constant dread of retaliation."  
Imbler, 424 U.S. at 428 (quoting Gregoire v. Biddle, 177 F.2d 579, 
581 (2d Cir. 1949) (Hand, J.)).

that do not rely on the decision to prosecute.  A violation of 
the Fourth Amendment is one of the more obvious examples.

     We therefore will affirm the dismissal of Moore's Bivens 
claim against Valder.3

                               III.

     With respect to Moore's FTCA action against the United 
States for malicious prosecution and abuse of process, "the 
law of the place where the act or omission occurred" is 
controlling.  28 U.S.C. s 1346(b).  All agree that District of 
Columbia law must be consulted.  See Tarpeh-Doe v. United 
States, 28 F.3d 120, 123 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

                     A. Malicious Prosecution

     Under local law four elements make up the tort of mali-
cious prosecution:  (1) the defendant's initiation or procure-
ment of a criminal proceeding against the plaintiff;  (2) ab-
sence of probable cause for the proceeding;  (3) malicious 
intent on the part of the defendant;  and (4) termination of 
the proceeding in favor of the plaintiff.  See Davis v. Giles, 
769 F.2d 813, 814-15 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (citing Restatement 
(Second) of Torts s 653 (1977)).  As the first element indi-
cates, in theory not only the prosecutor who initiates criminal 
proceedings, but also a person who "procures" a criminal 
proceeding may be liable for malicious prosecution.  See also 
Restatement (Second) of Torts s 653.  In fact, those who 
procure malicious prosecutions are usually the only potential 
defendants because, as here, prosecutors enjoy absolute im-
munity.  See W. Page Keeton et al., Prosser and Keeton on 
Torts s  119, at 873 (5th ed. 1984).  To succeed in this case, 
Moore must rely on the procurement component of the first 
element, focusing on the conduct of the postal inspectors in 
disclosing grand jury material.  The remainder of the postal 

__________
     3 Moore also contends that the district court improperly denied 
his request for discovery.  But a district court may deny discovery 
requests when additional facts are not necessary to resolve the 
summary judgment motion.  See White v. Fraternal Order of 
Police, 909 F.2d 512, 516-17 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (en banc).

inspectors' conduct fell within the FTCA's discretionary func-
tion exception, see 65 F.3d at 197, and none of Valder's 
conduct can be the basis for a malicious prosecution claim 
against the government because he is not an investigative or 
law enforcement officer, see 28 U.S.C. s 2680(h).

     In order to find that a defendant procured a prosecution, 
the plaintiff must establish "a chain of causation" linking the 
defendant's actions with the initiation of criminal proceedings.  
Dellums v. Powell, 566 F.2d 167, 192 (D.C. Cir. 1977) ("Del-
lums I").  Moore's chain consisted of the postal inspectors' 
releasing of grand jury testimony to Spartin, which caused 
Spartin to incriminate him, which led to his indictment and 
then his prosecution.4  See mem. op. at 36;  FTCA Complaint 
p 26.

     It may be helpful at this point to look more closely at 
Dellums I and the chain of causation there held sufficient to 
establish procurement of a prosecution.  Plaintiffs had won a 
verdict against Powell, the D.C. Police Chief, for his role in 
bringing about criminal charges against anti-war demonstra-
tors.  See 566 F.2d at 173-75, 193.  The court noted that the 
"chain of causation" would have been broken if the decision to 
prosecute was "independent of any pressure or influence 
exerted by Powell and of any knowing misstatements which 

__________
     4 In his brief, Moore stated only that Valder disclosed grand jury 
material to Spartin, though he mentions that the inspectors were 
present at the time.  See Brief for Appellant at 10.  The govern-
ment jumps on this to argue that Moore's claim had to be dismissed 
because a malicious prosecution claim under the FTCA can rely 
only on the conduct of investigative or law enforcement officers and 
Valder is not one.  Moore's complaint, however, alleged that 
"AUSA Valder and the Postal Inspectors violated Federal Rule of 
Criminal Procedure 6(e)(2) ... by giving Spartin and former Post-
master General Carlin access to the Grand Jury testimony of other 
witnesses...."  FTCA Complaint p 26 (italics added).  We there-
fore assume that the postal inspectors did play a role in presenting 
grand jury materials to Spartin.

Powell may have made" to the prosecutors.  Id. at 192-93.  
But Powell had knowingly misled the prosecutors when he 
failed to disclose the fact that the demonstrators were "peace-
ful" and "not that disorderly."  Id. at 193.  This was suffi-
cient evidence "from which the jury could have concluded that 
Chief Powell had procured the filing of informations...."5  
Id.

     We see two distinctions between Moore's case and Dellums 
I. The first is that the postal inspectors themselves did not 
make the misrepresentations, but allegedly caused Spartin to 
make them.  The district court did not rely on this distinction 
and we think its effect is only to require Moore to prove an 
additional link:  but for the postal inspectors' disclosure of 
grand jury testimony to Spartin, he would not have implicat-
ed Moore before the grand jury.  See Keeton et al. s 119, at 
873 (stating that significant "second-hand" involvement in 
instigating a prosecution is sufficient).

     The second distinction is that the misleading information 
was presented to the grand jury.  The district court made 
much of this:  "Moore has alleged only that the postal inspec-
tors influenced the grand jury's decision to indict ... Moore's 
allegations ignore the fact that malicious prosecution requires 
the initiation of a prosecution by the Executive Branch, not 
the grand jury.  Even if this Court could determine that 
Spartin's testimony 'caused' the indictment, this would not 
satisfy the first element because a grand jury indictment 
cannot by itself initiate a prosecution."  Mem. op. at 36-37 
(footnotes omitted).  We do not believe this accurately re-
flects District of Columbia law set forth in Davis v. Giles.  A 
criminal proceeding is a prerequisite to the malicious prosecu-
tion tort.  If the proceeding starts with a grand jury indict-
ment and the defendant procured the indictment, the first 
element of the tort is satisfied.  When "an indictment is found 
by a grand jury ... the return of the indictment ... marks 
the institution of the proceedings."  Restatement (Second) of 
Torts s 654 cmt. c;  see Keeton et al. s 119, at 871-72 ("The 

__________
     5 The court ordered a new trial, however, because of improper 
jury instructions.  See id.

initial step is of course a matter of the procedure of the 
particular jurisdiction;  and where prosecution is begun by an 
indictment, or an information filed by the prosecuting attor-
ney, it seems clear that this should be enough, since it 
constitutes official action and sets the law in motion.").

     The government argues that because later actions--the 
presentation of evidence to the grand jury, for instance--
were protected, Moore's case collapses.  The district court 
seemed to agree.  See mem. op. at 37.  If this were enough to 
break the chain of causation, if the "discretionary function" of 
presenting evidence to the grand jury or prosecuting the 
plaintiff shielded prior misconduct from liability, a plaintiff 
would never be able to make out a malicious prosecution 
claim against the government.  Yet the FTCA specifically 
recognizes the tort of malicious prosecution.  See 28 U.S.C. 
s 2680(h).  We think it follows that although a plaintiff may 
not rely on an official's alleged misconduct during the exer-
cise of discretionary functions, this does not immunize earlier, 
unprotected misconduct from ordinary principles of tort liabil-
ity.  Cf. Jones v. City of Chicago, 856 F.2d 985, 994 (7th Cir. 
1988);  Restatement (Second) of Torts s 653 cmt. g.

     For similar reasons we disagree with the district court that 
Valder's continuation of the prosecution after the indictment 
came down constituted an independent act that broke the 
causal chain.  See mem. op. at 37.  Without the indictment 
the prosecution could not have continued.  See Fed. R. Crim. 
P. 7(a).  As we have said, if a prosecutor's continuation of a 
prosecution automatically immunizes prior steps in the prose-
cution, then the whole notion of liability for maliciously "pro-
curing" a prosecution would disappear.  "[A] prosecutor's 
decision to charge, a grand jury's decision to indict, a prose-
cutor's decision not to drop charges but to proceed to trial--
none of these decisions will shield a police officer who deliber-
ately supplied misleading information that influenced the 
decision."  Jones v. City of Chicago, 856 F.2d at 994 (citing, 
among other cases, Dellums I, 566 F.2d at 192-94);  accord 
Restatement (Second) of Torts s 653 cmt. g. On the other 
hand, if Moore would have been indicted and prosecuted 
anyway, even without the postal inspectors' alleged miscon-

duct and Spartin's testimony, then the United States cannot 
be held liable.  See Jones, 856 F.2d at 993.  Since the case is 
still at the pleading stage, there is no telling how the evidence 
will turn out.  All that concerns us now is that the complaint 
sufficiently set forth the first element of the malicious prose-
cution tort.  See Krieger v. Fadely, 2000 WL 489428, at *2 
(D.C. Cir. May 5, 2000).

                       B. Abuse of Process

     Under District of Columbia law, abuse of process occurs 
when "process has been used to accomplish some end which is 
without the regular purview of the process, or which compels 
the party against whom it is used to do some collateral thing 
which he could not legally and regularly be required to do."  
Jacobson v. Thrifty Paper Boxes, Inc., 230 A.2d 710, 711 
(D.C. 1967) (citing 1 Am. Jur. 2d Abuse of Process s 4 (1962)).  
Local courts have emphasized that "[t]he critical concern in 
abuse of process cases is whether process was used to accom-
plish an end unintended by law...."  Morowitz v. Marvel, 
423 A.2d 196, 198 (D.C. 1980);  accord Bown v. Hamilton, 601 
A.2d 1074, 1079 (D.C. 1992);  see also Heck v. Humphrey, 512 
U.S. 477, 486 n.5 (1994);  Scott v. District of Columbia, 101 
F.3d 748, 755 (D.C. Cir. 1997) ("The essence of the tort of 
abuse of process is the use of the legal system 'to accomplish 
some end which is without the regular purview of the pro-
cess....' " (quoting Bown v. Hamilton, 601 A.2d 1074, 1079 
(D.C. 1992)).  The Restatement also focuses on this element 
of the tort:  "For abuse of process to occur there must be use 
of the process for an immediate purpose other than that for 
which it was designed and intended."  Restatement (Second) 
of Torts s 682 cmt. b.

     Moore's complaint failed to allege this critical element of 
the abuse-of-process tort and, for this reason, the district 
court properly rendered a judgment on the pleadings in favor 
of the government.  The only paragraph in the complaint 
dealing with this tort alleged the following:  "AUSA Valder 
and the Postal Inspectors violated Federal Rule of Criminal 
Procedure 6(e)(2), which protects the secrecy of Grand Jury 

proceedings, by giving Spartin and former Postmaster Gener-
al Carlin access to the Grand Jury testimony of other wit-
nesses for the purpose of influencing Spartin's testimony and 
for the apparent purpose of assisting Carlin, a private plain-
tiff, to pursue civil litigation in connection with his dismissal 
from the Postal Service.  The Postal Inspectors even gave 
Carlin a copy of a draft indictment for his review."  FTCA 
Complaint p 26.  As Moore sees it, his allegations regarding 
Carlin are sufficient to make out a cause of action.  But 
nothing in paragraph 26 of the complaint speaks of using the 
grand jury process for the purpose, immediate or otherwise, 
of obtaining evidence to assist Carlin in bringing a civil suit.  
The paragraph alleges only that the postal inspectors dis-
closed witness testimony and the draft indictment to Carlin.6  
Disclosing information is a far cry from using the grand jury 
to assist Carlin's civil litigation.  If the complaint is true, the 
postal inspectors violated the secrecy of the grand jury.  But 
that does not, in itself, constitute abuse of process.  The 
"process" here is the grand jury and the tort is made out only 
if the grand jury is misused.  Because Moore does not allege 
the "critical concern" of abuse-of-process law--that the in-
spectors used the grand jury for an improper purpose--we 
affirm the judgment of the district court.7

__________
     6 Given that the indictment became public, we do not see how 
letting Carlin look at the draft could have damaged Moore unless 
the draft contained information omitted from the final version.  We 
shall assume that the draft contained such information and that it 
was grand jury material.

     7 We recognize that on Rule 12(c) motions "[w]e 'view the facts 
presented in the pleadings and the inferences to be drawn there-
from in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party.' "  Peters 
v. National R.R. Passenger Corp., 966 F.2d 1483, 1485 (D.C. Cir. 
1992) (quoting Jablonski v. Pan American Worldways, Inc., 863 
F.2d 289, 290-91 (3d Cir. 1988)).  Even if we were to stretch this 
principle beyond its ordinary confines and infer that the postal 
inspectors somehow used the grand jury process for the purpose of 
obtaining evidence that they passed along to Carlin, Moore still 
could not make out an abuse-of-process claim.  For one thing, 
Moore cannot base his abuse-of-process claim on the presentation of 

                                                                                                 Affirmed in part and reversed in part.

__________
evidence to the grand jury--that is a discretionary function immune 
from suit under the FTCA.  See Moore, 65 F.3d at 197;  see also 
Doe v. Stephens, 851 F.2d 1457, 1462-63 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (causing a 
grand jury subpoena to issue falls within discretionary function 
exception).  For another, prosecutors, not postal inspectors, con-
vene and conduct grand jury proceedings--and the actions of a 
prosecutor cannot give rise to an abuse-of-process claim under the 
FTCA.  See mem. op. at 32 & n.21 (citing 28 U.S.C. s 2680(h)).

                             