                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                     Decided February 1, 2002

                           No. 01-1367

                      Fund Democracy, LLC, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

               Securities and Exchange Commission, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Securities and Exchange Commission

     Before:  Edwards, Sentelle, and Henderson, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part filed by 
Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Fund Democracy ("petitioner") 
petitions for review of an order of the Securities and Ex-
change Commission ("SEC" or "the Commission") denying 

petitioner's request for a hearing and granting to an invest-
ment company and its investment advisors an exemption from 
certain provisions of the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 
U.S.C. s 80a-1 et seq.  The SEC moves to dismiss the 
petition for review, arguing that Fund Democracy has no 
standing to bring this petition.  We agree.

                            Background

     The underlying proceeding before the Commission arose 
from the application of Hillview Investment Trust II and its 
investment advisor Hillview Capital Advisors, LLC (collec-
tively, "Hillview") seeking exemption from 15 U.S.C. 
s 80a-15(a) which provides that no person may serve as an 
investment advisor of a registered investment company "ex-
cept pursuant to a written contract [which] has been ap-
proved by the vote of a majority of the outstanding voting 
securities" of the company.  15 U.S.C. s 80a-39(a) requires 
the Commission, before issuing orders, to provide notice to 
"interested persons."  17 C.F.R. s 270.0-5 provides that after 
the issuance of such notice the Commission needs to order a 
hearing on the matter, inter alia, "upon the request of an 
interested person."1  Fund Democracy requested such a 

__________
    1 "Interested person" is defined in the governing statute, 15 
U.S.C. s 80a-2(a)(19):

      (19) "Interested person" of another person means--
     
           (A) when used with respect to an investment company--
                (i) any affiliated person of such company,
                (ii) any member of the immediate family of any natural 
                pe rson who is an affiliated person of such company,
                (iii) any interested person of any investment adviser of 
                or principal underwriter for such company,
                (iv) any person or partner or employee of any person 
                who at any time since the beginning of the last two 
                completed fiscal years of such company has acted as 
                legal counsel for such company,
                (v) any person or any affiliated person of a person 
                (other than a registered investment company) that, at 
                any time during the 6-month period preceding the date 
                of the determination of whether that person or affiliated 

                person is an interested person, has executed any portfo-
                lio transactions for, engaged in any principal transac-
                tions with, or distributed shares for--
                       (I) the investment company;
                    (II) any other investment company having the same 
                    investment adviser as such investment company or 
                    holding itself out to investors as a related company for 
                    purposes of investment or investor services;  or
                    (III) any account over which the investment compa-
                    ny's investment adviser has brokerage placement dis-
                    cretion,
              (vi) any person or any affiliated person of a person 
              (other than a registered investment company) that, at 
              any time during the 6-month period preceding the date 
              of the determination of whether that person or affiliated 
              person is an interested person, has loaned money or 
              other property to--
                  (I) the investment company;
                  (II) any other investment company having the same 
                 investment adviser as such investment company or 
                 holding itself out to investors as a related company for 
                 purposes of investment or investor services;  or
                 (III) any account for which the investment company's 
                 Investment adviser has borrowing authority,

            (vii) any natural person whom the Commission by order 
            shall have determined to be an interested person by 
            reason of having had, at any time since the beginning of 
            the last two completed fiscal years of such company, a 
            material business or professional relationship with such 
            company or with the principal executive officer of such 
            company or with any other investment company having 
            the same investment adviser or principal underwriter or 
            with the principal executive officer of such other invest-
            ment company:
     Provided, That no person shall be deemed to be an interested 
     person of an investment company solely by reason of (aa) his 
     being a member of its board of directors or advisory board or 
     an owner of its securities, or (bb) his membership in the 
     immediate family of any person specified in clause (aa) of this 
     proviso;  and
                  (B) when used with respect to an investment adviser of or 
               principal underwriter for any investment company--
               (i)any affiliated person of such investment adviser or 
               principal underwriter,

hearing, explaining that it "serves as an advocate and infor-
mation resource for mutual fund shareholders through a 
multi-faceted advocacy and educational program."  The SEC 
rejected the request for a hearing and granted the exemption.

                             Analysis

     Before us the Commission moved for dismissal on the 
__________
             (ii) any member of the immediate family of any natural 
             person who is an affiliated person of such investment 
             adviser or principal underwriter,
            (iii) any person who knowingly has any direct or indirect 
            beneficial interest in, or who is designated as trustee, 
            executor, or guardian of any legal interest in, any securi-
            ty issued either by such investment adviser or principal 
            underwriter or by a controlling person of such invest-
            ment adviser or principal underwriter,
            (iv) any person or partner or employee of any person 
            who at any time since the beginning of the last two 
            completed fiscal years of such investment company has 
            acted as legal counsel for such investment adviser or 
            principal underwriter,
            (v) any person or any affiliated person of a person 
            (other than a registered investment company) that, at 
            any time during the 6-month period preceding the date 
            of the determination of whether that person or affiliated 
            person is an interested person, has executed any portfo-
            lio transactions for, engaged in any principal transac-
            tions with, or distributed shares for--
                 (I) any investment company for which the investment 
                 adviser or principal underwriter serves as such;
                 (II) any investment company holding itself out to 
                 investors, for purposes of investment or investor ser-
                vices, as a company related to any investment compa-
                ny for which the investment adviser or principal un-
               derwriter serves as such;  or
               (III) any account for which the investment adviser 
               has borrowing authority,
           (vii) any natural person whom the Commission by order 
           shall have determined to be an interested person by 
           reason of having had at any time since the beginning of 
           the last two completed fiscal years of such investment 
           company a material business or professional relationship 
           with such investment adviser or principal underwriter.

grounds that Fund Democracy has no standing under Article 
III of the Constitution to bring this petition.  Under Article 
III, federal courts only have jurisdiction to resolve cases and 
controversies.  See, e.g., Chicago and Grand Trunk Ry. Co. v. 
Wellman, 143 U.S. 339 (1892).  Therefore, in order to bring 
an action within our jurisdiction, the party must demonstrate 
that it has standing to bring that action.  See Lujan v. 
Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992).  To satisfy 
this requirement a plaintiff or petitioner must, at an "irredu-
cible constitutional minimum ... demonstrate that it has 
suffered a concrete and particularized injury that is:  (1) 
actual or imminent, (2) caused by or fairly traceable to an act 
that the litigant challenges in the instant litigation, and (3) 
redressable by the court."  Florida Audubon Soc'y v. Bent-
sen, 94 F.3d 658, 663 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (en banc) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted).  Fund Democracy 
does not meet this standard.

                      Associational Standing

     Petitioner argues that it has associational standing to bring 
this action.  That theory fails.  An association only has 
standing to bring suit on behalf of its members when its 
members would otherwise have standing to sue in their own 
right, the interests it seeks to protect are germane to the 
organization's purpose, and neither the claim asserted nor the 
relief requested requires the participation of individual mem-
bers in the lawsuit.  See Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. 
Laidlaw Envtl. Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 181 (2000).  
Fund Democracy stumbles on the first step.  It does not 
appear that Fund Democracy actually has any members.  In 
any event, Fund Democracy has not shown that any of the 
individual mutual fund investors it claims as "members" have 
standing to sue in their own right.

     First, it is not clear that Fund Democracy has either 
members or any equivalent affiliates.  Fund Democracy ad-
mitted in another pleading that it is a one-person business, 
run by its CEO Mercer E. Bullard, who is also the attorney 

representing Fund Democracy in this court.  Bullard does 
not argue that he personally has standing.  Instead, he 
argues that Fund Democracy "represents" an "informal con-
sortium" of various groups whose members are individual 
mutual fund investors and are threatened with injury by the 
SEC order.  Fund Democracy describes in detail several 
examples of how it has worked closely in the past with other 
groups to conduct various "advocacy initiatives" such as chal-
lenging applications for exemptions, petitioning the SEC to 
adopt rules, and lobbying against proposed legislation.

     Fund Democracy's past work with various groups of indi-
vidual investors does not render these groups the equivalent 
of members of Fund Democracy.  In determining whether an 
organization that has no members in the traditional sense 
may nonetheless assert associational standing, the question is 
whether the organization is the functional equivalent of a 
traditional membership organization.  See Hunt v. Washing-
ton State Apple Adver. Comm'n, 432 U.S. 333, 342-45 (1977);  
American Legal Found. v. FCC, 808 F.2d 84, 89-90 (D.C. Cir. 
1987) ("ALF").  In Hunt, the Court held that a state commis-
sion had standing to assert the claims of apple growers and 
dealers.  The Court identified three reasons for treating the 
state commission like a traditional membership organization.  
First, the commission "serve[d] a specialized segment of the 
State's economic community which is the primary beneficiary 
of its activities, including the prosecution of this kind of 
litigation."  432 U.S. at 344.  Second, the apple growers and 
dealers possessed "all of the indicia of membership in an 
organization."  Id.  For example, the growers and dealers 
elected the members of the state commission, they alone 
could serve on the commission, and they alone financed the 
commission's activities, albeit through mandatory assess-
ments rather than voluntary contributions.  See id. at 344-45.  
Third, the fortunes of the commission were closely tied to 
those of its constituency.  See id. at 345.

     In ALF we held that a media watchdog group lacked 
standing to assert claims on behalf of members of the public 
who regularly watch the news.  Fund Democracy's case falls 
much closer to ALF than to Hunt.  In ALF, we noted that 

ALF did not serve a "discrete, stable group of persons with a 
definable set of common interests."  808 F.2d at 90.  Indeed, 
ALF could purport to serve all who read newspapers, watch 
television, or listen to the radio.  See id. Similarly, Fund 
Democracy purports to represent "tens of millions of individ-
ual investors."  Moreover, ALF did not show that its "sup-
porters" played any role in selecting its leadership, guiding 
its activities, or financing those activities.  See id.  Similarly, 
because Fund Democracy's course is steered entirely by 
Bullard, and Fund Democracy does not claim to receive 
funding from its purported members, it may have reasons for 
instituting suit other than to assert the rights of these alleged 
supporters.  See id.  Indeed, Fund Democracy's assertion of 
standing appears even weaker than ALF's.  ALF specifically 
identified certain "supporters" who swore that ALF repre-
sented their views and that they approved of the ALF's 
activities.  See id. at 88.  Fund Democracy has not identified 
a single individual investor who fills such a role.

     In any event, Fund Democracy lacks associational standing.  
Petitioner attempts to fill this gap by alleging that it has 
"worked closely" with Institutional Shareholder Services 
("ISS"), an entity which does have identifiable clients and 
which also objected to the Commission's action though it did 
not join the present petition.  Even assuming that the mutual 
fund investors who are clients of ISS or members of the other 
groups with whom Fund Democracy has "worked" are prop-
erly considered "members" of Fund Democracy, petitioner 
still cannot qualify for associational standing.  Fund Democ-
racy has not sufficiently established that any of these individ-
uals would have standing to sue in his own right.  The harm 
alleged by Fund Democracy is that investors or prospective 
investors will be misled about the true single-manager nature 
of the Hillview fund and will suffer a diminution of voting 
rights as a result of the SEC order granting an exemption.  
Therefore, it appears that the only people who will be directly 
affected by the SEC's order granting Hillview's request for 
an exemption are those who have purchased shares in Hill-
view or are at least considering doing so.  Yet Fund Democ-
racy presents no evidence that any of these "members" own, 

intend to purchase, or are even considering purchasing shares 
in Hillview.  See Lujan, 504 U.S. at 563 (organization must 
submit evidence that one or more of its members would be 
directly affected apart from their special interest in the 
subject).

     In a similar case in the Second Circuit, an association 
sought to challenge the grant of exemptions under the Act to 
certain investment companies.  See Independent Investor 
Protective League v. SEC, 495 F.2d 311 (2d Cir. 1974).  The 
court held that petitioner failed to demonstrate standing by 
merely alleging that "it is quite conceivable that, in the 
future," its members will be investors in the companies at 
issue.  Id. at 312.  Similarly, Fund Democracy asserts in 
cursory fashion that "current and prospective ISS clients who 
are current or prospective clients of the Hillview Funds," are 
at risk of harm.  Fund Democracy also alleges that "investors 
who are not shareholders of the Hillview Funds, including 
ISS clients, may be misled by the Funds' names."  Notably, 
Fund Democracy does not identify a single affiliate who has 
invested or is considering investing in Hillview Funds.  Nor 
has Fund Democracy even alleged that it is likely that any 
ISS clients will consider investing in Hillview.  For these 
reasons, Fund Democracy lacks Article III standing to chal-
lenge the SEC's decision to grant Hillview's application.

                       Procedural Interest

     Similarly, Fund Democracy lacks Article III standing to 
challenge the SEC's refusal to hold a hearing on Hillview's 
application. The mere violation of a procedural requirement 
does not authorize all persons to sue to enforce the require-
ment.  See Lujan, 504 U.S. at 571-78;  Florida Audubon 
Soc'y, 94 F.3d at 664.  A party has standing to challenge an 
agency's failure to abide by a procedural requirement only if 
the government act performed without the procedure in 
question will cause a distinct risk to a particularized interest 
of the plaintiff.  See Florida Audubon Soc'y, 94 F.3d at 664.  
Because Fund Democracy has no actual members, and has 
not even shown that any of its purported members will be 

affected by the grant of Hillview's application, Fund Democ-
racy has not shown a distinct risk to its particularized inter-
est.

                Standing as an "Interested Person"

     Fund Democracy argues that it has standing because it is 
an "interested person" for purposes of Rule 270.0-5, which 
allows "interested persons" to request a hearing on an appli-
cation.  That petitioner is an "interested person" is a most 
tenuous proposition.  See footnote 1, supra.  But, even as-
suming that Fund Democracy is an "interested person" under 
the rule and therefore eligible to participate in the SEC 
proceedings, this does not mean that Fund Democracy has 
Article III standing.  Participation in agency proceedings is 
alone insufficient to satisfy judicial standing requirements.  
See ALF, 808 F.2d at 89.  Because agencies are not con-
strained by Article III, they may permit persons to intervene 
in the agency proceedings who would not have standing to 
seek judicial review of the agency action.  See Envirocare of 
Utah, Inc. v. NRC, 194 F.3d 72, 74 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  For this 
reason, we agree with the Second Circuit which has expressly 
rejected the argument that an individual's status as an "inter-
ested person" is sufficient to confer standing to petition for 
review of an SEC order under the Act.  See Option Advisory 
Serv., Inc. v. SEC, 668 F.2d 120, 122 (2d Cir. 1981);  Indepen-
dent Investor Protective League, 495 F.2d at 313.

     Fund Democracy suggests that Congress specifically in-
tended to grant to all "interested persons" a right to a 
hearing before the SEC and that the denial of this right 
therefore confers standing.  See generally Warth v. Seldin, 
422 U.S. 490, 500 (1975) (the injury required by Article III 
may exist solely by virtue of statutes creating legal rights, the 
invasion of which creates standing).  Even assuming Con-
gress intended to grant a right to a hearing to all interested 
persons and that Fund Democracy is among those persons, 
the deprivation of that right does not alone confer Article III 
standing.  The grant of a procedural right cannot serve as 
the basis for Article III standing unless "the procedures in 

question are designed to protect some threatened concrete 
interest of [petitioner's] that is the ultimate basis of his 
standing."  Lujan, 504 U.S. at 573 n.8;  see also Florida 
Audubon Soc'y, 94 F.3d at 664.  As already noted, Fund 
Democracy has not shown any such concrete interest apart 
from the procedural injury.

     Because Fund Democracy has no standing to bring this 
petition for review of the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion's order, we grant the Commission's motion to dismiss.

                                   So ordered.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part:  I concur in the result reached by the court.  Under 
the applicable agency regulations, any "interested person" 
may request a hearing on an application.  17 C.F.R. 
s 270.0-5.  However, the SEC is required to hold such a 
hearing only if it is determined to be "necessary or appropri-
ate in the public interest or for the protection of investors."  
In this case, the SEC denied petitioner's request for a 
hearing, because it had already considered and reasonably 
disposed of the issues presented in 1995 when it initially 
approved another investment company's application for a 
manager of managers exemption.  The SEC was thus fully 
justified in denying petitioner's request for a hearing.  I 
therefore agree that the agency's action should be summarily 
affirmed.

     I also agree that petitioner has no standing to seek judicial 
review of the merits of the SEC's order.  It is clear that 
petitioner has not satisfied Article III standing requirements 
on this score.  I do not agree, however, that petitioner lacks 
standing to seek review of the agency's denial of the request-
ed hearing.

     It is true that our cases require plaintiffs to demonstrate 
that the denial of a procedural right will jeopardize interests 
particular to them, but they do not go so far as to deny 
standing in cases where a statute or regulation affords a 
party such a particularized procedural right.  In Florida 
Audubon Society v. Bentsen, 94 F.3d 658, 664 (D.C. Cir. 1996) 
(en banc), we reiterated the principle that, when the govern-
ment fails to comply with generalized procedural require-
ments (in that case, of the National Environmental Policy 
Act), a plaintiff seeking to challenge the alleged violation of 
the procedural rule must demonstrate that the government's 
failure to comply will cause a distinct risk to a particularized 
interest of the plaintiff.  We held that "the mere violation of a 
procedural requirement thus does not permit any and all 
persons to sue to enforce the requirement."  Id.  Similarly, in 
City of Orrville, Ohio v. FERC, 147 F.3d 979, 985 (D.C. Cir. 
1998), we held that a party does not acquire "a direct stake in 
a litigation" for purposes of standing simply by participating 
in the administrative proceedings giving rise to the litigation 
(internal citation omitted).  These cases are inapposite, for 

they do not address the issue that we face in the instant 
matter.

     Where a statute or a regulation affords a particular party 
an undisputed right to seek an administrative hearing, Flori-
da Audubon Society does not compel the conclusion that the 
party lacks standing to challenge an agency's refusal to grant 
the required hearing.  In this case, the governing regulation 
permits an "interested person" to submit relevant written 
facts and request a hearing.  See 17 C.F.R. s 270.0-5.  The 
Commission must order such a hearing if it appears to be 
necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the 
protection of investors.  Id.  In my view, petitioner, as an 
"interested person," has standing to challenge as arbitrary 
the Commission's denial of its request for a hearing.

     It is immaterial that petitioner cannot seek review of the 
merits of the SEC order.  The particularized interest here is 
petitioner's right to seek a hearing and to have one granted 
when it is "necessary or appropriate in the public interest or 
for the protection of investors."  To hold otherwise is to 
suggest that the agency could deny with impunity the right of 
any "interested person" even to receive notice or appear 
before the agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. s 80a-39(a) with no 
threat of judicial review.  Standing law does not condone such 
a result.

                           