                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 6, 2001      Decided June 12, 2001 

                           No. 00-1239

                     Felix Industries, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Peter D. Stergios argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the brief was Elliot Jay Mandel.

     Julie F. Marcus, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 

Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Margaret A. Gaines, 
Supervisory Attorney.

     Before:   Ginsburg, Randolph, and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  An employee telephoned his su-
pervisor to press his right under a collective bargaining 
agreement to receive premium pay for working night shifts.  
In the ensuing conversation the employee thrice directed 
obscenities at his supervisor, for which he was promptly fired.  
The National Labor Relations Board decided that the firing 
violated s 8(a)(1) of the National Labor Relations Act, s 29 
U.S.C. 158(a)(1), because the employee's conduct remained 
protected by s 7 of that Act, 29 U.S.C. s 157, notwithstand-
ing his abusive speech.  The employer now petitions for 
review, and the Board applies for enforcement, of that deci-
sion.

     This case turns upon the four factors the Board considers 
pursuant to Atlantic Steel Co., 245 NLRB 814 (1979), to 
determine "whether an employee engaged in protected activi-
ty loses the protection of the Act by opprobrious conduct:  (1) 
the place of the discussion;  (2) the subject matter of the 
discussion;  (3) the nature of the employee's outburst;  and (4) 
whether the outburst was, in any way, provoked by an 
employer's unfair labor practice."  Felix Indus., Inc., 331 
NLRB No. 12, slip op. at 1 (2000).  The Board's analysis of 
the third factor in this case was arbitrary and capricious in 
that it departed from its own precedent and that of this court.  
We therefore grant the petition for review and remand this 
case for the Board to reweigh that factor as part of its four-
factor balancing test.

                          I. Background

     Felix Industries, Inc. is a general contractor specializing in 
the construction of highways and utilities.  Salvatore Yonta, a 
dockbuilder on the day shift since 1989, was assigned to the 
night shift in the second week of September 1996.  Yonta's 

immediate supervisor at the time was Felix Petrillo, whose 
father was the president of the Company.

     Under the collective bargaining agreement then in place 
Yonta was entitled to a "night differential":  he was to be 
paid for nine hours of work every time he worked an eight-
hour shift during specified hours.  Upon joining the night 
shift Yonta asked his shop steward about the night differen-
tial.  The shop steward then consulted Petrillo, who told the 
steward to consult the union;  the steward thereafter told 
Yonta he would receive the differential.  When Yonta did not 
receive the differential with his next pay check (for the period 
ending September 15) he contacted the superintendent of 
steam operations at his site, who told him to contact Petrillo.  
After getting his checks for the periods ending September 22 
and 29, again without the differential, Yonta contacted the 
union's business agent, who confirmed that Yonta was enti-
tled to the extra pay.

     On the morning of October 7 -- three weeks after the issue 
was first brought to Petrillo's attention -- Yonta, who was at 
home, called Petrillo at his office to ask about the differential.  
Petrillo assured Yonta he would get "every penny" to which 
he was entitled.  He also told Yonta he was tired of "carry-
ing" him.  Yonta, who was 42 years old, retorted that Petrillo, 
who was 25, was "just a f--king kid," and added, "I don't 
have to listen to a f--king kid."  When Petrillo asked what 
Yonta had just called him, Yonta obligingly confirmed it was 
"a f--king kid."  Petrillo told Yonta he would get a check 
with all his hours, and Yonta was fired that same day.

     An Administrative Law Judge, applying the balancing test 
of Atlantic Steel, held that although "the subject matter of 
the [Yonta-Petrillo] discussion was protected," Yonta "had 
lost the protection" of the Act upon directing obscenities at 
his supervisor, Petrillo.  331 NLRB No. 12, slip op. at 8.  The 
Board, with one Member dissenting, disagreed with the ALJ's 
application of Atlantic Steel's four factors.  Deeming Yonta's 
conduct protected under s 7, the Board majority held that 
Felix had violated s 8(a)(1) by firing Yonta, and ordered 
Felix to reinstate him with backpay.  Id. at 1-3.

                           II. Analysis

     In Atlantic Steel Co. the Board established that

     even an employee who is engaged in concerted activity 
     can, by opprobrious conduct, lose the protection of the 
     Act.  The decision as to whether the employee has 
     crossed that line depends on several factors:  (1) the 
     place of the discussion;  (2) the subject matter of the 
     discussion;  (3) the nature of the employee's outburst;  
     and (4) whether the outburst was, in any, way provoked 
     by an employer's unfair labor practice.
     
245 NLRB at 816.  Felix nonetheless suggests initially that 
Yonta's conduct is categorically unprotected, but it stops 
short of arguing that the four-factored balancing test of 
Atlantic Steel is itself unlawful.  Instead, Felix argues that 
the Board unreasonably applied that test to the facts of this 
case.

     A. Place of the discussion

     In holding that the place of Yonta's discussion with Petrillo 
did not weigh against protecting Yonta's conduct under the 
Act, the Board first opined that a telephone conversation is 
"no more or less likely a situs [than the typical workplace 
setting] for the type of labor-management dispute where 
intemperate language is often tolerated."  The Board also 
considered it important that "no other employees heard or 
observed Yonta's statement to Petrillo" and that the "com-
ments were not made at work and did not have any direct 
impact on worker discipline."  331 NLRB No. 12, slip op. at 
2.

     Felix asserts that the Board illogically assumed that pri-
vate insubordination cannot affect discipline in the workplace.  
The Board, however, made no such assumption;  it simply 
said that Yonta's rant "did not have a direct impact on 
workplace discipline," suggesting quite reasonably that any 
effect would be smaller than if his outburst had occurred in 
the presence of other employees.

     Felix also argues that because Yonta's obscene statements 
were made outside the formal grievance process, to which the 

Board accords special protection, the place of discussion 
should weigh against protection.  That is a non sequitur.  
The Board implied that the place weighed neither in favor of 
protection, as it would if the obscenities had been used in a 
formal grievance setting, nor against it, as it would if they 
had been hurled at Petrillo in the presence of other employ-
ees.  That resolution certainly is not arbitrary and capricious.

     B. Subject matter of the discussion

     There is no dispute that Yonta telephoned Petrillo to 
pursue his collectively-bargained right to be paid the night 
differential.  Accordingly, the Board, along with the ALJ, 
determined that the subject matter of their conversation 
"concerned Yonta's rights under the collective-bargaining 
agreement and thus constitute[d] protected ... activity."  Id. 
at 2, 7-8.  Felix therefore cannot credibly argue that the 
subject matter of the conversation does not weigh in favor of 
protection.  Still, it tries.  Felix parses Yonta's words to show 
that the obscenities, not surprisingly, had nothing to do with 
Yonta's collective bargaining rights.  That of course misses 
the Board's point:  As the Board explained, the obscenities 
were "intertwined with [the] protected activity" -- as they 
are in every case governed by Atlantic Steel -- and the 
Board's task was to determine whether the employee lost the 
protection of the Act as a result of the obscenities.  Id. at 3.  
Felix's attempt to bifurcate the conversation is unavailing, 
therefore.

     C. Nature of outburst

     We agree with Felix that the Board's treatment of the 
nature of Yonta's obscene eruption is problematic.  All the 
Board said on this score is that "Yonta's conduct consisted of 
a brief, verbal outburst of profane language, unaccompanied 
by any threat or physical gestures or contact."  From that 
the Board reasoned that this factor did not "weigh[ ] in favor 
of Yonta losing the protection of the Act."  Id. at 2.

     Recall that Yonta's outburst -- though "brief" and "ver-
bal" -- consisted of calling his supervisor a "f--king kid" no 
less than three times, and insisting that Yonta need not listen 
to him.  That no threat or physical violence accompanied this 

insubordinate vitriol cannot, under established law, prevent it 
from "weigh[ing] in favor of ... losing the protection of the 
Act."

     In Atlantic Steel the Board expressly disavowed any rule 
whereby otherwise protected activity "would shield any ob-
scene insubordination short of physical violence."  245 NLRB 
at 817.  Yet the Board's treatment of the third Atlantic Steel 
factor in this case runs toward precisely such a rule.  In 
addition, this court previously rejected a suggestion from the 
Board that employees engaging in protected activity "could 
not be dismissed unless they were involved in flagrant, vio-
lent, or extreme behavior";  as we pointed out, s 10(c) of the 
National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 160(c), permits 
discharge for "cause" short of that.  Aroostook County v. 
NLRB, 81 F.3d 209, 215 n.5 (1996);  see also Republic Avia-
tion Corp. v. NLRB, 324 U.S. 793, 803 n.10 (1945) ("The Act, 
of course, does not prevent an employer from making and 
enforcing reasonable rules covering the conduct of employees 
on company time").  If an employee is fired for denouncing a 
supervisor in obscene, personally-denigrating, or insubordi-
nate terms -- and Yonta here managed all three with econo-
my -- then the nature of his outburst properly counts against 
according him the protection of the Act.

     The Board here truly does not contend otherwise;  rather, 
it observes that it could, notwithstanding the nature of Yon-
ta's outburst, deem his conduct protected as a result of its 
overall balancing of the four factors.  That is correct but 
irrelevant;  it does nothing to rehabilitate the Board's actual 
treatment of the third factor in its order, where it blandly 
asserts that Yonta's statements did not "weigh[ ] in favor of 
Yonta losing the protection of the Act."  Under the applicable 
precedents Yonta's statements do weigh against protection.  
Whether they weigh enough to tip the balance in that di-
rection is for the Board to decide on remand.

     D. Provocation by unfair labor practice

     The Board, interpreting Petrillo's comment that he was 
tired of "carrying" Yonta as "convey[ing] at least an implicit 
threat that Yonta could lose his job for having engaged in the 

protected activity," found that Petrillo committed an unfair 
labor practice, which in turn provoked Yonta's obscenities.  
331 NLRB No. 12, slip op. at 2.  Felix challenges those 
factual determinations.  First, Felix argues there is no evi-
dence in the record that shows Petrillo's "carrying" comment 
preceded rather than followed Yonta's vulgar outburst.  Actu-
ally, there is substantial and uncontradicted evidence to that 
effect:  Yonta testified that the conversation unfolded in that 
order, whereas Petrillo could not recall the sequence.

     Second, Felix objects to the Board's characterization of 
Petrillo's "carrying" remark about Yonta as an implied threat.  
The ALJ and the dissenting Member thought Petrillo's re-
mark referred to Yonta's sub-par performance, not to his 
claim to the night differential.  Id. at 4, 7.  There is evidence 
in the record both that Yonta's performance was indeed sub-
par and that Petrillo tried to mollify Yonta, not to meet his 
demand for the differential with a threat.  Still, the record as 
a whole contains substantial evidence to support the Board's 
characterization.  The Board reasonably found that "Petrillo's 
remark was angrily made in response to Yonta's pressing his 
right to extra pay under the contract.  Although Petrillo 
credibly testified that he had previously received supervisory 
complaints about Yonta's work, Petrillo did not testify that he 
mentioned these complaints in the phone discussion."  Id. at 
2.  And, as the Board points out, Petrillo's statement must be 
evaluated from Yonta's perspective:  Petrillo's intent in mak-
ing the remark about carrying Yonta does not necessarily 
mirror the impression it reasonably could have made upon 
Yonta.  See NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575, 617 
(1969).  Therefore, we find no reason to disturb the Board's 
treatment of this factor.

                         III. Conclusion

     Because the Board's offhand treatment of the nature of 
Yonta's outburst departs from precedent, we hold that it is 
arbitrary and capricious.  Upon remand of this case, the 
Board will need to reexamine that factor as part of its overall 
weighing of the Atlantic Steel factors.  In doing so it must 

either adhere to precedent or else justify, if it can, its 
departure therefrom.  Accordingly, Felix's petition for review 
is granted, the Board's application for enforcement is denied, 
and this matter is remanded to the Board for further pro-
ceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                                             So ordered.

                                                                  