                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 23, 2000    Decided April 6, 2001 

                           No. 98-3133

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Pili C. Greenfield, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00067-01)

     Neil H. Jaffee, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With him on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Elizabeth Carroll, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, U.S. Attorney, and John R. Fisher and Roy W. 

McLeese, III, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.  Mary-Patrice 
Brown, Assistant U.S. Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Pili Greenfield pled guilty to the 
charge of conspiring to possess with intent to distribute 
cocaine base.  Greenfield asked the district court to depart 
downward from the sentence required by the United States 
Sentencing Guidelines (U.S.S.G.), asserting that he had com-
mitted the offense while suffering from significantly reduced 
mental capacity.  The district court declined to grant the 
requested departure.  Finding no error in the court's applica-
tion of the Guidelines, we affirm.

                                I

     Greenfield was arrested during a January 1998 police raid 
on a house in which cocaine base was being packaged for sale.  
A grand jury initially indicted him for possession with intent 
to distribute 50 grams or more of cocaine base, in violation of 
21 U.S.C. ss 841(a)(1) and 841(b)(1)(A)(iii).  Greenfield later 
pled guilty to a superseding information charging him with 
conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute cocaine base, in 
violation of 18 U.S.C. s 371.

     Pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 32(b)(1), 
the United States Probation Office submitted a presentence 
report (PSR) to the court.  The report concluded that, under 
the Sentencing Guidelines, the applicable sentence in Green-
field's case was 60 months' imprisonment.1  Greenfield filed a 
memorandum seeking a downward departure from the guide-

__________
     1 Based on Greenfield's offense level and criminal history, the 
PSR determined that the applicable guideline range was 87-108 
months.  PSR p 56.  However, because 18 U.S.C. s 371 authorized 
a maximum sentence of only 60 months, and because that sentence 
was less than the minimum of the applicable guideline range, 
U.S.S.G. s 5G1.1(a) dictated that the court apply the 60-month 
sentence.  See PSR p 56.

line sentence on the ground that he suffered from significant-
ly reduced mental capacity, pursuant to U.S.S.G. s 5K2.13.  
According to the memorandum, Greenfield suffered from 
depression, which contributed to his participation in the drug 
conspiracy.  Def.'s Mem. in Aid of Sentencing at 7.

     At the sentencing hearing, Greenfield called as his only 
witness Dr. Clark Hudak, a Ph.D. in clinical social work and 
the director of a drug treatment program.  Hudak had 
previously treated Greenfield in 1995-96, and reexamined him 
in April 1998 at the request of defense counsel.  A copy of 
Hudak's written report was also admitted into evidence.

     Hudak testified that when he first saw Greenfield in 1995, 
he diagnosed him as suffering from depression.  At the same 
time, Hudak learned that Greenfield was using marijuana 
heavily.  Hudak consulted with a staff psychiatrist who con-
firmed the diagnosis of depression and placed Greenfield on 
medication.  Sentencing Hr'g Tr. at 21.  After nine months to 
a year of therapy, Hudak found that Greenfield was respond-
ing "pretty well" and discharged him from the treatment 
program.  Id. at 22.

     Hudak testified that he did not see Greenfield again until 
April 1998, three months after his arrest.  Id. at 25.  Green-
field told Hudak that he had stopped taking his medication 
soon after leaving the treatment program in 1996, and that he 
had quickly resumed using drugs.  Id. at 25-26.  Hudak's 
"impression ... was that [Greenfield] was still suffering from 
a depression[, and] that he was also addicted to marijuana 
and cocaine."  Id. at 30.  Hudak testified that "when a person 
gets ... depressed," he can "get involved in very self-
destructive behaviors," and that "knowing his history, I be-
lieve that's the direction that [Greenfield] went until he was" 
arrested.  Id. at 26.

     On cross-examination, Hudak testified that "in some cases, 
if a depression is severe enough, ... it can impair one's 
capacity" and "could significantly reduce someone's mental 
capacity."  Id. at 31-32.  Hudak conceded, however, that he 
had "no idea" what Greenfield's "mental condition was in 
January of 1998."  Id. at 33.  Hudak further testified that 

Greenfield's drug use was voluntary, id. at 31, that once he 
stopped taking his medication it was predictable that Green-
field "would return to drugs as a way to self medicate for his 
depression," id. at 33, and that his use of drugs was "a 
contributing factor to his reduced mental state."  Id. at 34.

     After the parties completed their examinations, the district 
court undertook its own inquiry.  The court asked Hudak to 
explain the various degrees of depression and their associated 
treatments, and to relate them to defendant's condition.  Id. 
at 35-38.  Hudak said that when he saw Greenfield in 1995-
96, he did not recommend the kind of treatment, including 
hospitalization, that would be indicated for severe depression.  
Id. at 37-38.  After further probing by the court, Hudak 
described Greenfield's depression as "moderate."  Id. at 39.

     At the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, the district 
court denied Greenfield's request for a departure under 
s 5K2.13.  "[T]here is simply no basis to depart," the court 
said.  "With respect to this matter of depression[,] ... 
viewed ... in the most favorable light, ... the testimony 
actually given by [Hudak] mandates that the court not take 
into consideration diminished capacity."  Id. at 52.  The court 
imposed the 60-month guideline sentence, with accompanying 
recommendations that Greenfield be placed in a "boot camp," 
rather than a typical prison facility, and that he be permitted 
to enter a drug treatment program.  Id. at 54.

                                II

     This court may review a district court's refusal to depart 
downward from an applicable guideline range only to deter-
mine whether the sentence was imposed "in violation of law" 
or "as a result of an incorrect application of the sentencing 
guidelines."  18 U.S.C. s 3742(a)(1), (2);  see United States v. 
Leandre, 132 F.3d 796, 800 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  United States v. 
Sammoury, 74 F.3d 1341, 1343 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  We must 
"accept the findings of fact of the district court unless they 
are clearly erroneous," and "give due deference to the district 
court's application of the guidelines to the facts."  18 U.S.C. 
s 3742(e).  If a district court refuses to depart because it 

"mistakenly believes [it] lacks authority to do otherwise," its 
sentencing decision is reviewable as an incorrect application 
of the Guidelines.  Sammoury, 74 F.3d at 1344.  If the court 
"correctly understands [its] discretionary authority to depart 
downward when a particular mitigating circumstance exists, 
[but] make[s] a clearly erroneous factual finding that the 
circumstance does not exist," the resulting sentence may also 
have been imposed as a result of an incorrect application of 
the Guidelines.  Id. at 1344;  see Leandre, 132 F.3d at 800.

     The relevant version of U.S.S.G. s 5K2.13, which is entitled 
"Diminished Capacity," provides:

     If the defendant committed a non-violent offense while 
     suffering from significantly reduced mental capacity not 
     resulting from voluntary use of drugs or other intoxi-
     cants, a lower sentence may be warranted to reflect the 
     extent to which reduced mental capacity contributed to 
     the commission of the offense, provided that the defen-
     dant's criminal history does not indicate a need for 
     incarceration to protect the public.
     
U.S.S.G. s 5K2.13, p.s. (1997).2  As we have previously noted, 
this guideline contains five eligibility criteria.  A district court 
may depart downward under s 5K2.13 if the defendant:  "(1) 
has committed a non-violent offense, (2) while suffering from 
'significantly reduced mental capacity,' (3) that was not 
caused by the voluntary use of [drugs or] other intoxicants, 
(4) where the defendant's mental incapacity 'contributed to 
the commission of the offense,' (5) so long as the defendant's 
criminal record does not indicate a need for imprisonment to 
protect public safety."  Leandre, 132 F.3d at 800.

__________
     2 Amendments to s 5K2.13, effective November 1998 (after 
Greenfield was sentenced), clarified the conditions for a departure 
under the guideline as well as the meaning of "significantly reduced 
mental capacity."  See U.S.S.G. s 5K2.13 & comment., n.1 (1998);  
U.S.S.G. app. C, amend. 583.  Neither party urges application of 
the revised guideline or suggests that it would have any effect on 
the disposition of this appeal.

     There is no question that the district court understood that 
it had discretion to depart under s 5K2.13 if each of the five 
criteria were met.3  Defendant contends, however, that the 
court "failed to consider ... Greenfield's individualized facts 
and circumstances in weighing his diminished capacity depar-
ture request," and that "there is nothing in th[e] record to 
indicate that the district court determined whether the re-
quirements for a s 5K2.13 departure had been met."  Green-
field Br. at 9.  Neither charge is true.  The court heard 
extensive testimony regarding defendant's individual facts 
and circumstances, and personally examined the expert wit-
ness about Greenfield's psychological condition.  Following 
the testimony, the court concluded, on the record, that the 
requirements for application of s 5K2.13 had not been met.  
See Sentencing Hr'g Tr. at 52.

     Greenfield also argues that the district court misunderstood 
the law regarding the third and fourth criteria for departure 
under s 5K2.13.  In support, he relies on the judge's state-
ment that Hudak's testimony "mandates that the court not 
take into consideration diminished capacity."  Id. at 52.  Ac-
cording to defendant, the court was "apparently referring to 
testimony by the defense expert that Greenfield was addicted 
to drugs," and wrongly concluded that such an addiction 
required the court to deny a departure.  Greenfield Br. at 5-
6.  Citing United States v. Leandre, Greenfield argues that as 

__________
     3 Defendant's appellate briefs do not dispute this point, and the 
entire focus of the sentencing hearing was on whether the criteria 
were met.  Although, as discussed below, the district court conclud-
ed that Hudak's testimony "mandates that the court not take into 
consideration diminished capacity," Sentencing Hr'g Tr. at 52 (em-
phasis added), in context it is clear that the court used the word 
"mandates" to indicate that s 5K2.13's criteria were not met.  In-
deed, the court prefaced its conclusion with an equivalent formula-
tion:  "[T]here is simply no basis to depart."  Id. at 52.  See United 
States v. Shark, 51 F.3d 1072, 1077 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (holding that 
judge's statement, that "I don't see any basis on what I've heard so 
far that gives me any leeway," indicated "that the judge appreciated 
his discretion [to depart] but thought that he had not been present-
ed with any reason to exercise it").

long as reduced mental capacity did not itself "result[ ] from 
voluntary use of drugs," a "departure under section 5K2.13 
might remain available if a defendant's drug use contributed 
only in part to a crime, because his mental infirmity may have 
also played a role."  132 F.3d at 806.  Greenfield asserts that 
Hudak's testimony met these requirements, and that in fail-
ing to comprehend them, the district court misapplied the 
guideline's third criterion (regarding voluntary drug use), as 
well as its fourth (regarding the contribution of defendant's 
mental capacity to the commission of the offense).

     We need not dwell on whether Hudak's testimony satisfied 
the third and fourth criteria of s 5K2.13, however, because 
there is nothing in the district court's statement to suggest 
that its decision was based on those criteria--or on Hudak's 
testimony regarding drug use at all.  The court did not 
specify which criteria defendant failed, and there is no reason 
to assume it was referring to these two.  As we have stressed 
before with respect to refusals to depart, "the appellant ... 
has the initial responsibility to ensure that the district court 
explains its reasoning for the record, and appellant neglected 
that responsibility when he failed to object to the district 
court's ruling.  Under these circumstances, we assume 'that 
the district court kn[ew] and applie[d] the law correctly'...."  
United States v. Pinnick, 47 F.3d 434, 439 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(quoting United States v. Garcia-Garcia, 927 F.2d 489, 491 
(9th Cir. 1991)).

     In any event, in this case it is clear that the sentencing 
court's focus was not on the testimony regarding Greenfield's 
drug use and its relation to the third and fourth criteria, but 
rather on Hudak's testimony about Greenfield's mental condi-
tion and its relation to the second criterion of s 5K2.13:  the 
requirement that the defendant have committed the offense 
while suffering from "significantly reduced mental capacity."  
Greenfield's evidence failed to demonstrate that his mental 
capacity was significantly reduced, and that it was significant-
ly reduced at the relevant time.

     A diagnosis of depression, alone, does not establish that a 
defendant suffered from "significantly reduced mental capaci-

ty" under s 5K2.13.  See United States v. Watkins, 179 F.3d 
489, 500 (6th Cir. 1999) (affirming refusal to depart where, 
although defendant introduced evidence that he suffered from 
"depressive disorder," no evidence "reflected his alleged di-
minished capacity");  see also United States v. Withers, 100 
F.3d 1142, 1148 (4th Cir. 1996) (same);  cf. United States v. 
Edwards, 98 F.3d 1364, 1371 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Nor is the 
guideline satisfied even by testimony that the depression 
manifested itself in "reduced" mental capacity.  Rather, the 
words of the guideline require evidence that the defendant's 
mental capacity was "significantly" reduced.  U.S.S.G. 
s 5K2.13;  see United States v. Webb, 49 F.3d 636, 639 (10th 
Cir. 1995) (reversing s 5K2.13 departure where, although 
defendant's psychiatric reports documented a history of men-
tal problems, "they do not address or lead to the conclusion 
that defendant suffered from 'significantly reduced mental 
capacity' ");  see also United States v. Frazier, 979 F.2d 1227, 
1230 (7th Cir. 1992) (same).  Moreover, defendant's mental 
capacity must have been significantly reduced at the time he 
committed the offense.  See United States v. White, 71 F.3d 
920, 929 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  Frazier, 979 F.2d at 1230.

     The sentencing court's own examination of Hudak makes 
clear that its focus was on Greenfield's claim of significantly 
reduced mental capacity, rather than on the implications of 
his drug use.  The court did not ask Hudak a single question 
about drug use.  Rather, it inquired extensively into the 
nature and severity of Greenfield's mental disorder, and 
asked Hudak to explain what the treatment prescribed for 
defendant indicated about the level of severity.  Sentencing 
Hr'g Tr. at 35-39.  In response, Hudak categorized Green-
field's depression as "moderate," id. at 39, and testified that 
the consulting psychiatrist had prescribed an antidepressant, 
id. at 22, characterized by the PSR as "mild," PSR p 41.  
Nothing in Hudak's response to the court's inquiries would 
have supported a finding of "significantly" reduced mental 
capacity.

     Nor was there anything in Hudak's direct or cross-
examination testimony that would have supported such a 
finding.  Although Hudak testified that "in some cases, if a 

depression is severe enough, ... it can impair one's capacity" 
and "could significantly reduce someone's mental capacity," 
Sentencing Hr'g Tr. at 31 (emphasis added), he never testi-
fied that this was so in Greenfield's case.  To the contrary, he 
testified that Greenfield's depression was only moderate, "on 
a scale of mild at the least, moderate in the middle, and then 
severe."  Id. at 39.  Moreover, Hudak failed altogether to 
offer an opinion about Greenfield's mental condition at the 
time of the offense, conceding that he had "no idea ... what 
[Greenfield's] mental condition was in January of 1998."  Sen-
tencing Hr'g Tr. at 33.

     Hudak's written report was equally deficient.  Although 
the report stated that "Greenfield suffers from a depressive 
disorder" and that without proper treatment his judgment 
"becomes impaired," App. 36, Hudak did not indicate the 
severity of that impairment nor tie it to an evaluation of 
Greenfield's mental capacity.  Indeed, the contents of the 
report cut strongly against a finding of significantly reduced 
mental capacity.  Hudak reported that:

     [Greenfield] seemed to be experiencing mild anxiety 
     related to his pending legal matters.  He was oriented 
     [as] to person, place and time, and there was no evidence 
     of any psychotic behavior past or present.  His recent 
     and remote memory were intact;  his thinking was clear 
     and organized;  and he seemed to be functioning at an 
     above average level of intelligence.  There was clear 
     evidence of tendencies toward impulsivity;  however, he 
     appeared to not be at risk for suicidal or homicidal 
     behavior.
     
Id. at 35.  Whether or not this description necessarily pre-
cludes a finding of diminished capacity, it surely does not 
support such a finding, and there is no evidence in the record 
that does.  Moreover, like his testimony, Hudak's report does 
not even venture a guess as to Greenfield's mental capacity 
on the day he committed the crime.

     In light of the clear focus of the district court's questioning 
of Hudak, and of the content of his testimony, we have no 
doubt that the court's reference to "the testimony actually 

given" was a reference to Hudak's testimony regarding defen-
dant's mental capacity.  For the same reason, it is clear that 
the court's conclusion, that Hudak's testimony "mandates that 
the court not take into consideration diminished capacity," 
expressed its view that the expert had failed to say anything 
that would have permitted a departure for diminished capaci-
ty under s 5K2.13.  Given the complete dearth of evidence to 
meet s 5K2.13's second criterion, there was nothing "incor-
rect" about the court's conclusion, 18 U.S.C. s 3742(a)(2).  
See Frazier, 979 F.2d at 1230 (vacating departure where, 
although mental health evaluation diagnosed defendant as 
having depression, it did not "conclud[e] that the defendant 
'suffered from significantly reduced mental capacity' when 
she committed her offense");  see also Webb, 49 F.3d at 639 
(same);  cf. Leandre, 132 F.3d at 803 (noting that "a bare 
showing of reduced mental capacity, without more, is insuffi-
cient to authorize a court to depart," and that "[a]bsent some 
causal link, the sentencing judge would misapply the Guide-
lines by granting a departure");  United States v. Cantu, 12 
F.3d 1506, 1511 (9th Cir. 1993) (noting that "a defendant 
bears the burden of proving the appropriateness of a down-
ward departure").

                               III

     The district court neither misapprehended its authority 
under, nor otherwise misapplied, the Sentencing Guidelines.  
Accordingly, the judgment of that court is

                                                            Affirmed.

                                                                 