                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 24, 2000      Decided April 25, 2000 

                           No. 99-5308

        Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

                        William M. Daley,
           In his official capacity as Secretary of the
          United States Department of Commerce, et al., 
                            Appellees

             Pacific Marine Conservation Council and 
               Alaska Marine Conservation Council, 
                          Amicus Curiae

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv00221)

     Monica B. Goldberg argued the cause for appellants.  With 
her on the briefs were Stephen E. Roady, Eric A. Bilsky, and 
Sarah Chasis.

     Deborah A. Sivas was on the brief for amicus curiae Pacific 
Marine Conservation Council and Alaska Marine Conserva-
tion Council.

     James Eichner, Attorney, United States Department of 
Justice, argued the cause for appellees.  With him on the 
brief were Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, and 
David C. Shilton, Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson, Circuit Judge, 
and Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  Paralichthys dentatus, or summer 
flounder, a commercially valuable species of flounder, dwell 
off the Atlantic coast and are harvested primarily between 
May and October from North Carolina to Maine.  The sum-
mer flounder fishery is an "overfished" fishery, in the process 
of recovering from severe depletion prevalent during the late 
1980s and early 1990s.  The Secretary of Commerce, advised 
by the National Marine Fisheries Service ("the Service"), the 
principal appellee in this case, annually sets a fishing quota 
limiting each year's summer flounder catch, pursuant to the 
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management 
Act ("the Fishery Act"), 16 U.S.C. ss 1801-1883 (1994 & 
Supp. IV 1998).  This case involves appellants' challenge to 
the Service's quota for the 1999 summer flounder harvest.

     Before the District Court, appellants alleged that the 1999 
quota did not provide sufficient assurance that it would meet 
the conservation goals of the Fishery Act and attendant 
regulations.  Appellants also claimed that the Service's con-
clusion that the quota had no significant environmental im-
pact was based on an inadequate environmental assessment, 
thereby violating the National Environmental Policy Act 
("NEPA").  On cross-motions for summary judgment, the 
District Court granted judgment in favor of appellees.  See 

Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Daley, 62 
F. Supp. 2d 102 (D.D.C. 1999).

     We reverse the District Court and remand the case to the 
Service for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
The 1999 quota, when adopted, had a documented 18% likeli-
hood of meeting the statute's conservation goals.  We hold 
that, under the Fishery Act, the disputed quota is insufficient 
to meet Congress' mandate to the Service to prevent overfish-
ing and to assure that specific conservation goals are met.  
We also hold that the Service's proposal to supplement the 
quota with other purportedly protective measures does not 
satisfactorily ameliorate the quota's glaring deficiencies.  Be-
cause of our disposition on these grounds, we have no need to 
reach appellants' NEPA claims.

                          I. BACKGROUND

A.   Regulatory Background

     The Fishery Act was enacted to establish a federal-regional 
partnership to manage fishery resources.  Under the statute, 
there are eight Regional Fishery Management Councils "to 
exercise sound judgment in the stewardship of fishery re-
sources."  16 U.S.C. ss 1801(b)(5), 1852(a) (Supp. IV 1998).  
Management Councils propose and monitor fishery manage-
ment plans "which will achieve and maintain, on a continuing 
basis, the optimum yield from each fishery."  Id. s 1801(b)(4) 
(1994).  Management Councils submit management plans to 
the Secretary of Commerce (functionally the Service), who 
may then adopt them through notice and comment rulemak-
ing.  See id. s 1854(a) (Supp. IV 1998).  An "optimum yield" 
under the statute is defined as the "maximum sustainable 
yield from the fishery."  Id. s 1802(28)(B) (Supp. IV 1998).  
If a fishery is "overfished," the management plan must 
"provide[ ] for rebuilding to a level consistent with" the 
maximum sustainable yield.  Id. s 1802(28)(C).  A fishery is 
"overfished" if the rate of fishing mortality "jeopardizes the 
capacity of a fishery to produce the maximum sustainable 
yield on a continuing basis."  Id. s 1802(29).

     The Service defines overfishing and optimum yield accord-
ing to the fishing mortality rate ("F").  F represents that 
part of a fish species' total mortality rate that is attributable 
to harvesting by humans, whether through capture or dis-
card.  Fish are "discarded" for many reasons, including, for 
example, when they are the wrong species, undersized, or not 
valuable enough.  Values for F can range anywhere from 0 to 
over 2, and only indirectly represent the amount of fish 
captured by industry.  For instance, an F of 1.4 means that 
about 20% of all summer flounder that are alive at year 1 will 
be alive at year 2.  There is a specific F, termed "Fmax," that 
is defined as that fishing mortality rate that will maximize the 
harvest of a single class of fish over its entire life span.  
Overfishing is fishing in excess of Fmax.  See Amendment 7 To 
The Fishery Management Plan for The Summer Flounder 
Fishery at 9 (May 1995), reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 
316.  Therefore, the basic goal of a management plan is to 
achieve Fmax, thereby preventing overfishing and assuring 
optimum yield.

B.   The Summer Flounder Fishing Quota

     From a commercial standpoint, the summer flounder is one 
of the most important species of flounder in the United 
States.  All parties agree that the summer flounder fishery is 
"overfished" and has been for some time.  The Mid-Atlantic 
Fishery Management Council ("MAFMC"), covering New 
York, New Jersey, Delaware, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virgi-
nia, and North Carolina, developed the original summer 
flounder management plan with the assistance of two other 
regional Management Councils and the Atlantic States Ma-
rine Fisheries Commission ("the Commission"), a consortium 
of 15 coastal states and the District of Columbia.  The 
Service approved the original management plan in 1988;  
however, the Service has amended the plan several times.  At 
the time relevant to the instant case, the plan was designed to 
achieve a fishing mortality rate equal to Fmax by 1998.

     Pursuant to the management plan, the Service must set a 
quota each year fixing the total weight of summer flounder 
that may be harvested by commercial and recreational fish-

ers.  This quota is referred to as the "total allowable land-
ings" for the year, or "TAL."  The Service allocates 60% of 
the TAL to commercial fisheries and 40% of the quota to 
recreational fisheries, and states receive allocations based 
upon their share of the summer flounder fishery.  States may 
subdivide their allocated commercial quota between "inciden-
tal" and "directed" catch.  Directed fisheries intentionally 
harvest summer flounder.  Fishers who catch juvenile flound-
er, or who are part of the directed fishery for another species 
and catch summer flounder unintentionally, have harvested 
incidental catch.

     The TAL must meet several requirements.  It must be 
consistent with the 10 national standards of fishery conserva-
tion and management set out in the Fishery Act.  See 16 
U.S.C. s 1851(a)(1)-(10) (1994 & Supp. IV 1998).  Most rele-
vant to the instant case, the quota must embody conservation 
measures that "shall prevent overfishing while achieving, on a 
continuing basis, the optimum yield from each fishery for the 
United States fishing industry."  Id. s 1851(a)(1) (1994).  The 
quota must also be "consistent with" the fishery management 
plan.  See id. s 1854(b)(1).  Finally, under the applicable 
regulations, the Regional Administrator of the Service must 
annually adopt a final rule "implement[ing] the measures 
necessary to assure that the applicable specified F will not be 
exceeded."  50 C.F.R. s 648.100(c) (1999) (emphasis added).  
The "applicable specified F" is also referred to as the "target 
F."

     There is a relatively direct relationship between the TAL 
and the likelihood of achieving the target F.  In general, the 
higher the TAL, the less likely a plan is to achieve the target 
F.  In other words, the lower the target F, the lower the 
TAL must be to attain the target F.  The basic dispute 
between the parties concerns whether the 1999 TAL provides 
a sufficient guarantee that the target F for summer flounder 
will be achieved.

     For 1999, the summer flounder fishery management plan 
mandated a target F equivalent to Fmax, which was 0.24.  The 
Summer Flounder Monitoring Committee, a MAFMC com-

mittee, had recommended a TAL of 14.645 million pounds, 
while MAFMC had recommended a TAL of 20.20 million 
pounds.  The Service rejected MAFMC's recommendation as 
"unacceptably risk-prone" for several reasons:  (1) it had an 
"unacceptably low probability" of 3% of achieving the target 
F;  (2) it had a 50% probability of achieving an F of 0.36, 
which was "significantly higher" than the target F;  (3) the 
proposal relied on unpredictable data;  and (4) MAFMC had 
"yet to specify a harvest level that has achieved the annual 
target F."  Fisheries of the Northeastern United States;  
Summer Flounder, Scup, and Black Sea Bass Fisheries, 63 
Fed. Reg. 56,135, 56,136 (1998) (to be codified at 50 C.F.R. pt. 
648) (proposed Oct. 21, 1998) ("Proposed TAL").  The Service 
also rejected the Summer Flounder Monitoring Committee's 
recommendation of a 14.645 million pound TAL.  Although 
the Committee's recommendation had a 50% chance of achiev-
ing the target F, the Service rejected the proposal without 
any meaningful explanation.

     On October 21, 1998, the Service proposed a TAL of 18.52 
million pounds.  See id.  All parties agree that, at most, the 
Service's proposal afforded only an 18% likelihood of achiev-
ing the target F.  The Service also proposed an incidental 
catch restriction "to address discards in this fishery that 
should further reduce the overall mortality."  Id.  This mea-
sure provided that, within the commercial fishery, 32.7% of 
the allocated quota be committed to incidental catch.  In the 
end, then, the Service proposed a TAL of 7.41 million pounds 
for recreational harvest, 7.47 million pounds for directed 
commercial harvesting, and 3.64 million pounds for incidental 
commercial catch, for a total of 18.52 million pounds.  See id.  
The Service also considered recent changes in minimum mesh 
size.  On this point, the Service noted that, while MAFMC 
felt that the "recently adopted mesh provision requiring 5.5 
inch" mesh throughout the net would "substantially reduce 
discard and discard mortality," the alleged benefits of mesh 
had yet to be verified by anyone.  Id.

     Between the time of proposal of the 1999 TAL and its 
adoption, the Service concluded that it did not have the 
authority to impose any incidental catch restrictions on the 

states.  Therefore, the Service merely recommended that the 
states adopt the incidental catch proposal, making the propos-
al entirely voluntary.  The Commission, the body represent-
ing 15 coastal states and the District of Columbia, also 
declined to command the states to adopt the proposal.  Ac-
cording to an advisor to the Service's Assistant Administrator 
for Fisheries, this development "result[ed] in an unknown but 
probably substantial reduction in the likelihood that 
[MAFMC's] rebuilding schedule will be achieved," and he 
therefore recommended that the Service adopt the Summer 
Flounder Monitoring Committee's recommended 14.645 mil-
lion pound TAL.  See Memo from Gary Matlock to Rolland 
Schmitten (Nov. 25, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 208.

     The Service rejected this recommendation and, on Decem-
ber 31, 1998, issued the final TAL, adopting its initial propos-
al.  The Service acknowledged that the Summer Flounder 
Monitoring Committee's recommended quota had a 50% 
chance of achieving the target F, while the Service's TAL had 
only an 18% chance of achieving the target F.  See Fisheries 
of the Northeastern United States;  Summer Flounder, Scup, 
and Black Sea Bass Fisheries, 63 Fed. Reg. 72,203, 72,203-04 
(1998) (codified at 50 C.F.R. pt. 648) ("Final TAL").  The 
Service also recognized that the incidental catch provisions 
were entirely voluntary.  See id. at 72,204.  The Service 
simply recommended that states adopt the additional inciden-
tal catch provisions "[t]o improve the probability of achieving 
the target [F]."  Id.  Nowhere did the Service analyze the 
effect on fishing mortality of shifting from a mandatory to a 
voluntary incidental catch provision.

     The Service responded to comments that the TAL did not 
sufficiently assure achievement of the target F by stating 
that:  (1) the TAL had a higher probability of meeting the 
target F than MAFMC's 20.2 million pound recommendation;  
and (2) the incidental catch recommendations "would improve 
the likelihood that the target fishing mortality rate would be 
attained."  Id. at 72,206.  In response to other comments, the 
Service suggested that the 5.5 inch minimum mesh provision 
might ameliorate other mortality concerns, but acknowledged 

that the requirement had not been in effect long enough to 
determine its efficacy.  See id. at 72,208.

     Appellants filed suit in District Court on January 29, 1999, 
seeking, inter alia, (1) a declaratory judgment that defen-
dants violated the Fishery Act, the Administrative Procedure 
Act ("APA"), and NEPA, and (2) remand to the agency to 
impose a new summer flounder TAL.  See Complaint at 25-
26, reprinted in J.A. 52-53.  The District Court upheld the 
Service's adoption of the 18.52 million pound TAL, deferring 
to the agency under Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  The 
District Court first determined that ss 1851 (a)(1) and (a)(8) 
in the Fishery Act evinced competing interests between ad-
vancing conservation and minimizing adverse economic effects 
and that Congress offered no insight as to how to balance 
these concerns.  See Natural Resources Defense Council, 62 
F. Supp. 2d at 106-07.  In addition, the trial court found that 
the Fishery Act expressed no clear intent as to the particular 
level of certainty a TAL must guarantee to be consistent with 
16 U.S.C. s 1851(a)(1).  See id. at 107.  Given these perceived 
ambiguities, the District Court deferred to the Service pursu-
ant to Chevron Step Two.  This appeal followed.

                           II. ANALYSIS

     As we recently held in Associated Builders & Contractors, 
Inc. v. Herman, 166 F.3d 1248 (D.C. Cir. 1999),

     [i]n a case like the instant one, in which the District 
     Court reviewed an agency action under the [APA], we 
     review the administrative action directly.  See Troy 
     Corp. v. Browner, 120 F.3d 277, 281 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  
     Gas Appliance Mfrs. v. Department of Energy, 998 F.2d 
     1041, 1045 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  In other words, we accord 
     no particular deference to the judgment of the District 
     Court.  See Gas Appliance Mfrs., 998 F.2d at 1045.  
     Rather, on an independent review of the record, we will 
     uphold [the agency's] decision unless we find it to be 
     "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or other-
     
     wise not in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A) 
     (1994).
     
Id. at 1254.

     As for the Service's disputed interpretations of the Fishery 
Act, we are guided by the Supreme Court's seminal decision 
in

     Chevron U.S.A., Inc., [467 U.S. at 837], [which] governs 
     review of agency interpretation of a statute which the 
     agency administers.  Under the first step of Chevron, 
     the reviewing court "must first exhaust the 'traditional 
     tools of statutory construction' to determine whether 
     Congress has spoken to the precise question at issue."  
     Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Browner, 57 
     F.3d 1122, 1125 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (quoting Chevron, 467 
     U.S. at 843 n.9).  The traditional tools include examina-
     tion of the statute's text, legislative history, and struc-
     ture, see Southern California Edison Co. v. FERC, 116 
     F.3d 507, 515 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  as well as its purpose, see 
     First Nat'l Bank & Trust v. National Credit Union, 90 
     F.3d 525, 529-30 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  This inquiry using the 
     traditional tools of construction may be characterized as 
     a search for the plain meaning of the statute.  If this 
     search yields a clear result, then Congress has expressed 
     its intention as to the question, and deference is not 
     appropriate.  See Hammontree v. NLRB, 894 F.2d 438, 
     441 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  If, however, "the statute is silent 
     or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue," Chev-
     ron, 467 U.S. at 843, Congress has not spoken clearly, 
     and a permissible agency interpretation of the statute 
     merits judicial deference.  Id.
     
Bell Atlantic Tele. Cos. v. FCC, 131 F.3d 1044, 1047 (D.C. Cir. 
1997).  Although agencies are entitled to deferential review 
under Chevron Step Two, our judicial function is neither rote 
nor meaningless:

     [W]e will defer to [an agency's] interpretation[ ] if [it is] 
     reasonable and consistent with the statutory purpose and 
     legislative history.  See Troy Corp. v. Browner, 120 F.3d 
     
     277, 285 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (noting that an agency's inter-
     pretation must be "reasonable and consistent with the 
     statutory purpose");  City of Cleveland v. U.S. Nuclear 
     Regulatory Comm'n, 68 F.3d 1361, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
     (providing that an agency's interpretation must be "rea-
     sonable and consistent with the statutory scheme and 
     legislative history").  However, a court will not uphold 
     [an agency's] interpretation "that diverges from any real-
     istic meaning of the statute." Massachusetts v. Depart-
     ment of Transp., 93 F.3d 890, 893 (D.C. Cir. 1996).
     
GTE Serv. Corp. v. FCC, 205 F.3d 416, 421 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  
This case presents a situation in which the Service's quota for 
the 1999 summer flounder harvest so completely diverges 
from any realistic meaning of the Fishery Act that it cannot 
survive scrutiny under Chevron Step Two.

     As an initial matter, we reject the District Court's sugges-
tion that there is a conflict between the Fishery Act's ex-
pressed commitments to conservation and to mitigating ad-
verse economic impacts.  Compare 16 U.S.C. s 1851(a)(1) 
(directing agency to "prevent overfishing" and ensure "the 
optimum yield from each fishery");  with id. s 1851(a)(8) 
(directing agency to "minimize adverse economic impacts" on 
fishing communities).  The Government concedes, and we 
agree, that, under the Fishery Act, the Service must give 
priority to conservation measures.  It is only when two 
different plans achieve similar conservation measures that the 
Service takes into consideration adverse economic conse-
quences.  This is confirmed both by the statute's plain lan-
guage and the regulations issued pursuant to the statute.  
See id. s 1851(a)(8) (requiring fishery management plans, 
"consistent with the conservation requirements of this chap-
ter," to take into account the effect of management plans on 
fishing communities) (emphasis added);  50 C.F.R. 
s 600.345(b)(1) (1999) ("[W]here two alternatives achieve sim-
ilar conservation goals, the alternative that ... minimizes the 
adverse impacts on [fishing] communities would be the pre-
ferred alternative.") (emphasis added).

     The real issue in this case is whether the 1999 TAL 
satisfied the conservation goals of the Fishery Act, the man-
agement plan, and the Service's regulations.  In considering 
this question, it is important to recall that the Service oper-
ates under constraints from three different sources.  First, 
the statute requires the Service to act both to "prevent 
overfishing" and to attain "optimum yield."  16 U.S.C. 
s 1851(a)(1).  Overfishing is commonly understood as fishing 
that results in an F in excess of Fmax.  Since Fmax for 1999 
was equivalent to 0.24, this constraint required the Service to 
issue regulations to prevent F from exceeding 0.24.  Second, 
any quota must be "consistent with" the fishery management 
plan adopted by the Service.  See id. s 1854(b)(1).  In this 
case the fishery management plan called for an F of 0.24.  
Therefore, the quota had be to "consistent with" achieving 
that F.  Third, the Service is required to adopt a quota 
"necessary to assure that the applicable specified F will not 
be exceeded."  50 C.F.R. s 648.100(c).  The "applicable speci-
fied F" for 1999 was Fmax, or 0.24.

     All of these constraints, then, collapse into an inquiry as to 
whether the Service's quota was "consistent with" and at the 
level "necessary to assure" the achievement of an F of 0.24, 
and whether it reasonably could be expected to "prevent" an 
F greater than 0.24.  In other words, the question is whether 
the quota, as approved, sufficiently ensured that it would 
achieve an F of 0.24.  Appellants argue that the quota 
violates applicable standards under both Chevron Step One 
and Chevron Step Two.  Because we find appellants' Chevron 
Step Two arguments convincing, we have no need to reach 
their alternative argument that the Service violated NEPA by 
relying on an inadequate environmental assessment in pro-
mulgating the final rule.

     Appellants' Chevron Step One "plain meaning" argument is 
virtually indistinguishable from their Chevron Step Two rea-
sonableness argument.  Appellants acknowledge that the 
statutory terms "assure," "prevent," and "consistent with" do 
not mandate a precise quota figure.  However, appellants 
contend that a TAL with only an 18% likelihood of achieving 
the target F is so inherently unreasonable that it defies the 

plain meaning of the statute.  This is an appealing argument 
on the facts of this case, because, as we explain below, the 
Service's action is largely incomprehensible when one consid-
ers the principal purposes of the Fishery Act.  Nonetheless, 
we still view this case as governed by Chevron Step Two.  
The statute does not prescribe a precise quota figure, so 
there is no plain meaning on this point.  Rather, we must 
look to see whether the agency's disputed action reflects a 
reasonable and permissible construction of the statute.  In 
light of what the statute does require, short of a specific quota 
figure, it is clear here that the Service's position fails the test 
of Chevron Step Two.

     The 1999 quota is unreasonable, plain and simple.  Govern-
ment counsel conceded at oral argument that, to meet its 
statutory and regulatory mandate, the Service must have a 
"fairly high level of confidence that the quota it recommends 
will not result in an F greater than [the target F]."  Fisher-
men's Dock Coop., Inc. v. Brown, 75 F.3d 164, 169-70 (4th 
Cir. 1996).  We agree.  We also hold that, at the very least, 
this means that "to assure" the achievement of the target F, 
to "prevent overfishing," and to "be consistent with" the 
fishery management plan, the TAL must have had at least a 
50% chance of attaining an F of 0.24. This is not a surprising 
result, because in related contexts, the Service has articulated 
precisely this standard.  See National Marine Fisheries Ser-
vice, Final Fishery Management Plan for Atlantic Tunas, 
Swordfish and Sharks, Vol. I, at 288, reprinted in J.A. 382 
(April 1999) (concluding that the Service should choose man-
agement measures that have "at least a 50-percent confi-
dence in target reference points," and when choosing between 
two alternatives with a greater than 50% probability, should 
choose the higher "unless there are strong reasons to do 
otherwise").

     The disputed 1999 TAL had at most an 18% likelihood of 
achieving the target F. Viewed differently, it had at least an 
82% chance of resulting in an F greater than the target F.  
Only in Superman Comics' Bizarro world, where reality is 
turned upside down, could the Service reasonably conclude 

that a measure that is at least four times as likely to fail as to 
succeed offers a "fairly high level of confidence."

     Rather than argue that the quota alone provided enough 
assurance, the Service contends instead that two additional 
measures were adopted to increase the likelihood of achieving 
the target F.  These measures were:  (1) the provision relat-
ing to minimum mesh size;  and (2) the recommendation that 
states voluntarily allocate a certain portion of the directed 
commercial fishery toward incidental catch.  There is nothing 
in this record, however, to indicate that the proposals on 
mesh size and voluntary state action would improve the level 
of confidence so as to assure a reasonable likelihood of 
achieving the target F.

     The Service's reliance on its provision regarding minimum 
mesh size for fishing nets is rather perplexing.  We do not 
question the Service's rational conclusion that it is important 
to reduce the number of undersized flounder being captured, 
given recent observations, in a species with a potential 20 
year life span, that very few adult fish survive past three 
years of age.  See Projection for 1998 Summer Flounder 
Quota at 2 (Aug. 1998), reprinted in J.A. 93.  At the time the 
1999 TAL was proposed, however, the Service acknowledged 
that the mesh size provision's "benefits have not yet been 
analyzed."  Proposed TAL, 63 Fed. Reg. at 56,136.  In fact, 
the Service apparently placed little stock in MAFMC's predic-
tion that the minimum mesh size of 5.5 inches would reduce 
the number of undersized fish caught.  See id.  In the final 
rule, the Service stated only that the minimum mesh size 
provision was "intended to address" discarding due to under-
sized catch;  the Service acknowledged, however, that the 
mesh provision had "not been in operation long enough to 
determine if an adjustment to the mesh size is warranted."  
Final TAL, 63 Fed. Reg. at 72,208.  In short, there are no 
meaningful data (or even well-founded predictions) to support 
the assertion that a larger mesh size would reduce the 
number of undersized fish caught.  And the Service conduct-
ed no analysis whatsoever to determine the likely effect of 
this measure on the probability of meeting the target F.  
There is certainly nothing in the record to indicate that the 

larger mesh size would make it likely that the TAL had at 
least a 50% chance of achieving the target F.

     The Service's second recommendation, that states set aside 
a certain percentage of the commercial fishing quota for 
incidental catch instead of directed commercial catch, also 
fails to ameliorate the deficient 18% figure.  First, in conclud-
ing that the TAL had an 18% likelihood of achieving the 
target F, the Service assumed that at least 10% of the 
commercial fishing quota would be allocated to incidental 
catch.  When defending its proposal to allocate 32.7% of the 
commercial quota to incidental catch against a comment that 
instead suggested a 10% figure, the Service observed that "[a] 
10-percent incidental catch allocation in combination with the 
18.52-million [pound] ... TAL would result in a less than 18-
percent probability of achieving the target F."  Id. at 72,211 
(emphasis added).  Therefore, at least some of the incidental 
catch proposal's assumed positive effects were already ac-
counted for in the 18% starting probability.  The agency's 
"double-counting" here indicates that the Service overstated 
the positive effects that might come from the incidental catch 
recommendation.

     The second, and more serious, flaw in the Service's reliance 
on its incidental catch proposal is that the proposal is merely 
a recommendation to the states, not a mandatory require-
ment.  The Service initially assumed that the incidental catch 
proposal would be mandatory.  When it was revised from a 
mandatory to voluntary proposal, however, the Service never 
assessed the impact of the change.  Indeed, the record is 
conspicuously silent on this point, almost as if the change 
never occurred.  At oral argument before this court, counsel 
for the Government asserted that the Service could reason-
ably conclude that the states would comply with the recom-
mendation on incidental catch.  But counsel conceded that 
there is absolutely no demonstrated history in the relations 
between the federal and state agencies to support such an 
assumption, and there are no present assurances from the 
states that they will comply with the Service's recommenda-
tion.  Indeed, there is evidence in the record to suggest 
resistance from some states to the Service's incidental catch 

proposal.  See id. at 72,207, 72,209-10 (reflecting comments 
from Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, 
North Carolina, and Virginia stating, in sum, that the inciden-
tal catch allocation was too high, unenforceable, and beyond 
the Service's power).  We are left only with the Service's 
unsupported conclusion that the incidental catch provision 
"increases the probability of meeting the target F."  Approv-
al of the Final Rule to Implement the 1999 Specifications for 
the Summer Flounder, Scup, and Black Sea Bass Fisheries-
Decision Memorandum at 3 (Dec. 14, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 
277.  This is manifestly insufficient.

     As we noted at the outset of this opinion, the Service's 
quota for the 1999 summer flounder harvest so completely 
"diverges from any realistic meaning" of the Fishery Act that 
it cannot survive scrutiny under Chevron Step Two.  See 
GTE Serv. Corp., 205 F.3d at 421.  The Service resists this 
result by suggesting that we owe deference to the agency's 
"scientific" judgments.  See Br. for Appellees at 33.  While 
this may be so, we do not hear cases merely to rubber stamp 
agency actions.  To play that role would be "tantamount to 
abdicating the judiciary's responsibility under the Administra-
tive Procedure Act."  A.L. Pharma, Inc. v. Shalala, 62 F.3d 
1484, 1491 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  The Service cannot rely on 
"reminders that its scientific determinations are entitled to 
deference" in the absence of reasoned analysis "to 'cogently 
explain' " why its additional recommended measures satisfied 
the Fishery Act's requirements.  Id. at 1492 (quoting Motor 
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 
463 U.S. 29, 48 (1983)).  Indeed, we can divine no scientific 
judgment upon which the Service concluded that its measures 
would satisfy its statutory mandate.

     Here, the adopted quota guaranteed only an 18% probabili-
ty of achieving the principal conservation goal of the summer 
flounder fishery management plan.  The Service offered nei-
ther analysis nor data to support its claim that the two 
additional measures aside from the quota would increase that 
assurance beyond the at-least-50% likelihood required by 
statute and regulation.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     For the reasons articulated herein, we reverse the District 
Court's judgment and remand the case to the Service for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                                         