                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 12, 1999   Decided January 18, 2000 

                           No. 98-5082

                          Ramon Lopez, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                United States of America, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96cv01972)

     Charles B. Klein, appointed by the court, argued the cause 
as amicus curiae for appellant. With him on the briefs was 
Eric W. Bloom.

     David L. Smith, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellees. With him on the brief were Wilma A. Lewis, 
U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. Attor-
ney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Rogers, and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Ramon Lopez, an inmate in a 
federal prison, brought suit against the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, alleging that the agency failed to make an 
adequate effort to notify him of a forfeiture proceeding it had 
initiated against property he claims to own.  The DEA sent 
two notices to Mr. Lopez--one to his home and one to a 
prison address--both of which were returned to the agency.  
One year later Mr. Lopez learned of the forfeiture proceeding 
through his wife, who had been separately notified by the 
DEA.

     After the DEA denied as untimely his petition for remis-
sion or mitigation of the forfeiture, Mr. Lopez filed a com-
plaint in the district court alleging the DEA denied him due 
process of law by failing to notify him of the forfeiture 
proceeding.  The district court granted summary judgment in 
favor of the DEA, concluding that the agency had met its 
statutory and constitutional duty to notify Mr. Lopez of the 
forfeiture by sending notices to him and to his wife.  Because 
the DEA, when the notices sent to Mr. Lopez were returned, 
made no further effort to notify him although it knew he was 
in prison, and because notice to his wife is not, on the facts of 
this case, notice to him, we reverse the judgment of the 
district court and remand this matter for further proceedings.

                          I. Background

     While Ramon Lopez was in the Martin County, Florida jail 
on a narcotics trafficking charge, he and his wife Alix Coba* 

__________
     * Amicus curiae appointed by this Court to represent Mr. Lopez 
on appeal points out that the couple actually were not married, nor 
could they have been considered married at common law because 
Florida does not recognize a common law marriage entered into 
after January 1, 1968.  See Fla. Stat. ch. 741.211.  Mr. Lopez, 
however, refers to Ms. Coba as his wife, and both the district court 
and the Government considered the couple to be married.  For the 
purposes of this appeal, therefore, we too treat Mr. Lopez and Ms. 
Coba as husband and wife.

agreed to pay $50,000 to an official who would let Mr. Lopez 
post bond on a lesser charge.  According to the Government, 
the payee was an "undercover law enforcement agent posing 
as a Deputy U.S. Marshal."  The couple were convicted under 
federal law of attempted escape, and the DEA seized the 
$50,000, claiming it had reason to believe that Mr. Lopez had 
obtained the money through the sale of illegal narcotics.

     In March, 1993 the DEA sent notices of seizure to Mr. 
Lopez both at his last known home address and at the Dade 
County Jail in Miami, Florida.  Mr. Lopez states that he was 
never incarcerated in the Dade County Jail and the Govern-
ment offers no explanation for having sent the notice there.  
In any event, both notices were returned to the DEA marked 
"RETURN TO SENDER."  The DEA also sent to Ms. Coba, 
as a potential claimant in her own right, a notice of seizure, 
which she accepted, and it published a notice of the seizure in 
USA Today once a week for three consecutive weeks.  The 
DEA did not receive any response to its notices and in May, 
1993 it declared the $50,000 forfeited to the United States.

     Mr. Lopez claims that he did not learn of the forfeiture 
until March or April, 1994, when Ms. Coba showed him the 
notice she had received, and that immediately thereafter he 
petitioned the DEA for relief from the forfeiture.  The DEA 
dismissed Mr. Lopez's claim as untimely.

     Mr. Lopez sought review in the district court, which grant-
ed summary judgment in favor of the DEA.  The court held 
that the agency had satisfied its statutory and constitutional 
obligations by sending notices of seizure to "interested par-
ties" via certified mail.  The district court also imputed to Mr. 
Lopez the notice of seizure received by Ms. Coba, who 
"allegedly had dominion and control over the money in ques-
tion" at the time of the crime.

     Mr. Lopez appeals.  We review the district court's grant of 
summary judgment de novo.  See National Treasury Em-
ployees Union v. United States Customs Service, 27 F.3d 623, 
626 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

                           II. Analysis

     The DEA seized Mr. Lopez's money pursuant to 21 U.S.C. 
s 881(a)(6), which authorizes the administrative forfeiture of 
property furnished or obtained in exchange for a controlled 
substance.  A forfeiture proceeding is initiated under 19 
U.S.C. s 1607(a), which requires the Government to send a 
written notice of forfeiture to each party who may have an 
interest in the seized property and to publish notice of its 
intent to seize the property in a newspaper of general circula-
tion once a week for three consecutive weeks.  A potential 
claimant then has 20 days in which to file a claim and to post 
a bond.  See 19 U.S.C. s 1608.

     The Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution of the United States require 
notice that is "reasonably calculated, under all the circum-
stances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the 
action and afford them an opportunity to present their objec-
tions."  Mullane v. Central Hanover Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306, 
314 (1949).  Taken together, the steps required by 19 U.S.C. 
s 1607(a) generally provide all the notice required for due 
process.  See id. at 317-18.

     In this case, the DEA complied with the statute by sending 
notices to Mr. Lopez at his home address and at prison and 
by publishing a notice of the proposed seizure in USA Today 
for three consecutive weeks.  When both of the notices were 
returned to the DEA, however, the agency took no additional 
steps to determine Mr. Lopez's whereabouts despite its 
knowledge that Mr. Lopez was in the custody either of the 
State of Florida or of the Attorney General of the United 
States;  that is, he was in one prison system or the other, as 
the DEA very well knew.

     In these circumstances, the DEA's efforts to notify Mr. 
Lopez directly were inadequate to afford him due process of 
law.  After learning that the two notices sent to Mr. Lopez 
were not delivered, the agency should have attempted to 
locate him within the prison system.  We made this clear in 
Small v. United States, 136 F.3d 1334, 1337-38 (D.C. Cir. 
1998)--a decision issued after the forfeiture at issue in this 
case--where we held that the Government should have resent 

notice of a forfeiture proceeding to a claimant when the initial 
notices it sent to the claimant's home and to a prison--the 
wrong prison, as it happened--were returned:

     [W]hen the government knows (or can easily ascertain) 
     where a person may be found, it must direct its notice 
     there....
     
     ....
     
          ... [I]f ... the government knows that a claimant is in 
     prison, it ... can easily ... find out whether the prison-
     er has been moved or released (and if so, to what 
     address), or whether some problem at the prison pre-
     vented delivery.
     
Recognizing the inadequacy of the DEA's efforts to notify 
Mr. Lopez directly, the Government argues that the notice 
the DEA sent to Ms. Coba was also "reasonably calculated" 
to reach Mr. Lopez because they were, or "appeared to all the 
world" including the DEA, to be married.  To Mr. Lopez's 
observation that a marital relationship is not enough by itself 
to make one spouse the agent of the other for the purpose of 
receiving notice, the Government responds that an agency 
relationship is not required and that in any event, Ms. Coba 
had apparent authority to accept the notice on behalf of Mr. 
Lopez in view of her participation in the attempted escape 
and the "the alignment of her interest with his."

     The Government's argument fails for two reasons.  First, 
the notice sent to Ms. Coba concerned only her own interest 
in the money;  it neither mentioned Mr. Lopez nor gave any 
indication that Ms. Coba should notify him or any other 
person who may have had an interest in the money.  The 
absence of any suggestion that the notice was sent for a 
purpose other than informing Ms. Coba of her own interest in 
the proposed forfeiture renders the notice facially deficient as 
to Mr. Lopez, regardless whether Ms. Coba was his agent for 
the service of process.  Cf. United States v. Marolf, 173 F.3d 
1213, 1215, 1217 (9th Cir. 1999) (noting that Government 
acknowledged notice was insufficient where Government noti-

fied co-defendant but failed to notify claimant after discover-
ing his interest in same property).

     Second, Ms. Coba's control over the money during the 
attempted escape did not cloak her with apparent authority to 
act for Mr. Lopez in all, or perhaps any, subsequent matters 
involving the money.  Apparent authority is "the power to 
affect the legal relations of another person by transactions 
with third persons, professedly as agent for the other, arising 
from and in accordance with the other's manifestations to 
such third persons."  Restatement (Second) of Agency s 8 
(1958).  Apparent authority arises "only to the extent that it 
is reasonable for the third person dealing with the agent to 
believe that the agent is authorized."  Id. cmt. c.

     The Government has not alleged any facts that made it 
reasonable for the DEA to believe that Ms. Coba was Mr. 
Lopez's agent for the purpose of receiving the notice of 
forfeiture.  Even if Mr. Lopez had vested Ms. Coba with 
apparent authority to transfer his $50,000 to the marshal 
during the attempted escape, something more would be re-
quired before one reasonably could say that Mr. Lopez mani-
fested his intention that Ms. Coba act as his agent for any 
other purpose.  Cf. United States v. $184,505.01 in U.S. 
Currency, 72 F.3d 1160, 1164 (3d Cir. 1995) (notice of forfei-
ture given to attorney who represented prisoner only in 
unrelated suit cannot be imputed to prisoner).  The argument 
for apparent authority is further weakened by the nearly four 
month interval between Ms. Coba's delivery of the money and 
the DEA's initiation of a forfeiture proceeding.  Assisting 
another in a failed attempt to escape is hardly the type of 
ongoing activity from which one might reasonably infer con-
tinued authority to act on behalf of the would-be escapee.  Cf. 
Bye v. United States, 105 F.3d 856, 857 (2d Cir. 1997) (notice 
of forfeiture sent to attorney constitutionally sufficient when 
attorney represented prisoner in ongoing and related pro-
ceedings).

     The Government attempts to bolster its argument for 
apparent authority by invoking general principles of agency 
between husband and wife.  Thus, the Government notes that 

although, according to the Restatement (Second) of Agency, 
"[n]either husband nor wife by virtue of the relation has 
power to act as agent for the other," the same authority 
states that "[t]he relation is of such a nature ... that 
circumstances which in the case of strangers would not 
indicate the creation of authority or apparent authority may 
indicate it in the case of husband or wife."  Id. s 22 cmt. b. 
According to the Government, because Ms. Coba was Mr. 
Lopez's wife and because "she had already acted on his 
behalf, at her own peril, with regard to the very same $50,000 
at issue, DEA had good reason to expect that notice to her 
would find its way back to [Mr. Lopez]."

     The Government's argument misses the mark.  A wife does 
not become the agent of her husband by once taking a risk on 
his behalf.  Rather, it is a course of conduct that may give 
rise to the apparent authority of one spouse to act on behalf 
of the other.  As the Restatement explains:

     [A] husband habitually permitted by his wife to attend to 
     some of her business matters may be found to have 
     authority to transact all her business affairs.  Likewise, 
     if a wife is customarily permitted by her husband to 
     order household supplies, authority or apparent authority 
     on her part to purchase things needed in the household 
     can be readily inferred.
     
Id.  Although the examples might benefit from some modern-
ization, they make the point clearly enough:  An act routinely 
performed by one spouse for the other may give rise to 
apparent authority for that spouse to perform the same or a 
closely related act.  The Restatement does not support the 
Government's contention that Ms. Coba's single act of trans-
ferring Mr. Lopez's money vested her with apparent authori-
ty to receive for her husband notice that the money is subject 
to forfeiture.  We therefore hold that Ms. Coba did not have 
apparent authority to receive the notice of forfeiture for Mr. 
Lopez.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the order of the 
district court granting summary judgment for the Govern-

ment.  This matter is remanded to the district court for 
further proceedings on the merits of Mr. Lopez's challenge to 
the forfeiture of his property.

                                                      So ordered.

   