                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 12, 2001    Decided January 4, 2002 

                           No. 00-1426

                        Pall Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

     United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement 
           Workers of America, UAW, AFL-CIO Local 365, 
                            Intervenor

    Petition for Review and Cross-Application for Enforcement 
        of an Order of the National Labor Relations Board

     Thomas W. Budd argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was G. Peter Clark.

     Daniel V. Yager, Heather L. MacDougall and Joseph E. 
Santucci Jr. were on the brief of amici curiae Council on 

Labor Law Equality and LPA, Inc. in support of petitioner.  
Charles I. Cohen entered an appearance.

     David A. Fleischer, Senior Attorney, National Labor Rela-
tions Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John 
H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, and Aileen A. Arm-
strong, Deputy Associate General Counsel.  David S. Haben-
streit, Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Craig Becker argued the cause and filed the brief for 
intervenor United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural 
Implement Workers of America, UAW, AFL-CIO, Local 365.  
Eugene G. Eisner entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson, Circuit Judge, 
and Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  Pall Biomedical Products Co. 
agreed to recognize Local 365, United Auto Workers, as the 
representative of employees at a new Pall facility not covered 
by an existing collective bargaining agreement (CBA) be-
tween Pall and the Union if unit work began to be performed 
there.  Under the agreement Pall would recognize the Union 
upon a showing of majority support without first requiring 
that the Union prevail in an election conducted by the Nation-
al Labor Relations Board.  The central issue in this case is 
whether, as the Board concluded, the agreement concerns a 
mandatory subject of bargaining.  We hold that it does not 
because the manner by which a union may achieve recogni-
tion as the representative of employees outside the bargain-
ing unit is not a mandatory subject of bargaining.  Therefore, 
Pall's revocation of the agreement was not an unfair labor 
practice.

                          I. Background

     Pall operates manufacturing facilities at East Hills, Glen 
Cove, and Port Washington, New York.  Local 365 has long 
represented the production and maintenance employees at 
East Hills and Glen Cove.  In 1990, before the Port Washing-

ton facility opened, the Union and Pall entered into an 
agreement that seemingly guaranteed the Union recognition 
at that facility in the event that unit work were ever to be 
performed there:

     The Employer agrees that in the event that it employs 
     one (1) or more employees performing bargaining unit 
     work at the Employer's facility in Port Washington, NY, 
     the Employer will extend recognition over such Employ-
     ees to Local 365, UAW.  After extension of recognition 
     the Employer and Union will meet to discuss the terms 
     and conditions of employment for such employees.
     
Pall Biomedical Prods. Corp., 331 N.L.R.B. No. 192 at 1 
(Aug. 31, 2000) (Decision).  The Board, however, following its 
decision in Houston Div. of the Kroger Co., 219 N.L.R.B. 388 
(1975), "construed the agreement at issue as requiring the 
showing of majority support before it may be properly ap-
plied," id. at 3, and the parties do not challenge that aspect of 
the decision.  So glossed, the 1990 Agreement simply re-
quires Pall to forego its right to a Board-conducted election to 
determine whether the Union enjoys majority support among 
the employees at Port Washington.

     In 1994 the Union became aware that Pall was moving to 
Port Washington certain laboratory equipment that had been 
operated by bargaining unit employees at Glen Cove.  The 
Union also learned that Pall was hiring new employees at 
Port Washington for jobs that had titles and duties similar to 
those of jobs in the bargaining unit.  The Union therefore 
asked to visit Port Washington in order to determine whether 
bargaining unit work was being performed there.  Pall re-
fused, taking the position that the 1990 Agreement was no 
longer in effect, alternatively giving notice of its revocation of 
the Agreement, and stating that "to gain representation 
rights ... at the Port Washington facility, [the Union] will 
have to go through the normal process of ... filing a repre-
sentation petition with the [Board]."  The Union then filed an 
unfair labor practice charge, which the parties settled in 1995 
when Pall reaffirmed the 1990 Agreement and agreed to give 
the union access to the Port Washington facility.

     In September, 1995 the Union twice visited Port Washing-
ton, after which it demanded recognition as the representa-
tive of the employees there and requested certain information 
assertedly relevant to their representation.  Pall refused such 
recognition and denied the Union's request for a third visit.  
The Union then accused Pall of "unilaterally revok[ing]" the 
1990 Agreement, requested more information, claimed that 
Port Washington was an accretion to the existing bargaining 
unit, and filed a new unfair labor practice charge.  At this 
point Pall withdrew from the 1995 settlement, "reaffirmed its 
previous revocation" of the 1990 Agreement, and refused to 
provide any information.

     The Union charged, among other things, that Pall had 
violated ss 8(a)(1) & (5) of the National Labor Relations Act 
by:  (1) revoking the 1990 Agreement;  (2) refusing to grant 
the Union access to Port Washington;  and (3) refusing to 
provide the requested information.  An Administrative Law 
Judge determined that, because the Agreement does not 
concern a mandatory subject of bargaining, Pall's revocation 
was not an unfair labor practice.  Further, Pall's refusals to 
provide access and information were not unfair labor prac-
tices because the Union's demands were premised upon its 
having the right to enforce the Agreement.  See Decision at 
1.

     The Board reversed the ALJ's determination that the 
Agreement does not concern a mandatory subject of bargain-
ing and ordered Pall to provide some of the information 
sought by the Union.  The Board affirmed the decision of the 
ALJ insofar as he had denied the Union access to the Port 
Washington facility and the rest of the information it had 
sought.  Pall petitioned for review of the adverse aspects of 
the Board's order, the Board cross-applied for enforcement of 
its order, and the Union intervened in support of the Board.

                           II. Analysis

     Pall contends first that the 1990 Agreement does not 
concern a mandatory subject of bargaining.  Pall then argues 

that its refusal to provide the information requested by the 
Union was not an unfair labor practice.

A.   Mandatory Subject of Bargaining

     Section 8(a)(5) of the Act makes it an unfair labor practice 
for an employer "to refuse to bargain collectively with the 
representatives of his employees."  29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5).  
Section 8(d) limits the scope of that obligation to bargaining 
about "wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of 
employment," 29 U.S.C. s 158(d), but that is not to say the 
parties may not also bargain about other, so-called permissive 
subjects of bargaining.  See NLRB v. Wooster Div. of Borg-
Warner Corp., 356 U.S. 342, 349 (1958).  Section 8(d) also 
provides that "where there is in effect a collective bargaining 
contract ... the duty to bargain collectively shall also mean 
that no party to such contract shall terminate or modify such 
contract ...."  More particularly, "an employer [is prohibit-
ed] from altering contractual terms concerning mandatory 
subjects of bargaining during the life of a collective bargain-
ing agreement without the consent of the union."  Int'l 
Union, UAW v. NLRB, 765 F.2d 175, 180 (D.C. Cir. 1985);  
see also Allied Chem. & Alkali Workers, Local Union No. 1 
v. Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., 404 U.S. 157, 185-88 (1971) 
(PPG).  The Act does not prohibit, however, the unilateral 
change of terms concerning permissive subjects.  PPG, 404 
U.S. at 187-88.

     Since there is no dispute that by revoking the 1990 Agree-
ment Pall altered the terms of the Agreement without the 
consent of the Union, this case turns upon whether that 
Agreement concerns a mandatory subject of bargaining.  In 
general, "only issues that settle an aspect of the relationship 
between the employer and employees" are mandatory sub-
jects of bargaining.  PPG, 404 U.S. at 178.  An issue arising 
from outside the bargaining unit may be a mandatory subject 
of bargaining if it "vitally affects" the terms and conditions of 
employment within the bargaining unit, id. at 179;  lest the 
obligation to bargain be extended beyond its statutory limit, 
however, a proposal dealing with such a vital issue is a 
mandatory subject of bargaining only if it is a "direct frontal 

attack" upon the perceived problem.  Local 24, Int'l Bhd. of 
Teamsters v. Oliver, 358 U.S. 283, 294 (1959) ("The regula-
tions embody not the 'remote and indirect approach to the 
subject of wages' perceived by the [lower court] but a direct 
frontal attack upon a problem thought to threaten the mainte-
nance of the basic wage structure established by the collective 
bargaining contract.");  PPG, 404 U.S. at 178 n.18 (quoting 
Oliver);  Lone Star Steel Co. v. NLRB, 639 F.2d 545, 558 
(10th Cir. 1980) ("[T]he Board did not properly observe the 
two-prong requirement of Oliver that in order for a subject 
involving employees outside the unit to be considered manda-
tory it must vitally affect the terms and conditions of employ-
ment or the job security of unit employees and must repre-
sent a direct frontal attack on the problem threatening such 
interests").

     In determining that the 1990 Agreement concerns a man-
datory subject of bargaining, the Board compared it to the 
agreements it had held to concern mandatory subjects in 
Kroger Co., 219 N.L.R.B. 388 (1975), and United Mine Work-
ers, 231 N.L.R.B. 573 (1977) (Lone Star Steel), enf. denied, 
639 F.2d 545.  Decision at 2-3.  The Board recognized that 
those agreements differed from the 1990 Agreement:  The 
agreement in Kroger provided that the employees in any 
acquired stores would become part of the existing bargaining 
unit.  Id.  The agreement in Lone Star Steel provided that 
the employees in any acquired facilities would be bound by 
the existing CBA.  Id. at 3.  While the agreement in Lone 
Star Steel did not extend the bargaining unit to include the 
employees in acquired facilities, it nonetheless "removed eco-
nomic incentives which might have otherwise encouraged the 
employer to transfer the work out of the bargaining unit," 
and thus vitally affected the economic interests of employees 
in the bargaining unit.  Id.

     In contrast, the Agreement here neither includes in the 
bargaining unit the Port Washington employees doing bar-
gaining unit work nor extends to them the CBA in place at 
East Hills and Glen Cove.  The Board concluded that the 
Agreement nonetheless concerns a mandatory subject of bar-
gaining because, like the agreements in Kroger and Lone Star 

Steel, it discourages the transfer of work out of the existing 
bargaining unit.  Id. at 3-4.

     The Board explained as follows why it thought the 1990 
Agreement addresses the threat of work being transferred 
out of the bargaining unit:

     If [Pall] began performing bargaining unit work at Port 
     Washington, the Union would be in a position to protect 
     the interests of the existing unit employees by achieving 
     recognition as the bargaining representative of the Port 
     Washington employees and negotiating terms and condi-
     tions of employment for them similar to those enjoyed by 
     East Hills and Glen Cove employees.
     
Id. at 4.  If similar terms were negotiated, the Board contin-
ued, then labor costs at Port Washington would be similar to 
those at East Hills and Glen Cove, and Pall would have no 
incentive to transfer work to Port Washington.  Id.  Conse-
quently, the Board held, the 1990 Agreement "specifically 
addressed" a concern that vitally affects the employees at 
East Hills and Glen Cove.  Id. at 4.

     We review the Board's decision deferentially:  "[B]ecause 
the classification of bargaining subjects as terms or conditions 
of employment is a matter concerning which the Board has 
special expertise, its judgment as to what is a mandatory 
bargaining subject is entitled to considerable deference."  
Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB, 441 U.S. 488, 495 (1979).  The 
court must determine only "whether the Board's approach is 
a reasonably defensible reading of the statute, one that is 
consistent with the Supreme Court's decisions construing the 
duty to bargain thereunder."  United Food & Commercial 
Workers Int'l Union v. NLRB, 880 F.2d 1422, 1432 (D.C. Cir. 
1989).  For the reasons given below, the decision under 
review fails even this relatively lenient test.

     Pall argues that, because the 1990 Agreement does not 
require it to provide at Port Washington terms and conditions 
similar to those at its other facilities, the Agreement:  (1) does 
not concern a subject that vitally affects the terms and 
conditions of unit employees, and (2) is not a direct frontal 

attack upon any problem facing those employees.  Indeed, 
Pall points out, under the Agreement the parties must negoti-
ate a CBA for the Port Washington employees from scratch.  
And to the extent the resulting agreement--if and when an 
agreement is reached--provides less generous terms than 
those of the CBA for the East Hills and Glen Cove employ-
ees, it will not blunt Pall's incentive to transfer work out of 
the bargaining unit.

     The Board counters that the 1990 Agreement concerns a 
mandatory subject of bargaining because it protects to some 
extent against a transfer of work to Port Washington:  "The 
[1990] agreement, as the Board noted [in the Decision], 
serves that goal by making it easier for the Union to seek to 
negotiate a contract at Port Washington with economic provi-
sions similar to those in the contract covering the existing 
bargaining unit ...."  For its part, the Union similarly 
argues that the Agreement responds to a threat to job 
security and therefore concerns a mandatory subject of bar-
gaining.  The Union stresses that, based upon the specific 
facts underlying this case, the Board reasonably concluded 
there was a real threat of work being transferred to Port 
Washington.

     Although both the Board and the Union are clear in stating 
that the problem faced by unit employees is the potential 
transfer of work to Port Washington, both ultimately recog-
nize that the 1990 Agreement does not actually address that 
problem.  As the Board put it, the Agreement "waiv[es] the 
Company's right to insist on an election" and thereby "en-
ables such negotiations to begin promptly upon the Union's 
presenting proof of majority status."  Or as the Union states, 
the effect of the 1990 Agreement is to create "an expedited 
process for extending representation to Port Washington 
employees."

     We think the modest reach of the 1990 Agreement goes to 
the heart of the matter.  We may assume the Board and the 
Union are correct that the transfer of bargaining unit work to 
Port Washington would "vitally affect" the terms and condi-
tions of employment at East Hills and Glen Cove.  See 
Fibreboard Paper Prods. Corp. v. NLRB, 379 U.S. 203, 210-

15 (1964) (contracting out unit work a mandatory subject of 
bargaining);  Oliver, 358 U.S. at 293-95 (compensation of 
owner-drivers outside of bargaining unit a mandatory subject 
of bargaining in unit of non-owner drivers).  But the 1990 
Agreement is not a "direct frontal attack" upon that problem.  
The Agreement neither prevents work from being transferred 
nor approximates that result by extending the CBA to Port 
Washington employees.

     Rather, the Agreement has the single effect of allowing the 
Union to achieve recognition at Port Washington without 
winning a Board-conducted election.  Yet, as we have seen (in 
the block quotation at 7, above) the Board treated the 1990 
Agreement as the de facto equivalent of an agreement ex-
tending a CBA to employees in new facilities.  An agreement 
providing for a CBA automatically to extend to employees in 
a new facility is significantly different, however, from a mere 
recognition agreement, which dispenses with a Board election.  
The former is indeed a "direct frontal attack" upon the issue 
of work being transferred out of the bargaining unit;  the 
latter is at most a way of expediting recognition of the Union.

     We say "at most" because whether avoiding an election 
would expedite significantly the onset of bargaining is itself 
uncertain.  At oral argument counsel for the Board conceded 
that certification of the result of an uncontested election 
occurs "pretty fast" and that even disputed election issues are 
typically resolved in "several months."  Counsel for the Un-
ion, on the other hand, said the resolution of an election 
dispute could take years, during which the employer would 
not be obligated to bargain.  Counsel did not dispute, howev-
er, that an employer intent upon avoiding its obligation to 
bargain could equally well contest a card count done pursuant 
to a recognition agreement.

     Even if a card count would substantially expedite recogni-
tion, the Union would still have to negotiate a CBA, which 
might or might not equalize labor costs between the new and 
the old plants.  Thus, even expedited recognition is only the 
first step toward equalizing labor costs and thereby prevent-
ing the transfer of work.  For this reason, we conclude that 

prescribing the manner of recognition at a new facility is not 
"a direct frontal attack" upon the problem of transfer of work 
facing employees at already organized facilities, see Oliver, 
358 U.S. at 294;  Lone Star Steel, 639 F.2d at 558;  therefore 
the 1990 Agreement does not concern a mandatory subject of 
bargaining.

     Before closing, we pause to note an argument raised by the 
Union but not relied upon by the Board:  The Union contends 
that the subject of bargaining at issue in this case is not how 
the Union might achieve recognition but "the terms of em-
ployment of Port Washington employees."  Here the Union 
points out that it sought "but was unable to secure the 
Employer's agreement" to include Port Washington employ-
ees in the existing bargaining unit and to extend the CBA to 
Port Washington employees.  The Union goes on to argue 
that

     the retrospective analysis of subjects of bargaining pro-
     posed by the Employer is unworkable because the par-
     ties must be able to determine in advance whether a 
     subject is a mandatory subject of bargaining and cannot 
     wait to see what agreement result [sic] from the bargain-
     ing.
     
     We reject the Union's approach for three reasons.  First, it 
is too easily manipulated;  a party could make virtually any 
issue a mandatory subject of bargaining simply by showing 
that it sought more than it achieved.  Second, the Supreme 
Court in PPG and Oliver gave no indication that negotiation 
history is relevant to whether an agreement concerns a 
mandatory subject of bargaining.  Finally, we doubt seriously 
that an approach that determines the subject of an agreement 
by looking at the text of the agreement is "unworkable."

     What the Union calls the "retrospective analysis"--al-
though retrospection plays no part in it--certainly seems to 
have been workable in this case:  the Union raised an issue--
extending the CBA to Port Washington--over which the 
employer was obligated to bargain.  The employer rejected 
the proposal but the Union did not resort to self-help.  In-
stead one side or the other made a proposal--that the em-
ployer forego its right to an election--over which bargaining 

was merely permissive.  There was no ambiguity at any stage 
about the parties' rights, and nothing "unworkable" about the 
process.

     In conclusion, we hold that the decision of the Board is 
inconsistent with the relevant Supreme Court decisions con-
struing the duty to bargain under the Act.  Even if we 
assume that the transfer of work to Port Washington would 
"vitally affect" the East Hills and Glen Cove employees, we 
cannot conclude that the 1990 Agreement, which merely 
expedites recognition of the Union at Port Washington, is a 
"direct frontal attack" upon that problem.  Because the 
Agreement is not a "direct frontal attack" upon the problem 
of work transfer, under Oliver and PPG it is not a mandatory 
subject of bargaining and, consequently, Pall did not commit 
an unfair labor practice by unilaterally modifying it.

B.   Refusal to Provide Information

     The Board determined that the Union had a right to 
certain information solely because that information was 
deemed relevant to the enforcement and administration of the 
1990 Agreement.  Decision at 6.  The Board did not explicit-
ly state that this aspect of its decision was dependent upon its 
prior holding that the Agreement concerns a mandatory 
subject of bargaining, but that is how we understand its 
reasoning.  So, it seems, do the parties.  Neither the Board 
nor the Union argues that Pall's refusal to provide informa-
tion was an unfair labor practice even if the Agreement 
concerns only a permissive subject of bargaining.  On the 
contrary, the Union implies that it was not:  "Because the 
agreement addressed a mandatory subject, it follows that the 
Union had a right to information needed to utilize the agree-
ment."  Our holding that Pall's revocation of the 1990 Agree-
ment was not an unfair labor practice therefore requires us 
also to reject the Board's conclusion that Pall violated the Act 
when it refused to provide the information requested by the 
Union.

                         III. Conclusion

     The 1990 Agreement concerns the manner in which the 
Union could achieve recognition at Port Washington, which is 

not a mandatory subject of bargaining.  It follows that nei-
ther Pall's revocation of the Agreement nor its refusal to 
provide the information requested by the Union was an unfair 
labor practice.  Accordingly, Pall's petition for review is 
granted and the Board's application for enforcement is de-
nied.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                    