                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued April 17, 2000     Decided September 12, 2000 

                           No. 99-5110

                      George E. Cone, Jr., 
                             Appellee

                                v.

              Louis Caldera, Secretary of the Army, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00168)

     Fred E. Haynes, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellant.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. Lewis, 
U.S. Attorney, and Michael J. Ryan and R. Craig Lawrence, 
Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     John A. Wickham argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellee.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  George E. Cone, Jr. filed suit in 
United States District Court challenging the Army's refusal 
to amend his Officer Evaluation Report.  The court concluded 
that the Army's refusal was arbitrary and capricious, and 
directed the Army to improve Cone's rating.  We reverse.

                                I

     Cone served as a captain in the United States Army and 
commanded an infantry company during the Persian Gulf 
War.1  After the war, his supervisors completed an Officer 
Evaluation Report (OER) assessing his performance from 
June 14, 1990 to June 13, 1991.  An OER is used to evaluate 
an officer's performance and career potential.  See Army 
Regulation 623-105, at p 1-6(a) [hereinafter AR 623-105].  At 
least two of the officer's superiors prepare the report--a 
"rater" who directly supervises the officer and a "senior 
rater" higher in the chain of command.  Id. p 3-1.  Cone's 
rater was his battalion commander, Lt. Colonel Stephen S. 
Smith.  His senior rater was his brigade commander, Colonel 
James C. Riley.

     The OER form contains blanks that require the rater and 
senior rater to provide both numerical and narrative assess-
ments.  Part VII of the form is reserved for the senior rater, 
who evaluates the officer "by comparing the rated officer's 
potential with all other officers of the same grade."  Id. 
p 4-16(b).  In Part VII(a), the senior rater is to check one of 
ten blocks that rank the officer's potential against that of all 
other officers of that grade.  According to Army regulations, 
the evaluation is "based on the premise that in a representa-
tive sample of 100 officers of the same grade or grade 
grouping (Army-wide), the relative potential of such a sample 
will approximate a bell-shaped normal distribution pattern."  
Id.2  This means, the regulations continue, "that in a repre-

__________
     1  Cone was promoted to major in October of 1996.

     2  In a normal distribution, most of the data points are "clus-
tered near the mean, and the density or relative frequency of the 

sentative sample of 100 officers of the same grade or grade 
grouping (Army-wide) only one officer can reasonably be 
expected to be placed in the top block."  Id. p 4-16(c).  
Slightly more officers may be ranked in the second block, 
which represents the top 2-3% of Army officers of that grade, 
and so on.  In a representative sample of 100, it is expected 
that the majority of officers will be rated in the two middle 
blocks.  See J.A. at 147 (illustrative OER form).  The senior 
rater must also write narrative comments addressing the 
officer's performance in Part VII(b) of the OER.  See AR 
623-105, at p 4-16(d)(2), (3).3

     Once completed, the Army compares the senior rater's 
assessment of the officer to the senior rater's rating history 
for all officers of the same grade--known as the senior rater's 
"profile."  Id. pp 2-5, 4-16(d)(5)(a).  "The purpose of the 
profile is to place the rated officer's OER in perspective by 
revealing the senior rater's general rating tendency."  Id. 
p 4-16(d)(5)(a).  By comparing a specific OER to the profile, 
the Army can discern whether a particular officer performed 
above, at, or below the "center of mass"--i.e., the median 
ranking--of the officers ranked by the same senior rater.

     In completing Cone's OER, senior rater Riley checked the 
second block from the top.  Of eleven captains rated by Riley 
during this period, he ranked seven in the top block, three 
(including Cone) in the second block, and one in the third 
block.  See J.A. at 147.  According to this profile--which was 
included in Cone's OER--Riley's center-of-mass ("COM") 

__________
numbers decreases with increasing distance from the mean."  
David W. Barnes & John M. Conley, Statistical Evidence in 
Litigation 140 (1986).  "If the frequencies with which the numbers 
in the normal population appear as the result of random experi-
ments are plotted on a graph, the figure resembles a bell-shaped 
curve."  Id.

     3  The Army has recently altered its regulations and OER form, 
and has dispensed with the ten-block rating system.  See Army 
Regulation 623-105 (Apr. 1, 1998);  DA Form 67-9 (Apr. 1, 1998).  
The citations in this opinion refer to the regulations and forms that 
were in effect at the time of Cone's evaluation.

was the top block.  Cone's rating was therefore below center-
of-mass for the group even though he was rated in the 
second-highest block, which corresponds to the top 2-3% of 
captains Army-wide.

     Cone appealed his OER to the Officer Special Review 
Board (OSRB), which is charged with reviewing requests to 
correct erroneous military records.  See AR 623-105, at 
p 9-2(i).  He contended that "[t]he senior rater blocking ... 
does not accurately portray my potential and may penalize 
me when viewed by future boards."  J.A. at 144.  As support 
for this assertion, he supplied affidavits from Riley and Smith 
indicating that Riley "did not intend for [Cone's] OER to 
reflect below center of mass performance," and acknowl-
edging that Riley had failed "to tightly manage" his senior 
rater profile.  Id. at 150.

     The Special Review Board denied Cone's request.  See 
OSRB Decision at 4 (July 2, 1993) (J.A. at 143).  The Board 
rejected the affidavit from Riley, noting that Army regula-
tions preclude "statements from rating officials that they did 
not intend to evaluate as they did from serving as the basis 
for favorable action on appeals."  Id.;  see AR 623-105, at 
p 5-32(b)(2), App. p N-2(b)(3).  The Special Review Board 
also noted that Riley had submitted "virtually identical" 
memoranda in support of appeals by five other captains he 
had similarly rated below center-of-mass.  1993 OSRB Deci-
sion at 2 (J.A. at 141).4  Although the Board recognized that 
there "was a persistent failure by the [senior rater] to man-
age his profile for [captains] in such a way as to preclude any 
unintended below-COM ratings," it concluded that Cone had 
failed to adduce "clear and convincing evidence" (as required 
by the regulations) to rebut the "presumption of regularity" 
in the OER.  Id. at 3-4 (J.A. at 142-43) (citing AR 623-105, 
at p 5-32).

__________
     4  The Special Review Board further found that of nine below 
center-of-mass ratings made by Riley and processed by the Army 
between August 1990 and February 1992, he supported or offered 
to support appeals by at least seven of the subject officers.  See 
1993 OSRB Decision at 3 (J.A. at 142).

     Relying on new statements from his rater and senior rater, 
Cone once again appealed to the Special Review Board and 
the Board once again denied Cone's request.  See OSRB 
Decision (July 29, 1994) (J.A. at 158-60).  In particular, the 
Board rejected Cone's claim that the comments Riley wrote 
in the narrative portion of the OER supported a center-of-
mass rating.  Those words, the Special Review Board said, 
"are not comparable to" what Riley wrote regarding "other 
officers [whom] he did in fact place in the top block COM."  
Id.  Specifically, the Board noted that Riley characterized 
Cone as having "solid potential," while he described those he 
placed in the top block as having "unlimited" or "outstanding 
potential."  Id.  Similarly, while Riley's recommendation re-
garding Cone was "promote to major and consider for [Com-
mand and General Staff College] when eligible," for the 
others it was "promote to major and select for [Command and 
General Staff College] ASAP."  Id. (emphasis added).

     Cone next appealed to the Army Board for Correction of 
Military Records.  See 10 U.S.C. s 1552(a)(1).  Based on the 
same evidence, Cone urged amendment of his OER to reflect 
a center-of-mass rating.  The Correction Board rejected his 
appeal, concluding that, despite Riley's inability "to establish 
a ... profile for captains that approximated a bell-shaped 
normal distribution," Cone's rating accurately captured Ri-
ley's assessment of Cone's performance compared to that of 
other officers of the same grade.  Correction Board Decision 
at 4 (Apr. 26, 1995) (J.A. at 128).  The Board noted that its 
conclusion was also "supported by the type of comments used 
by the [senior rater] to distinguish between a top block officer 
and a two block officer."  Id.

     After losing before the Correction Board, Cone filed suit in 
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, 
alleging that the Board's denial of his request violated the 
Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A), and ask-
ing the court to correct his records.5  Specifically, Cone 

__________
     5  Cone also challenged his nonselection to the Command and 
General Staff College, a challenge the district court found non-
reviewable.  See Cone v. Caldera, 46 F. Supp. 2d 3, 7-8 (D.D.C. 

argued that Army regulations require a senior rater to rank 
officers along a bell-shaped curve, and that Riley's failure to 
maintain a profile hewn to that curve constituted arbitrary 
and capricious action.  Although the district court found that 
the regulations "do not mandate that each senior rater main-
tain a bell-shaped-curve distribution," Cone v. Caldera, 46 
F. Supp. 2d 3, 6 (D.D.C. 1999) (internal quotation omitted), it 
nevertheless held the Army's ranking arbitrary and capri-
cious, see id. at 7.  After undertaking a statistical analysis, 
the court determined that "[t]he senior rater's ranking of 
seven captains in the top block is more than twenty standard 
deviations above the expected value," and that "the center of 
mass of an eleven-officer profile" could not "reasonably be 
located in the top block."  Id. at 6-7.  This, the court said, 
indicated that the Army had acted arbitrarily and capriciously 
in declining to amend Cone's OER "to reflect a center of 
mass rating."  Id. at 7.  The court ordered the Army to make 
the necessary amendment, see id., and the Army appealed.

                                II

     The Secretary of a military department, acting through a 
civilian board, "may correct any military record of the Secre-
tary's department when the Secretary considers it necessary 
to correct an error or remove an injustice."  10 U.S.C. 
s 1552(a).  An officer's OERs are presumed to be "adminis-
tratively correct" and to "[r]epresent the considered opinions 
and objective judgment of the rating officials at the time of 
preparation."  AR 623-105, at p 5-32.  An officer seeking a 
correction must prove "clearly and convincingly" that the 
"presumption of regularity" in the preparation of administra-
tive records should not apply, and that "[a]ction is warranted 
to correct a material error, inaccuracy, or injustice."  Id. 
p 9-7(a) (citing id. p 5-32);  see Frizelle v. Slater, 111 F.3d 
172, 177 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (noting "strong but rebuttable 

__________
1999).  Cone has not pressed this claim on appeal, apparently 
because it became moot due to his subsequent selection to the 
College.  See Cone Br. at 4.

presumption that administrators of the military, like other 
public officers, discharge their duties correctly, lawfully, and 
in good faith") (internal quotations omitted).

     Although we have jurisdiction to review the decisions of the 
Correction Board,6 we do so under an "unusually deferential 
application of the 'arbitrary or capricious' standard" of the 
Administrative Procedure Act.  Kreis v. Secretary of the Air 
Force, 866 F.2d 1508, 1514 (D.C. Cir. 1989);  see Kidwell v. 
Department of the Army, 56 F.3d 279, 286 (D.C. Cir. 1995).7  
This deferential standard is calculated to ensure that the 
courts do not become a forum for appeals by every soldier 
dissatisfied with his or her ratings, a result that would 
destabilize military command and take the judiciary far afield 
of its area of competence.  See Orloff v. Willoughby, 345 U.S. 
83, 94 (1953) ("Orderly government requires that the judicia-
ry be as scrupulous not to interfere with legitimate Army 
matters as the Army must be scrupulous not to intervene in 
judicial matters.").  We review de novo the district court's 
ruling, on cross-motions for summary judgment, that the 
Correction Board acted arbitrarily and capriciously in this 
case.  See Frizelle, 111 F.3d at 176;  Kidwell, 56 F.3d at 286.

     Cone contends that Riley's failure to adhere to a bell-curve 
distribution, and the Army's refusal to correct that failure, 
constituted arbitrary and capricious agency action in violation 
of Army regulations.  The regulations, however, do not re-
quire adherence to a bell-shaped curve;  rather, they state a 
"premise" upon which senior raters are to base their evalua-
tions:

__________
     6  See Kreis v. Secretary of the Air Force, 866 F.2d 1508, 1512 
(D.C. Cir. 1989) (citing Chappell v. Wallace, 462 U.S. 296 (1983));  
see also Frizelle, 111 F.3d at 176;  Dickson v. Secretary of Defense, 
68 F.3d 1396, 1401-02 & n.6 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  Kidwell v. Depart-
ment of the Army, 56 F.3d 279, 283-86 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

     7  Cone's appellate brief asserts that his incorrect OER also 
violated his rights under the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. s 552a(e)(5).  
Neither Cone's complaint nor the district court's opinion addresses 
such a claim, and we therefore do not consider it here.

     The senior rater's evaluation is made by comparing the 
     rated officer's potential with all other officers of the same 
     grade, or grade groupings....  His or her evaluation is 
     based on the premise that in a representative sample of 
     100 officers of the same grade or grade grouping (Army-
     wide), the relative potential of such a sample will approx-
     imate a bell-shaped normal distribution pattern.
     
AR 623-105, at p 4-16(b).  As the district court itself said, 
this regulation does "not mandate that each senior rater 
maintain a bell-shaped-curve distribution" in each rating peri-
od.  Cone, 46 F. Supp. 2d at 6 (internal quotation omitted).8  
Nonetheless, the district court concluded that Riley's rank-
ings of his eleven officers departed so radically from what 
statistically would have been expected as to prove that Riley 
"violated p 4-16 in rating at least some of the other captains 
against whom Cone was compared."  Id.  To reach this 
conclusion, the district court applied a test of statistical 
significance to the distribution of Riley's rankings of the 
eleven captains.  See id. at 6 & n.1.

     Even without a statistical analysis, it is clear that Riley was 
lax in following the rating guidelines.  The Special Review 
Board itself determined that, over a series of rating periods, 
Riley exhibited "a persistent failure ... to manage his profile 
for [captains] in such a way as to preclude any unintended 
below-COM ratings."  1993 OSRB Decision at 3 (J.A. at 142).  
But Riley's inability to adhere to a bell-curve distribution is 
not sufficient to render arbitrary the Army's refusal to cor-
rect Cone's record.  The Army anticipates, and compensates 
for, the fallibility of individual raters by requiring that each 
rater's personal profile (indicating the number of officers he 
or she has placed in each box during the rating period) be 
included in the OER of each officer he or she reviews.  As 

__________
     8  See also Cone, 46 F. Supp. 2d at 6 ("The Army correctly notes 
that ... 'since there are thousands of captains in the Army, it is 
statistically possible that a particular senior rater may have a 
number of captains that he or she is senior rating that merit 
placement in the top block."') (quoting Def.'s Resp. to Pl.'s State-
ment of Facts p 41).

the regulations state, "[t]he purpose of the profile is to place 
the rated officer's OER in perspective by revealing the senior 
rater's general rating tendency."  AR 623-105, at 
p 4-16(d)(5)(a).  Put more bluntly, "[t]he profile is meant to 
be an indicator of the senior rater's tendency to inflate or 
deflate ratings."  Id. p 9-7(f).  Hence, anyone examining the 
OER to determine the true ability of the officer can take into 
account whether his ratings have been rendered by an "easy" 
or "hard" grader.  This is a reasonable response to the 
problem, and one which makes the Correction Board's refusal 
to amend Cone's OER reasonable as well.

     Moreover, we would be hard pressed to find a reversible 
"error" in Cone's record even without the clarification provid-
ed by the senior rater's profile.  Under the regulations, the 
senior rater's obligation is to compare "the rated officer's 
potential with [that of] all other officers of the same grade" 
Army-wide.  Id. p 4-16(b).  The rating box in which Cone 
was placed represents the top 2-3% of all Army officers of 
the same rank.  There is no evidence in the record that 
Cone's true abilities place him in the only higher category--a 
category reserved for the Army's top 1%.  See id. p 4-16(c).  
Indeed, the principal flaw to which Cone points--Riley's 
inability to adhere to a bell curve--indicates only that Riley 
tended to inflate his officers' ratings above the curve:  he 
consistently placed most of his officers in the top few boxes 
on the rating chart, despite the instruction that those boxes 
be reserved for the top few percent of all officers in the 
Army.  See, e.g., 1993 OSRB Decision at 3 (J.A. at 142) 
(noting profile periods in which Riley gave top-block ratings 
to 22 of 61, 12 of 19, 6 of 11, and 26 of 32 captains).  Although 
this could suggest that Cone's ranking should not have been 
as high as the one Riley gave him, it certainly does not 
establish that he should have been ranked even higher.9

__________
     9  Cone notes that Riley wrote on the OER:  "This evaluation 
does not reflect a downturn in performance, rather I have restarted 
my profile."  J.A. at 147.  Army regulations permit a rater to 
restart his profile when necessary to convey his intended evaluation 
to selection boards and personnel managers.  See AR 623-105, at 
p 3-12.1.  Although Riley's comment means that Cone's second-

     In support of the contention that he was misrated, Cone 
offers a post-evaluation affidavit in which Riley states that he 
"did not intend for [Cone's] OER to reflect below center of 
mass performance."  J.A. at 150.  But the Correction Board 
reasonably refused to credit the affidavit on the basis of 
Army regulations providing that "[s]tatements from rating 
officials that they did not intend to rate [an officer] as they 
did" will "not be used to alter or withdraw a report."  AR 
623-105, at p 5-32(b)(2);  see id. App. p N-2(b)(3).  The ratio-
nale for these regulations is an understanding that raters 
may attempt to retract otherwise accurate assessments when 
requested to do so by their disappointed officers.  Such post-
hoc statements by rating officials, the regulations explain, 
"often reflect retrospective thinking, or second thoughts, 
prompted by an appellant's non-selection or other unfavorable 
personnel action claimed to be the sole result of the contested 
report." Id. The Correction Board's refusal to credit Riley's 
affidavit is particularly reasonable in this case, given that 
Riley had submitted "virtually identical" memoranda in sup-
port of the appeals of many other captains who likewise 
challenged the below center-of-mass ratings he gave them 
during the same time period.  1993 OSRB Decision at 2 (J.A. 
at 141).  The Board reasonably regarded these memoranda 
as reflections of Riley's sympathy for the pleas of his subor-
dinates, rather than as accurate statements of his original 
intent.

     Cone also asks us to consider affidavits, authored by senior 
Army officers, that contend that the adjectives Riley used to 
describe him in the narrative section of the OER indicate a 
center-of-mass rating.  See J.A. at 96-99.  Both affidavits 
were written in November of 1998--after the district court 
complaint was filed and long after the close of the administra-
tive proceedings.  Because the affidavits were not part of the 
administrative record, we may not consider them on appeal.  
See Environmental Defense Fund, Inc. v. Costle, 657 F.2d 

__________
block rating should not be regarded as a downturn in Cone's own 
performance, it says nothing about where he ranks in comparison 
with his peers.

275, 284-86 (D.C. Cir. 1981);  see also Camp v. Pitts, 411 U.S. 
138, 142 (1973).  In any event, the affidavits are neither 
sufficiently specific, nor sufficiently authoritative, to affect the 
result here.10

     In conclusion, we observe that the district court's remedial 
order reveals just what a quagmire we would enter were we 
to uphold Cone's challenge to his OER.  The court directed 
the Army to amend Part VII(a) of Cone's report "to reflect a 
center of mass rating."  Cone, 46 F. Supp. 2d at 7.  But how 
should it be amended?  Cone interprets the court's mandate 
as requiring that he be given a top-block rating, see Cone Br. 
at 34-35, as do we.11  Yet, as already noted, there is no 
evidence that Cone qualifies as one of the Army's top 1%.  
Moreover, even if Riley were guilty of rampant grade-
inflation, there is no evidence that the seven officers to whom 
he gave top-block rankings still did not merit higher rankings 
than Cone.  Thus, if Cone were moved to the top block to 
achieve a center-of-mass result, would not those seven officers 
have grounds for appeal, complaining that their own compara-
tive positions had been unfairly deflated?  Indeed, would not 
the same be true for all captains, Army-wide, whose senior 

__________
     10  By the same token, we decline to give any weight to the 
Special Review Board's conclusion that the words Riley used in 
Cone's OER were "not comparable" to the words he used to 
describe other officers whom "he did in fact place in the top block 
COM."  1994 OSRB Decision (J.A. at 159).  The Army successfully 
argued below that the court should deny Cone discovery of the 
OERs of the other officers upon which this comparison was based, 
even in redacted form, on the ground that they were not part of the 
administrative record before the Correction Board.  See Cone v. 
Caldera, Civ. No. 97-168, slip op. at 2-3 (D.D.C. Aug. 21, 1998) (J.A. 
at 33-34).  But if that is true, then the comparisons cannot provide 
substantial evidence to support the Board's decision.  On the other 
hand, if the comparisons were before the Board, by keeping them 
out of the appellate record the Army has deprived this court of any 
basis for concluding that the Board's characterizations are valid.

     11  The other alternative--lowering the ratings of some officers 
now in the top block in order to make the second block the center-
of-mass--would only further complicate the problem discussed in 
the following text.

raters had placed them in the top block?  The knowledge that 
"correcting" Cone's grades would ultimately require us to 
reassess the relative rankings of his entire cohort--a task for 
which a court is spectacularly unsuited--only further con-
firms the wisdom of deferring to the reasonable judgment of 
the Correction Board.  See Kreis, 866 F.2d at 1514 ("[T]he 
alteration of a record may correct one injustice only to 
commit another, or perhaps only to incur some other equally 
significant institutional cost.  All such balancing of consider-
ations is to be done by the Secretary, free of judicial second-
guessing.");  see also Sargisson v. United States, 913 F.2d 
918, 922 (Fed. Cir. 1990) ("A court lacks the special expertise 
needed to review reserve officers' records and rank them on 
the basis of relative merit.").

                               III

     At bottom, Cone argues not that he was graded too low in 
comparison to all officers of his rank, but that he did not get 
the full benefit of his superior's inflated grading curve.  Be-
cause we conclude that this does not constitute cause for 
requiring the Correction Board to amend Cone's evaluation 
report, we reverse the decision of the district court.

                                