                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 17, 2000     Decided March 2, 2001 

                           No. 94-1035

               Time Warner Entertainment Co., L.P. 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                 BellSouth Corporation, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
               95-1337, 99-1503, 99-1504, 99-1522, 
                    99-1541, 99-1542, 00-1086

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     David W. Carpenter argued the cause for petitioners 
AT&T Corporation and Time Warner Entertainment Co., 

L.P.  With him on the briefs were Peter Keisler, David L. 
Lawson, C. Frederick Beckner III, Henk Brands and Robert 
D. Joffe.  Charles S. Walsh, Richard B Beckner, Stuart W. 
Gold and Marc C. Rosenblum entered appearances.

     Robert D. Joffe and Henk Brands were on the briefs for 
petitioner Time Warner Entertainment Co., L.P.  Charles S. 
Walsh, Richard B. Beckner and Stuart W. Gold entered 
appearances.

     Andrew Jay Schwartzman, Cheryl A. Leanza and Harold 
Feld were on the briefs for petitioner Consumers Union.

     James M. Carr, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, Daniel 
M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, Joel Marcus and 
James M. Carr, Counsel, David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant 
Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, Mark B. Stern 
and Jacob M. Lewis, Attorneys, and Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. 
Attorney.  William E. Kennard, General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, John E. Ingle, Deputy Associ-
ate General Counsel, and Catherine G. O'Sullivan, Robert B. 
Nicholson and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, entered appearances.

     Henk J. Brands, Robert D. Joffe, Peter D. Keisler, David 
L. Lawson and C. Frederick Beckner III were on the brief for 
intervenor Time Warner Entertainment Co., L.P. in No. 
99-1522.  Mark C. Rosenblum entered an appearance.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  Section 11(c) of the Cable Televi-
sion Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. 
L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 ("1992 Cable Act"), amends 47 
U.S.C. s 533 to direct the Federal Communications Commis-
sion to set two types of limits on cable operators.  The first 
type is horizontal, addressing operators' scale:  "limits on the 

number of cable subscribers a person is authorized to reach 
through cable systems owned by such person, or in which 
such person has an attributable interest."  47 U.S.C. 
s 533(f)(a)(1)(A).  The second type is vertical, addressing 
operators' integration with "programmers" (suppliers of pro-
grams to be carried over cable systems):  "limits on the 
number of channels on a cable system that can be occupied by 
a video programmer in which a cable operator has an attrib-
utable interest."  47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(a)(1)(B).  The FCC has 
duly promulgated regulations.  See 47 C.F.R. s 76.503-04.  
Petitioners Time Warner and AT&T challenge the horizontal 
limit as in excess of statutory authority, as unconstitutional 
infringements of their freedom of speech, and as products of 
arbitrary and capricious decisionmaking which violate the 
Administrative Procedure Act.  Time Warner similarly chal-
lenges the vertical limit.  Together with AT&T, Time Warner 
also challenges as arbitrary and capricious the rules for 
determining what counts as an "attributable interest."  Con-
cluding that the FCC has not met its burden under the First 
Amendment and, in part, lacks statutory authority for its 
actions, we remand for further consideration of both limits.  
In addition we vacate specific portions of the attribution rules 
as lacking rational justification.

     Consumers Union also files a petition for review, which 
need not detain us long.  It objects to the Commission's 
action to the extent that it continued a stay on enforcement of 
the horizontal limit.  See Implementation of Section 11(c) of 
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition 
Act of 1992, 14 F.C.C.R. 19098, 19127-28 p p 71-73 (1999) 
("Third Report").  The Commission issued the stay after a 
district court found the statute underlying that limit unconsti-
tutional, see Daniels Cablevision, Inc. v. United States, 835 
F. Supp. 1 (D.D.C. 1993), and provided that in the event of 
Daniels's reversal the stay would end.  See Implementation 
of Sections 11 and 13 of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, 8 F.C.C.R. 8565, 
8609 p 109 (1993) ("Second Report").  We did reverse Daniels 
in Time Warner Entertainment Co. v. United States, 211 

F.3d 1313 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("Time Warner I"), so the stay 
ended automatically.1  Thus the stay issue is moot unless the 
issue posed is capable of repetition yet evading review.  Even 
if we assume that the issue evades review, its recurrence is 
not probable enough to qualify it as "capable of repetition."  
See Spencer v. Kemna, 523 U.S. 1, 17 (1998) (requiring "a 
reasonable expectation that the same complaining party [will] 
be subject to the same action again") (internal citations 
omitted).  Although we find here that the regulations fail 
constitutional scrutiny, the specific condition that led to the 
stay--a pending challenge to the statute's constitutionality--
is highly unlikely to recur.  We therefore find Consumers 
Union's claim moot and dismiss the petition.

                              * * *

     The horizontal rule imposes a 30% limit on the number of 
subscribers that may be served by a multiple cable system 
operator ("MSO").  See 47 C.F.R. s 76.503;  Third Report 14 
F.C.C.R. at 19119 p 55.  Both the numerator and denomina-
tor of this fraction include only current subscribers to multi-
channel video program distributor ("MVPD") services.  See 
id. at 19107-10 p p 20-25.  Subscribers include not only users 
of traditional cable services but also subscribers to non-cable 
MVPD services such as Direct Broadcast Satellite ("DBS"),2 a 

__________
     1 The cross-appeals of the government and the cable firms from 
the district court's decision in Daniels were originally consolidated 
with the cable firms' petitions for review of earlier iterations of the 
implementing regulations.  See Time Warner I, 211 F.3d at 1315-
16.  After a date for oral argument was set, the FCC initiated a 
new rulemaking as part of its planned quinquennial review of the 
horizontal regulations.  We therefore severed the Daniels appeals 
from the challenges to the regulations, holding the latter in abey-
ance until the completion of the new rulemaking.  See id.  The 
challenge to the new horizontal rules has supplanted that portion of 
the earlier challenges.

     2 DBS "is a nationally distributed subscription video service that 
delivers programming via satellite to a small parabolic 'dish' anten-
na located at the viewer's home."  Annual Assessment of the Status 
of Competition in the Market for the Delivery of Video Program-

rapidly growing segment of the MVPD market.  See id. at 
19110-12 p p 26-35.  The Commission pointed out that under 
this provision the nominal 30% limit would allow a cable 
operator to serve 36.7% of the nation's cable subscribers if it 
served none by DBS.  See id. at 19113 p 37 & n.82.3  In an 
express effort to encourage competition through new provi-
sion of cable, the Commission excluded from any MSO's 
numerator all new subscribers signed up by virtue of "over-
building," the industry's term for cable laid in competition 
with a pre-existing cable operator.  See id. at 19112-13 p p 34, 
37.  Further, subscribers to a service franchised after the 
rule's adoption (October 20, 1999) do not go into an MSO's 
numerator, even if not the result of an overbuild.  See id. at 
19112 p 33.  As a result, the rule's main bite is on firms 
obtaining subscribers through merger or acquisition.

     The vertical limit is currently set at 40% of channel capaci-
ty, reserving 60% for programming by non-affiliated firms.  
See 47 C.F.R. s 76.504;  Second Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 8593-
94 p 68;  Implementation of Section 11(c) of the Cable Televi-
sion Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, 10 
F.C.C.R. 7364, 7368 p 14 (1995) ("Reconsideration Order").  
Channels assigned to broadcast stations, leased access, and 
for public, educational, or governmental uses are included in 
the calculation of channel capacity.  See id. at 7371-73 p p 20-
27.  Capacity over 75 channels is not subject to the limit, so a 
cable operator is never required to reserve more than 45 
channels for others (.60 x 75 = 45).  See id. at 7374-76 
p p 31-35.

__________
ming, Seventh Annual Report, CS Docket No. 00-132, FCC 01-01 
(rel. Jan. 8, 2001) p 71 (2000) ("Seventh Annual Report").

     3 30% of roughly 80 million MVPD subscribers would be about 24 
million subscribers, which in turn would be 36.69% of roughly 66 
million cable subscribers.  Under the Commissions most recent 
subscriber estimates, this provision would allow an MSO to serve 
37.4% of cable subscribers, or approximately 1.1 million more 
customers than when the Third Report was written.  See Seventh 
Annual Report at p p 6-7.

     As cable operators, Time Warner and AT&T "exercise[ ] 
editorial discretion in selecting the programming [they] will 
make available to [their] subscribers," Time Warner I, 211 
F.3d at 1316, and are "entitled to the protection of the speech 
and press provisions of the First Amendment," Turner 
Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Federal Communications Com-
mission, 512 U.S. 622, 636 (1994) ("Turner I") (quoting 
Leathers v. Medlock, 499 U.S. 439, 444 (1991)).  The horizon-
tal limit interferes with petitioners' speech rights by restrict-
ing the number of viewers to whom they can speak.  The 
vertical limit restricts their ability to exercise their editorial 
control over a portion of the content they transmit.

     In Time Warner I we upheld the statutory provisions 
against a facial attack, after finding them subject to interme-
diate rather than, as the cable firms argued, strict scrutiny.  
Time Warner I, 211 F.3d at 1316-22.  The regulations here 
present a related but independent set of questions.  Constitu-
tional authority to impose some limit is not authority to 
impose any limit imaginable.

     In briefs written before the issuance of Time Warner I, 
petitioners argued here for strict scrutiny.  At oral argument 
they withdrew from this position and said, euphemistically, 
that they were "happy to stand on intermediate scrutiny."  
Because of that concession and, in any event, not seeing any 
distinction between the statute and the regulations for level-
of-scrutiny purposes, we apply intermediate scrutiny.  Under 
the formula set forth in United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 
367, 377 (1968), and reaffirmed by Turner Broadcasting 
System, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commission, 520 
U.S. 180, 189 (1997) ("Turner II"), a governmental regulation 
subject to intermediate scrutiny will be upheld if it "advances 
important governmental interests unrelated to the suppres-
sion of free speech and does not burden substantially more 
speech than necessary to further those interests."  Id. (quot-
ing O'Brien, 391 U.S. at 377).

     The interests asserted in support of the horizontal and 
vertical limits are the same interrelated interests that we 
found sufficient to support the statutory scheme in Time 

Warner I:  "the promotion of diversity in ideas and speech" 
and "the preservation of competition."  Time Warner I, 211 
F.2d at 1319;  see also Turner I, 512 U.S. at 662-64 (conclud-
ing that both qualify as important governmental interests).  
After a review of the legislative history, we concluded that 
Congress had drawn "reasonable inferences, based upon sub-
stantial evidence, that increases in the concentration of cable 
operators threatened diversity and competition in the cable 
industry."  Time Warner I, 211 F.3d at 1319-20.  But the 
FCC must still justify the limits that it has chosen as not 
burdening substantially more speech than necessary.  In 
addition, in "demonstrat[ing] that the recited harms are real, 
not merely conjectural," Turner I, 512 U.S. at 664, the FCC 
must show a record that validates the regulations, not just 
the abstract statutory authority.

                              * * *

     The FCC asserts that a 30% horizontal limit satisfies its 
statutory obligation to ensure that no single "cable operator 
or group of cable operators can unfairly impede ... the flow 
of video programming from the video programmer to the 
consumer," 47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(A), while adequately re-
specting the benefits of clustering4 and the economies of scale 
that are thought to come with larger size.  See Third Report, 
14 F.C.C.R. at 19123-24 p 61.  It interpreted this statutory 
language as a directive to prohibit large MSOs--either by the 
action of a single MSO or the coincidental or collusive actions 
of several MSOs--from precluding the entry into the market 
of a new cable programmer.  See id. at 19116 p 43.  In 
setting the limit at 30%, it assumed there was a serious risk 
of collusion.  See id., Part VI, at 19113-25 p p 36-65.  But 

__________
     4 "Clustering" refers to the strategy under which MSOs concen-
trate their operations within a particular geographic region, giving 
up scattered holdings around the country.  The benefits are 
thought to be in achieving economies of both scale and scope, 
allowing MSOs to spread fixed investment costs over a larger 
customer base and to better compete with telephone companies 
owning local loops that are actual or potential substitutes.  See 
Seventh Report p p 152-53.

while collusion is a form of anti-competitive behavior that 
implicates an important government interest, the FCC has 
not presented the "substantial evidence" required by Turner 
I and Turner II that such collusion has in fact occurred or is 
likely to occur;  so its assumptions are mere conjecture.  See 
Turner II, 520 U.S. at 195 (citing Turner I, 512 U.S. at 666).  
The FCC alternatively relies on its supposed grant of authori-
ty to regulate the non-collusive actions of large MSOs.  Con-
gress may indeed, under certain readings of Turner I and 
Turner II, have the power to regulate the coincidental but 
independent actions of cable operators solely in the interest of 
diversity, but "[w]here an administrative interpretation of a 
statute invokes the outer limits of Congress' power, we expect 
a clear indication that Congress intended that result."  Solid 
Waste Agency v. United States Army Corps of Eng'rs, __ 
U.S. __, 121 S. Ct. 675, 683 (2001).  The 1992 Cable Act, as 
we shall see, instead expresses the contrary intention.

     Part VI of the Third Report lays out the calculations that 
lead the FCC to the 30% limit.  See Third Report, Part VI, 
14 F.C.C.R. at 19113-25 p p 36-65.  First the FCC deter-
mines that the average cable network needs to reach 15 
million subscribers to be economically viable.  See id. at 
19114-16 p p 40-42.  This is 18.56% of the roughly 80 million 
MVPD subscribers, and the FCC rounds it up to 20% of such 
subscribers.  The FCC then divines that the average cable 
programmer will succeed in reaching only about 50% of the 
subscribers linked to cable companies that agree to carry its 
programming, because of channel capacity, "programming 
tastes of particular cable operators," or other factors.  Id. at 
19117-18 p 49.  The average programmer therefore requires 
an "open field" of 40% of the market to be viable (.20/.50 = 
.40).  See id. at 19117-18 p p 46-50.

     Finally, to support the 30% limit that it says is necessary to 
assure this minimum, the Commission reasons as follows:  
With a 30% limit, a programmer has an "open field" of 40% of 
the market even if the two largest cable companies deny 
carriage, acting "individually or collusively."  Id. at 19119 
p 53.  A 50% rule is inadequate because, if a duopoly were to 
result, "[t]he probability of tacit collusion is higher with 2 

competitors than 3 competitors."  Id. at 19118-19 p 51.  Even 
if collusion were not to occur, independent rejections by two 
MSOs could doom a new programmer, thwarting congression-
al intent as the Commission saw it.  See id.  A 40% limit is 
insufficient for the same reason:  "two MSOs, ... represent-
ing a total of 80% of the market, might decline to carry the 
new network" and leave only 20% "open," which by hypothe-
sis is not enough (because of the 50% success rate).  Id. at 
19119 p 52.  Although the Commission doesn't spell out the 
intellectual process, it is necessarily defining the requisite 
"open field" as the residue of the market after a programmer 
is turned down either (1) by one cable company acting alone, 
or (2) by a set of companies acting either (a) collusively or (b) 
independently but nonetheless in some way that, because of 
the combined effect of their choices, threatens fulfillment of 
the statutory purposes.  We address the FCC's authority to 
regulate each of these scenarios in turn.

     The Commission is on solid ground in asserting authority to 
be sure that no single company could be in a position single-
handedly to deal a programmer a death blow.  Statutory 
authority flows plainly from the instruction that the Commis-
sion's regulations "ensure that no cable operator or group of 
cable operators can unfairly impede, either because of the size 
of any individual operator or because of joint actions of 
operators of sufficient size, the flow of video programming 
from the video programmer to the consumer."  47 U.S.C. 
s 533(f)(2)(A) (emphasis added).  Constitutional authority is 
equally plain.  As the Supreme Court said in Turner II:  "We 
have identified a corresponding 'governmental purpose of the 
highest order' in ensuring public access to 'a multiplicity of 
information sources.' "  520 U.S. at 190 (quoting Turner I, 
512 U.S. at 663);  see also Time Warner Entertainment Co. v. 
Federal Communications Commission, 93 F.3d 957, 969 
(D.C. Cir. 1996).  If this interest in diversity is to mean 
anything in this context, the government must be able to 
ensure that a programmer have at least two conduits through 
which it can reach the number of viewers needed for viabili-
ty--independent of concerns over anticompetitive conduct.

     Assuming the validity of the premises supporting the 
FCC's conclusion that a 40% "open field" is necessary (a 
question that we need not answer here), the statute's express 
concern for the act of "any individual operator" would justify 
a horizontal limit of 60%.  To reach the 30% limit, the FCC's 
action necessarily involves one or the other of two additional 
propositions:  Either there is a material risk of collusive 
denial of carriage by two or more companies, or the statute 
authorizes the Commission to protect programmers against 
the risk of completely independent rejections by two or more 
companies leaving less than 40% of the MVPD audience 
potentially accessible.  Neither proposition is sound.

     First, we consider whether there is record support for 
inferring a non-conjectural risk of collusive rejection.  Either 
Congress or the Commission could supply that record, and we 
take them in that order.  We give deference to the predictive 
judgments of Congress, see Turner II, 520 U.S. at 195-96 
(citing Turner I, 512 U.S. at 665), but Congress appears to 
have made no judgment regarding collusion.  The statute 
plainly alludes to the possibility of collusion when it autho-
rizes regulations to protect against "joint actions by a group 
of operators of sufficient size." 47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(A) (em-
phasis added).  But this phrase, while granting the Commis-
sion authority to take action in the event that it finds collu-
sion extant or likely, is not itself a congressional finding of 
actual or probable collusion.  Such findings have not been 
made.  No reference to collusion appears in the Act's findings 
or policy, see 1992 Cable Act s 2, 106 Stat. at 1460-63, nor in 
the legislative history discussing the horizontal or vertical 
limits.  See H.R. Rep. No. 102-628, at 40-43 (1992) ("House 
Report");  S. Rep. No. 102-92, at 24-29, 32-34, reprinted in 
1991 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1133, at 1156-62, 1165-67 ("Senate Re-
port").  It was thus appropriate for the FCC to describe 
Congress's reference to "joint" action as merely a "legislative 
assumption."  Third Report, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19116 p 43 (em-
phasis added).

     The Commission's own findings amount to precious little.  
It says only:

     The legislative assumption [about joint action] is not 
     unreasonable given an environment in which all the 
     larger operators in the industry are vertically integrated 
     so that all are both buyers and sellers of programming 
     and have mutual incentives to reach carriage decisions 
     beneficial to each other.  Operators have incentives to 
     agree to buy their programming from one another.  
     Moreover, they have incentives to encourage one another 
     to carry the same non-vertically integrated programming 
     in order to share the costs of such programming.
     
Id.  None of these assertions is supported in the record.  The 
Commission never explains why the vertical integration of 
MSOs gives them "mutual incentive to reach carriage deci-
sions beneficial to each other," what may be the firms' 
"incentives to buy ... from one another," or what the proba-
bilities are that firms would engage in reciprocal buying 
(presumably to reduce each other's average programming 
costs).  After all, the economy is filled with firms that, like 
MSOs, display partial upstream vertical integration.  If that 
phenomenon implies the sort of collusion the Commission 
infers, one would expect the Commission to be able to point to 
examples.  Yet it names none.  Further, even if one accepts 
the proposition that an MSO could benefit from sharing the 
services of specific programmers, programming is not more 
attractive for this purpose merely because it originates with 
another MSO's affiliate rather than with an independent.

     The only justification that the FCC offers in support of its 
collusion hypothesis is the economic commonplace that, all 
other things being equal, collusion is less likely when there 
are more firms.  See Third Report 14 F.C.C.R. at 19118-19 
p 51.  This observation will always be true, although margin-
ally less so for each additional firm;  but by itself it lends no 
insight into the question of what the appropriate horizontal 
limit is.  Turner I demands that the FCC do more than 
"simply 'posit the existence of the disease sought to be 
cured.' "  Turner I, 512 U.S. at 664 (quoting Quincy Cable 
TV, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commission, 768 F.2d 
1434, 1455 (D.C. Cir. 1985).  It requires that the FCC draw 
"reasonable inferences based on substantial evidence."  Tur-

ner I, 512 U.S. at 666.  Substantial evidence does not require 
a complete factual record--we must give appropriate defer-
ence to predictive judgments that necessarily involve the 
expertise and experience of the agency.  See Turner II 520 
U.S. at 196, citing Federal Communications Commission v. 
National Citizens Comm. For Broadcasting, 436 U.S. 775, 
814 (1978).  But the FCC has put forth no evidence at all that 
indicates the prospects for collusion.

     That having been said, we do not foreclose the possibility 
that there are theories of anti-competitive behavior other 
than collusion that may be relevant to the horizontal limit and 
on which the FCC may be able to rely on remand.  See 47 
U.S.C. s 533(f)(1).  Indeed, Congress considered, among oth-
er things, the ability of MSOs dominant in specific cable 
markets to extort equity from programmers or force exclu-
sive contracts on them.  See 1992 Cable Act s 2(a)(4)-(5), 106 
Stat. at 1460-61;  Senate Report at 3, 14, 23-29, 32-34, 
reprinted in 1991 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 1135, 1146-47, 1156-62, 
1165-67;  House Report at 40-43.  A single MSO, acting 
alone rather than "jointly," might perhaps be able to do so 
while serving somewhat less than the 60% of the market (i.e., 
less than the fraction that would allow it unilaterally to lock 
out a new cable programmer) despite the existence of anti-
trust laws and specific behavioral prohibitions enacted as part 
of the 1992 Cable Act, see 47 U.S.C. s 536, and the risk might 
justify a prophylactic limit under the statute.  See Time 
Warner I, 211 F.3d at 1322-23.  So the absence of any 
showing of a serious risk of collusion does not necessarily 
preclude a finding of a sufficient governmental interest in 
preventing unfair competition.  (We express no opinion on 
whether exploitation of a monopoly position in a specific cable 
market to extract rents that would otherwise flow to pro-
grammers alone gives rise to an "important governmental 
interest" justifying a burden on speech.)  But the FCC made 
no attempt to justify its regulation on these grounds.

     We pause here to address an aspect of petitioners' statuto-
ry challenge that is relevant to a showing of non-conjectural 
harm.  Congress required that in setting the horizontal limit, 
the FCC "take particular account of the market structure ... 

including the nature and market power of the local franchise."  
47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(C).  Petitioners assert that the Commis-
sion's failure to take adequate account of the competitive 
pressures brought by the availability and increasing success 
of DBS make the horizontal limit arbitrary and capricious.  
Although DBS accounts for only 15.4% of current MVPD 
households, the annual increase in its total subscribership is 
almost three times that of cable (nearly three million addi-
tional subscribers over the period June 1999 to June 2000, as 
against one million for cable).  See Seventh Annual Report 
p p 6-8.  To the extent petitioners argue that the horizontal 
limit must fail because market share does not equal market 
power, they misconstrue the statutory command.  The Com-
mission is not required to design a limit that falls solely on 
firms possessing market power.5  The provision is directed to 
the Commission's intellectual process, and requires it, in 
evaluating the harms posed by concentration and in setting 
the subscriber limit, to assess the determinants of market 
power in the cable industry and to draw a connection between 
market power and the limit set.

     It follows naturally from our earlier discussion that we do 
not believe the Commission has satisfied this obligation.  
Having failed to identify a non-conjectural harm, the Commis-
sion could not possibly have addressed the connection be-
tween the harm and market power.  But the assessment of a 
real risk of anti-competitive behavior--collusive or not--is 
itself dependent on an understanding of market power, and 
the Commission's statements in the Third Report seem to 
ignore the true relevance of competition.  In changing the 
calculation of the horizontal limit to reflect subscribers in-
stead of homes at which a service is available, for instance, 
the Commission wrote:

     [W]hether subscribership or homes passed data is used is 
     largely a mechanical issue in terms of the market power 
     issue....  As the market develops in terms of competi-
     
__________
     5 Contrast Congress's requirement that the FCC "make such 
rules and regulations reflect the dynamic nature of the communica-
tions marketplace."  47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(E) (emphasis added).

     tion we believe ... that an operator's actual number of 
     subscribers more uniformly and accurately reflects pow-
     er in the programming marketplace.
     
Third Report, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19108 p 22.

     But normally a company's ability to exercise market power 
depends not only on its share of the market, but also on the 
elasticities of supply and demand, which in turn are deter-
mined by the availability of competition.  See AT&T Corp. v. 
Federal Communications Commission, 236 F.3d 729, 736 
(D.C. Cir. 2001).  If an MVPD refuses to offer new program-
ming, customers with access to an alternative MVPD may 
switch.  The FCC shows no reason why this logic does not 
apply to the cable industry.  Indeed, its most recent competi-
tion report suggests that it does.  According to the Commis-
sion, "several very small and rural cable systems have used a 
variety of schemes to add digital channels, expand their 
program offerings, and take preemptive action against ag-
gressive DBS marketing."  Seventh Annual Report p 67.

     Given the substantial changes in the cable industry since 
publication of the Third Report in 1999 and our reversal on 
other grounds, there is little point in our reviewing the 
Commission's assessment of then-existing market power of 
cable MVPDs.  But whatever conclusions are to be drawn 
from the new data, it seems clear that in revisiting the 
horizontal rules the Commission will have to take account of 
the impact of DBS on that market power.  Already when the 
Third Report was written, DBS could be considered to "pass 
every home in the country."  Third Report, 14 F.C.C.R. at 
19107-08 p 20.  The technological and regulatory changes 
since then appear only to strengthen petitioners' contention.  
See Seventh Annual Report p p 60-82, 140.

     With the risk of collusion inadequately substantiated to 
support the 30% limit and no attempt to find other anti-
competitive behavior, there remains the Commission's alter-
native ground--that programming choices made "unilateral-
ly" by multiple cable companies, Third Report, 14 F.C.C.R. at 
19118-19 p 51;  see also id. at 19119 p 53 ("individually"), 
might reduce a programmer's "open field" below the 40% 

benchmark.  The only support the Commission offered for 
regulation based on this possibility was the idea that every 
additional chance for a programmer to secure access would 
enhance diversity:

     [T]he 30% limit serves the salutary purpose of ensuring 
     that there will be at least 4 MSOs in the marketplace.  
     The rule thus maximizes the potential number of MSOs 
     that will purchase programming.  With more MSOs mak-
     ing purchasing decisions, this increases the likelihood 
     that the MSOs will make different programming choices 
     and a greater variety of media voices will therefore be 
     available to the public.
     
Id. p 54.  Petitioners challenge the FCC's authority to regu-
late for this purpose on both constitutional and statutory 
grounds.

     We have some concern how far such a theory may be 
pressed against First Amendment norms.  Everything else 
being equal, each additional "voice" may be said to enhance 
diversity.  And in this special context, every additional splin-
tering of the cable industry increases the number of combina-
tions of companies whose acceptance would in the aggregate 
lay the foundations for a programmer's viability.  But at 
some point, surely, the marginal value of such an increment in 
"diversity" would not qualify as an "important" governmental 
interest.  Is moving from 100 possible combinations to 101 
"important"?  It is not clear to us how a court could deter-
mine the point where gaining such an increment is no longer 
important.  And it would be odd to discover that although a 
newspaper that is the only general daily in a metropolitan 
area cannot be subjected to a right of reply, see Miami 
Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241 (1974), it 
could in the name of diversity be forced to self-divide.  Cer-
tainly the Supreme Court has not gone so far.

     We need not face that issue, however, because we conclude 
that Congress has not given the Commission authority to 
impose, solely on the basis of the "diversity" precept, a limit 
that does more than guarantee a programmer two possible 
outlets (each of them a market adequate for viability).  We 

analyze the agency action under the familiar framework of 
Chevron USA, Inc. v. National Resources Defense Council, 
Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984).  If we find (using traditional tools of 
statutory interpretation) that Congress has resolved the ques-
tion, that is the end of the matter.  FDA v. Brown & 
Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S. 120, 132 (2000);  Nation-
al Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Browner, 57 F.3d 1122, 
1125 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  We must place the statutory language 
in context and "interpret the statute 'as a symmetrical and 
coherent regulatory scheme.' "  Brown & Williamson, 529 
U.S. at 133.

     We begin with the statutory language.  The relevant sec-
tion requires the FCC to

     ensure that no cable operator or group of cable operators 
     can unfairly impede, either because of the size of any 
     individual operator or because of joint actions by a group 
     of operators of sufficient size, the flow of video program-
     ming from the video programmer to the consumer.
     
47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(A).

     The language addresses only "unfair[ ]" impediments to the 
flow of programming.  The word "unfair" is of course ex-
tremely vague.  Certainly, the action of several firms that is 
"joint," in the sense of collusive, may often entail unfairness 
of a conventional sort.  The statute goes further, plainly 
treating exercise of editorial discretion by a single cable 
operator as "unfair" simply because that operator is the only 
game in town.  (And Time Warner I authoritatively deter-
mines that the government is constitutionally entitled to 
impose limits solely on that ground.)  But we cannot see how 
the word unfair could plausibly apply to the legitimate, inde-
pendent editorial choices of multiple MSOs.  A broad inter-
pretation is plausible only for actions that impinge at least to 
some degree on the interest in competition that lay at the 
heart of Congress's concern.6  The Commission's reading of 

__________
     6 The Commission's economic theory--that cable operators have 
an incentive to contract with the same programmers in order to 
lower the programmers' average costs (see discussion in the collu-

the clause effectively deletes the word "joint" and opens the 
door to illimitable restrictions in the name of diversity.

     Looking at the statute as a whole does little to support the 
FCC's position.  The "interrelated interests" of promoting 
diversity and fair competition run throughout the 1992 Cable 
Act's various provisions.  Turner II, 520 U.S. at 189.7  But 
despite the duality of interests at work in this section, see 
Time Warner I, 211 F.3d at 1319, it is clear from the 
structure of the statute that Congress's primary concern in 
authorizing ownership limits is "fair" competition.  The stat-
ute specifies, after all, that these regulations are to be pro-
mulgated "[i]n order to enhance effective competition."  47 
U.S.C. s 533 (f)(1).  In only two of the other sections of the 
1992 Cable Act does Congress specify a dominant purpose.8 

__________
sion context, supra p. 11)--would seem to apply regardless of any 
horizontal limit.  Putting various special cases aside, any profit-
maximizing firm will have an incentive to lower its costs.  In a 
market where a cable operator is a monopolist, the resulting benefit 
to the firm would be classified as monopoly rents.  In a market 
where an operator is in competition, it can be expected to pass the 
benefits on to its customers.  But the FCC has not shown why such 
pursuit of lower costs, by the monopolist or the competitive firm, is 
by itself "unfair," and the statute allows for regulation only if 
unfairness can be shown.

     7 The 1992 Cable Act is a wide-ranging statute that includes, 
besides the ownership limits, must-carry and leased-access require-
ments, rate regulation, behavioral prohibitions, and privacy protec-
tions.  See 1992 Cable Act, 106 Stat. 1460.

     8 The leased access provision was amended to add the words "to 
promote competition in the delivery of diverse sources of video 
programming" to the section's previously stated purpose of assuring 
"that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made 
available."  1992 Cable Act s 9(a), 106 Stat. at 1484;  47 U.S.C. 
s 532(a).  The various behavioral rules designed to prevent cable 
operators from abusing their market power were passed for the 
stated purpose of promoting "the public interest, convenience, and 
necessity by increasing competition and diversity in the multichan-
nel video programming market."  1992 Cable Act s 19, 106 Stat. at 
1494;  47 U.S.C. s 547.

This statement of purpose supports a reading that sharply 
confines the authority to regulate solely in the interest of 
diversity.

     The FCC points to the statutory findings that the "cable 
industry has become highly concentrated" and that "the 
potential effects of such concentration are barriers to entry 
for new programmers and a reduction in the number of media 
voices available to consumers."  Third Report, 14 F.C.C.R. at 
19118-19 p 51, 1992 Cable Act s 2(a)(4), 106 Stat. at 1460.  
But reference to a congressional finding cannot overcome the 
clear language and purpose of the actual provision.  The 
quoted finding stands as little more than support for the 
proposition that Congress was concerned with the possibilities 
for market failure and the possible impact on new program-
mers.  The legislative history also offers little.  Again, the 
fact that Congress's interest in anti-competitive behavior may 
have been animated by an interest in preserving diversity 
doesn't give the FCC carte blanche to cobble cable operators 
in the name of the latter value alone.  After all, Congress also 
sought to "ensure that cable operators continue to expand, 
where economically justified, their capacity," 1992 Cable Act 
s 2(b)(3), 106 Stat. at 1463, and it specifically directed the 
FCC, in setting the ownership limit, to take into account the 
"efficiencies and other benefits that might be gained through 
increased ownership or control."  47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(D).

     On the record before us, we conclude that the 30% horizon-
tal limit is in excess of statutory authority.  While a 60% limit 
might be appropriate as necessary to ensure that program-
mers had an adequate "open field" even in the face of 
rejection by the largest company, the present record supports 
no more.  In addition, the statute allows the Commission to 
act prophylactically against the risk of "unfair" conduct by 
cable operators that might unduly impede the flow of pro-
gramming, either by the "joint" actions of two or more 
companies or the independent action of a single company of 
sufficient size.  But the Commission has pointed to nothing in 
the record supporting a non-conjectural risk of anti-
competitive behavior, either by collusion or other means.  

Accordingly, we reverse and remand with respect to the 30% 
rule.

                              * * *

     The FCC presents its 40% vertical limit as advancing the 
same interests invoked in support of its statutory authority to 
adopt the rule:  diversity in programming and fair competi-
tion.  As with the horizontal rules the FCC must defend the 
rules themselves under intermediate scrutiny and justify its 
chosen limit as not burdening substantially more speech than 
necessary.  Far from satisfying this test, the FCC seems to 
have plucked the 40% limit out of thin air.

     The FCC relies almost exclusively on the congressional 
findings that vertical integration in the cable industry could 
"make it difficult for non-cable affiliated ... programmers to 
secure carriage on vertically integrated cables systems" and 
that "vertically integrated program suppliers have the incen-
tive and the ability to favor their affiliated cable operators 
... and program distributors."  Second Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 
8583 p 41 (citing 1992 Cable Act s 2(a)(5), 106 Stat. at 1460).  
Regulatory limits in response to these consequences would 
"increase the diversity of voices available to the public."  
Second Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 8583-84 p 42 (citing Senate 
Report at 80, reprinted in 1991 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 1213).  In 
Time Warner I we thought these findings strong enough to 
overcome the First Amendment challenge to the relevant 
provision of the 1992 Cable Act.  In doing so, we held that 
such a prophylactic rule was not "rendered unnecessary 
merely because preexisting statutes [such as the antitrust 
laws and the antidiscrimination provisions of the 1992 Cable 
Act] impose behavioral norms."  Time Warner I, 211 F.3d at 
1322-23.  Beyond that we did not assess the appropriateness 
of the burden on speech.  We upheld no specific vertical 
limit--none was before us.

     We recognize that in drawing a numerical line an agency 
will ultimately indulge in some inescapable residue of arbi-
trariness;  even if 40% is a highly justifiable pick, no one 
could expect the Commission to show why it was materially 

better than 39% or 41%.  See Missouri Public Service 
Comm'n v. FERC, 215 F.3d 1, 5 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  But to pass 
even the arbitrary and capricious standard, the agency must 
at least reveal " 'a rational connection between the facts found 
and the choice made.' "  Dickson v. Secretary of Defense, 68 
F.3d 1396, 1404-05 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (quoting Motor Vehicle 
Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 
43 (1983).  Here the FCC must also meet First Amendment 
intermediate scrutiny.  Yet it appears to provide nothing but 
the conclusion that "we believe that a 40% limit is appropriate 
to balance the goals."  See Second Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 
8593-95 p 68.  What are the conditions that make 50% too 
high and 30% too low?  How great is the risk presented by 
current market conditions?  These questions are left unan-
swered by the Commission's discussion.

     The FCC argued before us that no MSO has yet com-
plained that the 40% vertical limit has required it to alter 
programming.  This is no answer at all, as it says nothing 
about plans that the rule may have scuttled.  Petitioners 
responded that their subsidiaries frequently must juggle their 
channel lineups to stay within the cap.  Furthermore, it 
appears uncontested that AT&T's merger with MediaOne 
brings the vertical limits into play.  See In the Matter of 
Applications for Consent to the Transfer of Control of Licens-
es and Section 214 Authorizations from MediaOne Group, 
Inc. to AT&T Corporation, 15 F.C.C.R. 9816 (2000).

     In fairness, the FCC does make an attempt to review some 
relevant conditions.  See Second Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 8583-
85 p p 41-45.  The FCC cites the House Report's conclusion 
that "some" vertically integrated MSOs favor their affiliates 
and "may" discriminate against others.  Id. at 8583-84 p 42 
(citing House Report at 43).  But it also notes a report that 
none of the top five MSOs "showed a pattern" of favoring 
their affiliates.  Id. at 8584 p 43.  Indeed, the FCC concludes 
that "vertical relationships had increased both the quality and 
quantity of cable programming services."  Id. p 44.  But still 
it settled on a limit of 40%.  There is no effort to link the 
numerical limits to the benefits and detriments depicted.  
Further, given the pursuit of diversity, one might expect 

some inquiry into whether innovative independent originators 
of programming find greater success selling to affiliated or to 
unaffiliated programming firms, but there is none.

     Quite apart from the numerical limit vel non, petitioners 
attack the Commission's refusal to exclude from the vertical 
limit cable operators that are subject to effective competition.  
The FCC had proposed exempting cable operators who met 
the definition of effective competition provided by s 623 of 
the Communications Act of 1934.  See Implementation of 
Sections 11 and 13 of the Cable Television Consumer Protec-
tion and Competition Act of 1992, 8 F.C.C.R. 6828, 6862 p 231 
(1993) ("First Report");  see also 47 U.S.C. s 543(l )(1) (defin-
ing the categories of cable operators that are not subject to 
rate regulation under that section).9  Of course our decision 
in Time Warner I acknowledged the existence of incentives 
__________
     9 The term "effective competition" means that--
     (A) fewer than 30 percent of the households in the franchise 
     area subscribe to the cable system;
     
     (B) the franchise area is--
     
          (i) served by at least two unaffiliated multichannel video 
          programming distributors each of which offers comparable 
          video programming to at least 50 percent of the households 
          in the franchise area;  and
          
          (ii) the number of households subscribing to programming 
          services offered by multichannel video programming distrib-
          utors other than the largest multichannel video programming 
          distributor exceeds 15 percent of the households in the 
          franchise area;  or
          
     (C) a multichannel video programming distributor operated by 
     the franchising authority for that franchise area offers video 
     programming to at least 50 percent of the households in that 
     franchise area;  or
     
     (D) a local exchange carrier or its affiliate (or any multichannel 
     video programming distributor using the facilities of such carri-
     er or its affiliate) offers video programming services ... in the 
     franchise area of an unaffiliated cable operator which is provid-
     ing cable service in that franchise area, but only if the video 
     programming services so offered in that area are comparable to 
     
to use affiliated programming.  211 F.3d at 1322.  For exam-
ple, even where an unaffiliated supplier offered a better cost-
quality trade-off, a company might be reluctant to ditch or 
curtail an inefficient in-house operation because of the impact 
on firm executives or other employees, or the resulting 
spotlight on management's earlier judgment.  But petitioners 
argue, quite plausibly, that exposure to competition will have 
an impact on a cable company's ability to indulge in favorit-
ism for in-house productions.  After all, while reliance on in-
house suppliers offering an inferior price-quality trade-off will 
reduce a monopolist's profits, it may threaten a competitive 
firm's very survival.  This analysis is not foreign to the 
Commission, which endorsed it when proposing the exemp-
tion:

     We believe that this proposal is appropriate since effec-
     tive competition will preclude cable operators from exer-
     cising the market power which originally justified chan-
     nel occupancy limits.  Where systems face effective 
     competition, their incentive to favor an affiliated pro-
     grammer will be replaced by the incentive to provide 
     programming that is most valued by subscribers.
     
First Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 6862 p 231.

     The FCC makes two arguments to justify its refusal to 
exempt MVPDs that are subject to effective competition.  
First, it says that the definition of competition provided by 47 
U.S.C. s 543 was "not adopted for this specific purpose" but 
rather for relief from rate regulation.  See Reconsideration 
Order 10 F.C.C.R. at 7379 p 47.  Indeed, we have recognized 
that one of the ways in which the statutory standard is met 
may be surprisingly defective as a mark of real competition.  
See Time Warner Entertainment Co., L.P. v. Federal Com-
munications Commission, 56 F.3d 151, 166 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(MVPDs satisfying subsection (A) of 47 U.S.C. s 543(l )(1) 
(low penetration) may do so more as a result of geography 
than competition).  But the Commission is free to carve out 

__________
     the video programming services provided by the unaffiliated 
     cable operator in that area.
     
47 U.S.C. s 543(l )(1).

subsections that are truly pertinent to competition, as it had 
proposed.  See First Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 8662-63 p 232;  
Second Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 8602 p 85.

     Of course competition that is adequate to justify dispensing 
with rate regulation could still leave an undue likelihood of 
improper favoritism for affiliated programmers.  But the 
possible failure of readily available criteria does not itself 
justify the use of so blunt a blade.  Congress expressly 
directed the Commission to take "particular account of the 
market structure..., including the nature and market power 
of the local franchise."  47 U.S.C. s 533(f)(2)(C) (emphasis 
added).  Because competition raises the stakes for a firm that 
sacrifices the optimal price-quality trade-off in its acquisition 
of programming, the issue seems to trigger the legislative 
directive.  Yet the Commission seems to ignore its own 
conclusions about cable companies' incentives and constraints, 
and the dynamics of the programming industry.  See First 
Report, 8 F.C.C.R. at 6862 p 231.  If the criteria of 
s 543(l )(1) are unsuitable, the Commission can consider con-
cepts of effective competition that it finds more apt for these 
purposes.

     Second, the FCC comments that if a competing MVPD 
favored its own affiliated programmers, the presence of com-
petition would have no tendency to create room for indepen-
dent programmers.  See Reconsideration Order 10 F.C.C.R 
at 7379 p 47.  But this theory seems contradicted by the 
Commission's own observation, mentioned earlier, that no 
vertically integrated MPVD has complained of reaching the 
40% limit.  Vertically integrated MVPDs evidently use loads 
of independent programming.  Further, although cable oper-
ators continue to expand their interests in programmers, 
"[t]he proportion of vertically integrated channels ... contin-
ue[d] to decline" for each of the last two years.  Sixth 
Annual Report, 15 F.C.C.R. at 1058-59 p 181, Seventh Annu-
al Report p 173 (emphasis added).  Even if competing MSOs 
filled all of their channels with affiliates' products (as unlikely 
as that seems), the Commission nowhere explains why, in the 
pursuit of diversity, the independence of competing vertically 
integrated MVPDs is inferior to the independence of unaffili-

ated programmers.  In any event, the Commission's point 
here does not respond to the intuition that competition spurs 
a firm's search for the best price-quality trade-off.

     In its brief the Commission adds the argument that truly 
effective competition under s 543(l )(1) existed only for a tiny 
fraction of cable systems.  Indeed, it said in its Sixth Annual 
Report that of the nation's 33,000 cable community units, only 
157 satisfy the definition through being in a market offering 
more than one wireline MVPD.  Sixth Annual Report, 15 
F.C.C.R. at 1045-46 p 142.  (In the Seventh Annual Report 
we learn that now 330, or 1% of the total, meet the competi-
tion standard through exposure to another MVPD;  in this 
report the qualifier "wireline" is absent.  See Seventh Annual 
Report p 138.)  But in determining whether or not the regula-
tions burden substantially more speech than necessary, it is a 
weak move to point to the paucity of MVPDs facing competi-
tion if, as seems the case, it is easy to exempt them from the 
limit.

     We find that the FCC has failed to justify its vertical limit 
as not burdening substantially more speech than necessary.  
Accordingly, we reverse and remand to the FCC for further 
consideration.

                              * * *

     We turn, finally, to several aspects of the rules for attribut-
ing ownership for purposes of the horizontal and vertical 
limits, recently revised by the FCC and challenged by peti-
tioners.  See Implementation of the Cable Television Con-
sumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, 14 F.C.C.R. 
19014 (1999) ("Attribution Order").  Petitioners suggest that 
these rules affect their ability to "speak" to subscribers 
because of their connection to the horizontal and vertical 
limits.  But petitioners' speech rights are implicated only 
where their interest allows them to exercise editorial control, 
in which case attribution would be proper and it is the 
horizontal or vertical limit that constrains speech.  The only 
effect of the attribution rules where no control is exercised is 
to limit the extent of petitioners' investments in a particular 

class of companies.  We therefore review the agency actions 
under the APA standards, to determine whether they are 
"arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not 
in accordance with law."  See 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).

     The FCC adopted as its starting point the pre-existing 
rules for attributing ownership of broadcast television sta-
tions, finding that the purposes of the rules are the same.  
See Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19030 p 35;  Second 
Report 8 F.C.C.R. at 8577-79, 8593-96 p p 30-35, 56-63.  Un-
der that standard, attribution is triggered by ownership of 5% 
of the voting shares of a company, with various exceptions.  
See Attribution of Ownership Interests, 97 FCC 2d 997 
(1984).  Because the decisions in the Attribution Order 
tracked, to a large degree, similar decisions related to the 
broadcast attribution rules, the FCC incorporated by refer-
ence much of the reasoning from the broadcast orders.  See 
Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19015-16 p 1.

     Petitioners challenge the sufficiency and relevance of the 
Commission's evidence in support of the 5% attribution rule 
and its failure to adopt an alternative proposed by cable 
industry interests.  They begin by asserting that the FCC 
improperly relied on two studies that were mentioned neither 
in the FCC's notice nor in any party's submission.  See 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 13 F.C.C.R. 12990 (1998).  
Although it is true that an agency cannot rest a rule on data 
" 'that, [in] critical degree, is known only to the agency,' " 
Community Nutrition Institute v. Block, 749 F.2d 50, 57 
(D.C. Cir. 1984) (quoting Portland Cement Ass'n v. Ruckel-
shaus, 486 F.2d 375, 393 (D.C. Cir. 1973);  see also Interna-
tional Union, UAW v. OSHA, 938 F.2d 1310, 1324-35 (D.C. 
Cir. 1991) (approving reliance on documents not exposed to 
comment if not "vital" to agency's support for rule), obviously 
not every cited document is "critical."

     Here, although petitioners assert that the studies were the 
sole evidence cited by the FCC, the Commission also relied 
on a survey, used to support the 1984 broadcast attribution 
rules, showing that in widely held corporations, an owner of 
5% or more would ordinarily be one of the two or three 

largest shareholders.  See Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 
19034 p 46;  Block, 749 F.2d at 58 (1984) (new information 
"expanded on and confirmed information").  The earlier rule-
making had inferred that with such ownership a holder of 5% 
or more would be able "to potentially affect the outcome of 
elective or discretionary decisions and to command the atten-
tion of management."  Attribution of Ownership Interests, 97 
FCC 2d at 1005-06 p 14.  This hardly seems implausible.  
Presumably an owner of 5% or more typically has enough of 
an interest to justify the burden of informing himself about 
the company's activities and trying to influence (or supplant) 
management, a fact that management would bear in mind in 
deciding to whose exhortations it should pay attention.  Peti-
tioners have not pointed to any evidence suggesting that the 
FCC's survey is no longer accurate, or that the conclusion 
they draw from it has been undermined.

     Furthermore, in attacking the relevance of the new studies, 
the petitioners fail to acknowledge that the FCC sought a 
rule that would capture "influence or control," not just con-
trol.  Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19015-16 p 1 (empha-
sis added).  The Commission specifically noted that a "firm 
does not need actual operational control over ... a company 
in order to exert influence."  Id. at 19030-31 p 36.  This 
distinction also tends to rebut petitioners' critique of the 
Commission's reliance on the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission's requirement that investors report to the SEC when 
their holdings exceed 5% of any class of a firm's shares.  See 
15 U.S.C. s 78m(d)(1).  The FCC noted that the purpose of 
the SEC's requirement was to alert investors to potential 
changes in control, and reasoned that this was similar to its 
own purpose in the attribution rules, encompassing not mere-
ly control but influence.  See Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. 
at 19035 p 49 (citing Securities and Exchange Comm'n v. 
Savoy Indus., Inc., 587 F.2d 1149 (D.C. Cir. 1978)).

     Finally, petitioners contend that it was arbitrary for the 
FCC to reject a "control certification" approach, such as it 
adopted for partnerships, under which a partner can avoid 
attribution if (but only if) it certifies to the absence of certain 
relationships that might betoken control.  In this argument, 

petitioners make a classic apples-and-oranges mix, since the 
bases that they proposed for self-certification, see Attribution 
Order at 19024 p 22, are quite different from those adopted by 
the Commission for partnerships, see id. at 19038 p 57 n.163.  
Even if corporations and partnerships were virtually identi-
cal, the Commission would hardly be guilty of self-
contradiction if it rejected certification scheme A for corpora-
tions and accepted certification scheme B for partnerships.  
In any event, for corporations the Commission rejected a 
case-by-case approach on conventional grounds, observing 
that a bright-line rule was to be preferred because it "reduces 
regulatory costs, provides regulatory certainty, and permits 
planning of financial transactions."  Id. at 19035 p 48;  see 
also id. at 19031 p 38.  Given an agency's very broad discre-
tion whether to proceed by way of adjudication or rulemak-
ing, see N.L.R.B. v. Bell Aerospace Co., 416 U.S. 267, 294 
(1974), and the reasonableness of the 5% criterion, we doubt 
there was need to explain further.  The Commission did, 
however, observe that the certification proposals offered did 
"not take into account the variety of ways that an investor 
may exert influence or control over a company."  Id. at 
19030-31 p 36.  And it implicitly distinguished its treatment 
of partnerships when it said that a limited partner's influence 
may not be proportional to equity interest "because the 
extent of its power may be modified by contract."  Id. at 
19039 p 61.  Indeed, the Commission's certification rules for 
partnerships require voting restrictions that would not nor-
mally, and perhaps could not, be paralleled in the corporate 
world (such as abnegation of any power to remove the general 
partner except under extremely limited circumstances, see id. 
at 19038 p 57 n.163).  We find the Commission's discussion 
adequate.

     We also uphold the FCC's adoption of an "equity-and-debt" 
rule to capture "nonattributable investments that could carry 
the potential for influence."  Id. at 19047 p 83.  The rule 
triggers attribution "to an investor that holds an interest that 
exceeds 33% of the total asset value (equity plus debt) of the 

applicable entity."  Id. at 19046-47 p 82.10  Petitioners attack 
the sufficiency of evidence to support both the rule itself and 
the selection of 33% as limit.  They observe in particular that 
the Commission's own claims seem to depend on combina-
tions of debt and equity with contractual rights.  See, e.g., id. 
at 19047 p 83.  But the Commission explicitly relied on an 
earlier rulemaking, see, e.g., id. at 19047 p 83, citing Review 
of the Commission's Regulations Governing Attribution of 
Broadcast and Cable/MDS Interests, 14 F.C.C.R. 12559 
(1999) ("Broadcast Attribution Order"), which in turn relied 
on academic literature, see id. at 12589 p 62 nn.132, 134.  
Petitioners offer no critique of that literature's relevance, and 
it is not our role to launch one on our own.  So we must 
accept the Commission's basic finding.

     Although petitioners independently attack the Commis-
sion's selection of 33% as the debt-and-equity limit, we are 
constrained in our review by the sketchy character of their 
attack on the basic theory.  The Commission's choice of 33% 
certainly has modest support.  It recited the numbers offered 
by various parties, which ranged from 10% to 50%, in some 
cases with variations dependent on the presence of special 
contract provisions.  Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 
19048-49 p p 85-86.  Obviously 33% is not far off the median, 
but, as the Commission says nothing to evaluate the numbers 
recited, that tells us little.

     The Commission also cited its own past decisions, saying 
that it had used the same percentage for the parallel rule in 
its broadcast cross-interest policy, and that there it "does not 

__________
     10 The Commission often writes as if investors owned the assets 
of the companies in which they hold stock or bonds.  See, e.g., 
Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19047-48 p 84 n.230.  No issue is 
made here of how its calculations are to be made, e.g., percentage of 
book value, percentage of market capitalization, or some other 
method, although the Commission has attempted "clarification" in 
the broadcast context by allowing applicants to choose their valua-
tion method.  See Review of the Commission's Regulations Govern-
ing Attribution of Broadcast and Cable/MDS Interest, MM Docket 
No. 94-150, FCC 00-438 (rel. Jan. 19, 2001) p p 26-28 (2001) ("Attri-
bution Clarification Order").

appear to have had a disruptive effect," id. at 19048-49 p 86, 
though without indicating what (if any) assessment it had 
made.  And it referred to two prior adjudications.  Id. (citing 
Cleveland Television Corp., 91 FCC 2d 1129 (Rev. Bd. 1982), 
aff'd, Cleveland Television Corp. v. Federal Communications 
Commission, 732 F.2d 962 (D.C. Cir. 1984), and Roy M. 
Speer, 11 F.C.C.R. 18393 (1996)).  In Cleveland Television it 
had simply held that a one-third preferred stock interest 
conferred " 'insufficient incidents of contingent control' " un-
der various policies, Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19048-
49 p 86 (emphasis added).  In Roy M. Spear, it relied on 
Cleveland Television to impose a 33% ownership on a credi-
tor's purchase option, but deferred establishment of any 
general rule.  See 11 F.C.C.R. 18393 p 126 n.26.  These prior 
adjudications provide thin affirmative support for the choice 
of 33%, though they at least suggest that the Commission has 
not indulged in self-contradiction.  But given the absence of a 
real probe of the Commission's underlying reasoning for 
having the restriction at all, the inevitable difficulty in picking 
such a number, and the deference due the Commission, we 
cannot find the choice of 33% arbitrary.  See Cassell v. 
Federal Communications Commission, 154 F.3d 478, 485 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).

     Petitioners also challenge the Commission's elimination of 
an exemption that prevailed in the broadcast attribution rules 
at the time the cable attribution rules were promulgated.  In 
the broadcast context, an otherwise covered minority share-
holder in a company with a single majority shareholder was 
exempted, on the principle that in such a case the minority 
shareholder would ordinarily not be able to direct the activi-
ties of the company.11  See Attribution of Ownership Inter-
ests, 97 FCC 2d at 1008-09 p 21;  Attribution Order, 14 
F.C.C.R. at 19044-46 p p 74-81.  There were contentions in 
the Broadcast Attribution Order proceeding that the majority 
shareholder exemption was being used evasively.  See 14 
F.C.C.R. at 12574-75 p 29.  The Commission neither rejected 

__________
     11 The FCC has since eliminated the single majority owner ex-
emption in the broadcast rules to bring it into conformity with the 
cable rules.  See Attribution Clarification Order at p p 41-44.

nor accepted these claims, but retained the exemption.  See 
id. at p 36.  In dispatching the exemption here, the Commis-
sion cited only its concern that a minority shareholder might 
be able to exercise influence even in these circumstances, the 
"lack of a record ... that the exemption should be retained," 
and the fact that no one claimed to be using the exemption.  
Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19046 p 81.

     The Commission argues here that petitioners lack standing 
because they have not shown that they are using the exemp-
tion.  Again, the FCC disregards the impact the rule can 
have on investment plans.  Petitioners say that they are 
continually reviewing investment opportunities and that they 
are constrained by the absence of the single majority exemp-
tion.  See supra p. 20.  This is an actual "injury in fact" that 
is "fairly traceable" to the administrative action.  See Lujan 
v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992);  see also 
Committee for Effective Cellular Rules v. Federal Communi-
cations Commission, 53 F.3d 1309, 1315-16 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  
And of course the absence of current use is no reason to 
delete an exemption.  Removal of the exemption is a tighten-
ing of the regulatory screws, if perhaps a minor one.  It 
requires some affirmative justification, cf. State Farm, 463 
U.S. at 41-42 (requiring justification for removal of a restric-
tion), yet the Commission effectively offers none.  Its "con-
cern" about the possibility of influence would be a basis, if 
supported by some finding grounded in experience or reason, 
but the Commission made no finding at all.  Accordingly, 
deletion of the exemption cannot stand.

     Finally, petitioners object to one of the seven criteria that a 
cable operator must satisfy in order to be exempt from 
attribution of limited partnership.  The general rule is that 
any partnership interest, no matter how small, leads to 
attribution, Attribution Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19039-40 p 61, 
but a limited partner can secure exemption if it certifies 
compliance with certain criteria intended to ensure that the 
partner "will not be materially involved in the media manage-
ment and operations of the partnership."  Id.  The Commis-
sion interprets one of these criteria to bar exemption when a 
limited partner that is a vertically integrated MSO also sells 

programming to the partnership.  See id. at 19055 p 106.  
This criterion applies even though the limited partner, to 
achieve exemption, must have certified that it does not "com-
municate with the licensee or general partners on matters 
pertaining to the day-to-day operations of its video-
programming business."  Id. at 19040-41 p 64.

     We agree with petitioners that the no-sale criterion bears 
no rational relation to the goal, as the Commission has drawn 
no connection between the sale of programming and the 
ability of a limited partner to control programming choices.  
Of course a programmer might secure contract terms giving 
it some control over a partnership's programming choices, 
but, given the independent criterion barring even communica-
tions on the video-programming business, see Attribution 
Order, 14 F.C.C.R. at 19040-41 p 64, exercise of that power 
would seem to be barred.  Even if it weren't, the bargaining 
opportunity would depend on the desirability of the partner's 
programming, not on its status as a partner.  The FCC does 
not even offer a hypothetical to the contrary.

                              * * *

     To summarize, we reverse and remand the horizontal and 
vertical limits, including the refusal to exempt cable operators 
subject to effective competition from the vertical limits, for 
further proceedings.  We also reverse and remand the elimi-
nation of the majority shareholder exception and the prohibi-
tion on sale of programming by an insulated limited partner.  
We uphold the basic 5% attribution rule and the creation of a 
33% equity-and-debt rule.

                                                              So ordered.

                                                                     