                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 10, 2001   Decided January 11, 2002 

                           No. 00-1292

                   High Plains Wireless, L.P., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

        Digital PCS, LLC and Tritel Communications, Inc., 
                           Intervenors

                   Appeal from an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Eliot J. Greenwald argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Stanley Scheiner, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief 

were Jane E. Mago, General Counsel, Daniel M. Armstrong, 
Associate General Counsel, and Thomas Chandler, Counsel.

     Thomas Gutierrez argued the cause for intervenors Digital 
PCS, LLC and Tritel Communications, Inc.  With him on the 
joint brief was Russell D. Lukas.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  High Plains Wireless, L.P. appeals 
an order of the Federal Communications Commission award-
ing 32 licenses to Mercury PCS II, LLC, now called Tritel 
Communications, Inc.  High Plains and Mercury both bid at 
an auction conducted by the Commission for licenses to 
provide personal communications services (PCS).  See Mercu-
ry PCS II, LLC, 15 F.C.C.R. 9654 (2000) (Mercury).  High 
Plains asserts that the Commission unreasonably refused to 
disqualify Mercury from receiving the licenses even though 
Mercury concededly violated the Commission's rule against 
collusion.  High Plains also alleges that Mercury orchestrated 
a slew of unlawful ex parte contacts in an attempt to influence 
the investigation into its bidding practices.  We hold that, 
insofar as High Plains has standing to appeal, it has not 
shown that the award to Mercury was arbitrary or irrational, 
and we therefore affirm the order of the Commission.

                          I. Background

     Broadband PCS is a group of technologies that allow 
mobile communication using the electromagnetic spectrum.  
See Amendment of the Comm'n's Rules to Establish New 
Personal Comms. Servs., 8 F.C.C.R. 7700 at p 24 (1993) (2d 
R&O).  Advanced cellular telephones, portable facsimile ma-
chines, and many other methods of wireless communication 
are based upon broadband PCS.  See id. at p 18.  Recogniz-
ing the commercial and technological potential of broadband 
PCS, the Commission reserved 120 MHz of spectrum for 
provision of these services.  See 47 C.F.R. s 24.200.

     Before a party may use the spectrum to provide broadband 
PCS, it must get a license from the Commission.  See 47 
U.S.C. s 301.  In 1993 the Congress directed the Commission 
to choose between mutually exclusive applications for a li-
cense through a system of competitive bidding, see 47 U.S.C. 
s 309(j)(1);  47 C.F.R. s 24.701;  the Commission has since 
held several of the highest value auctions in history.  See 
Remarks of then-Chairman Reed Hundt at the Inst. for Int'l 
Econ., Washington, D.C. (Oct. 23, 1996), at http:  
//www.fcc.gov/Speeches/Hundt/spreh647.txt (visited Dec. 18, 
2001) (comparing himself to Genghis Khan as one of the 
"most profit-generating" officials ever).

     The Commission divided the 120 MHz of spectrum re-
served for broadband PCS in two ways.  First, it partitioned 
the spectrum into six blocks:  three of 30 MHz each (A, B, 
and C) and three of 10 MHz each (D, E, and F).  See 2d R&O 
at p 56.  Second, it divided the spectrum into geographic 
service areas.  Licenses for the A and B blocks of spectrum 
were established for each of the 51 Market Trading Areas 
into which the United States and its territories were divided 
in the Rand McNally Commercial Atlas & Marketing Guide 
(1992).  See id. at p p 64, 76.  Licenses for the C, D, E, and F 
blocks were established for each of the 493 Basic Trading 
Areas (BTAs) defined by the same source.  See id.  Between 
August 26, 1996 and January 14, 1997 the Commission auc-
tioned off the D, E, and F block licenses in all 493 BTAs.  See 
Mercury, 15 F.C.C.R. 9654 at p 2.

     The DEF auction was open, simultaneous, and ascending.  
That the auction was "open" means that, in contrast to a 
sealed-bid auction, the participants became aware of each 
others' bids as they were cast.  The auction was "simulta-
neous" in that the D, E, and F licenses for each of the 493 
BTAs were open for bidding at the same time, and the 
auction was "ascending" in the sense that bidding on the 
licenses continued through successive rounds until no new 
high bid was cast.  The Commission built these features into 
the auction to maximize the revenue it would generate and 
the allocative efficiency it would achieve.  See generally Peter 
Cramton, The Efficiency of the FCC Spectrum Auctions, 41 J. 

L. & Econ. 727, 728-35 (1998).  Because the bidding was 
open, however, any bidder could send all other bidders a 
message encoded in the digits of its bid.  See Peter Cramton 
& Jesse A. Schwartz, Collusive Bidding:  Lessons from FCC 
Spectrum Auctions, 17 J. Reg. Econ. 229, 237 (2000).  In this 
way, participants could collude through the auction process 
itself.

     Mercury and High Plains both bid on the licenses for the F 
block of spectrum in Lubbock and for the D and F blocks in 
Amarillo, Texas.  See Mercury, 15 F.C.C.R. 9654 at p 2.  
High Plains was the successful bidder for the F block license 
in Amarillo.  See id. at p 2 & n.9.  Mercury acquired the F 
block license in Lubbock as well as 31 other licenses for which 
High Plains did not bid.  See id. at p 2 & n.10.

     Mercury used so-called "reflexive bidding," a tactic for 
deterring would-be competitors from bidding on a particular 
license, to dissuade High Plains from bidding on the F block 
license for Lubbock.  See id. at p 5 & n.23.  Specifically, 
Mercury made the last three digits of its bids for the F block 
licenses in Lubbock and in Amarillo the same as the Commis-
sion's numeric designations for the Amarillo and Lubbock 
BTAs respectively.  See Mercury PCS II, LLC, 13 F.C.C.R. 
23755 (1998) p 3 (NALF Rescission).  In one round of the 
auction, for example, Mercury bid $1,375,013 on the F block 
license in Lubbock, "013" being the BTA for Amarillo;  after 
High Plains bid again for the F block license in Lubbock, 
Mercury bid $1,615,264 on the F block license in Amarillo, 
"264" being the BTA for Lubbock.  See id.  By repeatedly 
thus encoding its bids, Mercury was able to warn High Plains 
that if High Plains did not stop bidding, then Mercury would 
drive up the price of the F block license in Amarillo.  See id. 
at p 4.

     The message was not lost on High Plains, which stopped 
bidding for the F block license in Lubbock, see id., and filed 
with the Commission an emergency motion to disqualify 
Mercury from the auction.  High Plains alleged that Mercury 
violated the anti-collusion rule, which prohibited bidders 
"from cooperating, collaborating, discussing or disclosing in 

any manner the substance of their bids or bidding strategies" 
during the auction.  47 C.F.R. s 1.2105(c) (2000), amended by 
Competitive Bidding Procedures, 66 Fed. Reg. 54447, 54447-
48 (Oct. 29, 2001).  When the auction ended without the 
Commission having acted upon the motion, High Plains filed a 
motion to deny the award to Mercury of any licenses in the 
DEF auction.  During ensuing investigations conducted sepa-
rately by the Commission and by the Department of Justice, 
the executive responsible for formulating Mercury's bidding 
strategy admitted that Mercury had used reflexive bidding to 
threaten other bidders.  See Mercury, 15 F.C.C.R. 9654 at 
p 16 n.57.  Mercury claimed, however, that reflexive bidding 
was a common practice and did not violate the rule against 
collusion.  See NALF Rescission, 13 F.C.C.R. 23755 at p 4.

     While the investigation into Mercury's bidding practices 
was ongoing, High Plains again complained to the Commis-
sion, this time about ex parte contacts between Members of 
Congress and the staff of the Commission.  At least 27 
Members inquired of the Commission about Mercury's licens-
es and the delay in their award.  After yet another investiga-
tion, the Office of General Counsel (OGC) dismissed the 
charge, finding that the contacts were all congressional "sta-
tus inquiries" exempt from the ban on ex parte contacts 
under the Commission's rules.  47 C.F.R. s 1.1202(a).

     Also while the investigation into Mercury's bidding prac-
tices was ongoing, the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau 
(WTB) of the Commission awarded Mercury all but nine of 
the licenses for which the company was the high bidder.  See 
Mercury PCS II, LLC, 13 F.C.C.R. 5756 (1997) p 1.  When 
the investigation was over, the Commission imposed upon 
Mercury a $650,000 forfeiture, see Notice of Apparent Liabil-
ity for Forfeiture, 12 F.C.C.R. 17970 (1997) p 1 (NALF Or-
der);  the WTB granted Mercury the remaining nine licenses, 
including the F block license for Lubbock;  High Plains filed 
an application for review of that order;  and the Commission 
rescinded its earlier forfeiture order.  See NALF Rescission, 
13 F.C.C.R. 23755 at p 1.  In the rescission order, the Com-
mission found that Mercury was not on notice that reflexive 

bidding would violate the rule against collusion, see id. at p 10, 
and therefore declined to punish the company.  See id.

     The Commission consolidated High Plains' applications to 
review (1) the OGC's determination that Mercury had not 
violated the ban against ex parte contacts and (2) the WTB's 
award of licenses to Mercury, and affirmed on both counts.  
See Mercury, 15 F.C.C.R. 9654 at p p 13, 26.  It also rejected 
High Plains' new contention that Mercury had shown a lack 
of candor during the investigations into its bidding practices 
so egregious as to disqualify it from holding a Commission 
license.  See id. at p p 14-21.  High Plains appealed to this 
court and Mercury intervened in the case.

                           II. Analysis

     High Plains presents three issues on appeal.  First, it 
challenges the Commission's award of licenses to Mercury on 
the ground that Mercury violated the rule against collusion 
and the Commission had so held.  Second, High Plains as-
serts that this court should reverse the decision of the 
Commission because it erred in holding that Mercury did not 
violate the rules against ex parte communications.  Third, 
High Plains renews its claim that Mercury exhibited a dis-
qualifying lack of candor.  We turn to these claims only after 
considering whether High Plains has standing under Article 
III of the Constitution of the United States to bring this 
appeal.  See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env., 523 U.S. 
83, 94-95 (1998);  see also United Transp. Union-Ill. Legis. 
Bd. v. Surface Transp. Bd., 175 F.3d 163, 165 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
("[W]e must determine whether the court has jurisdiction of 
the case before we may turn to the merits").

A.   Standing and Jurisdiction

     The Commission and Mercury, which has intervened, ad-
vance numerous arguments that High Plains is without stand-
ing to assert some or all of its claims on appeal.  We consider 
the objections of the litigants, fully aware of our independent 
obligation to be sure we have jurisdiction.

     The "irreducible constitutional minimum" that High Plains 
must show for standing to maintain this appeal is that it 
suffered an injury in fact, that the conduct of which it 
complains caused the injury, and that a favorable decision of 
this court would redress the injury.  U.S. Airwaves, Inc. v. 
FCC, 232 F.3d 227, 231-32 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  This court has 
had occasion in prior cases to tailor the application of these 
prerequisites specifically to complaints arising from the Com-
mission's auctions of spectrum.  We have held that "[a] 
bidder in a government auction has a 'right to a legally valid 
procurement process';  a party allegedly deprived of this right 
asserts a cognizable injury."  Id. at 232 (quoting DirecTV, 
Inc. v. FCC, 110 F.3d 816, 829 (D.C. Cir. 1997)).  A disap-
pointed bidder need not show that it would be successful if 
the license were auctioned anew, but only that it was able and 
ready to bid and that the decision of the Commission prevent-
ed it from doing so on an equal basis.  See id.  The bidder 
may satisfy the requirement of redressability by showing that 
" 'it is ready, willing, and able' to participate in a new auction 
should it prevail" in court.  Id. (quoting Orange Park Fla. 
T.V., Inc. v. FCC, 811 F.2d 664, 672 (D.C. Cir. 1987)).

     Insofar as the appellant challenges the award to Mercury 
of the F block license for Lubbock, it meets these require-
ments.  High Plains complains that it was injured because 
the Commission awarded the license to Mercury, which had 
violated the anti-collusion rule, instead of holding a new 
auction in which High Plains could bid free of the illicit 
influence of reflexive bidding.  Further, High Plains has 
expressed its willingness to bid in a reprise of the vendue for 
the F block license in Lubbock;  and it is obvious that the 
court could redress High Plains' injuries by ordering the 
Commission to auction the license anew.  High Plains' con-
tentions that Mercury tried to mislead the Commission and to 
influence the Commission through illicit ex parte contacts also 
assert a cognizable injury, that of deprivation to a valid, 
impartial administrative proceeding, which injury this court 
could redress by reversing the Commission.  Accordingly, 
High Plains has standing to appeal the Commission's award 
to Mercury of the F block license for Lubbock.

     The Commission contends separately that High Plains 
does not have standing to challenge the award of the 31 other 
licenses that Mercury acquired in the DEF auction, and High 
Plains does not counter the Commission's argument.  We 
agree with the Commission (as does the intervenor, not 
surprisingly).  High Plains did not compete against Mercury 
for those licenses.  Nor does it allege that the award of those 
licenses somehow deprived it of a valid auction process with 
respect to the lots for which it did bid.  It follows that 
denying those 31 licenses to Mercury will not redress the 
injury that High Plains suffered in its attempt to acquire the 
F block license in Lubbock.  Accordingly, we hold that High 
Plains' challenge to the award of licenses other than the F 
block license in Lubbock is not within the jurisdiction of this 
court.

     Standing aside, Mercury argues that the court lacks juris-
diction over the entire dispute, but its objections are predicat-
ed upon technical and not upon constitutional grounds.  Mer-
cury's principal claim is that in order to raise to this court any 
objection to the award of licenses to Mercury based upon the 
anti-collusion rule, High Plains should have sought review of 
the NALF Rescission order, which is now barred by the 60-
day limitation in the Hobbs Act.  See 28 U.S.C. s 2344.  The 
point is not well taken:  High Plains could not have gotten 
review of the NALF Rescission because it did not have 
standing to object to the agency's refusal to sanction Mercu-
ry.  See Branton v. FCC, 993 F.2d 906, 910-11 (D.C. Cir. 
1993) (citing Linda R.S. v. Richard D., 410 U.S. 614 (1973)).  
When the Commission later disposed of High Plains' consoli-
dated applications for review, the company had and took its 
first opportunity to seek judicial review of the Commission's 
award of the Lubbock license to Mercury.  For the same 
reason, we reject Mercury's second contention, namely, that 
High Plains is precluded from asserting its objections in this 
appeal because it could have done so when the Commission 
issued the NALF Rescission order.  See Restatement (Sec-
ond) of Judgments s 28(1).

B.   The Anti-Collusion Rule

     High Plains argues that the Commission's decision to 
award the license to Mercury despite its having violated the 
anti-collusion rule was "neither plausible nor reasonable."  
We understand High Plains to object to the decision under 
two theories:  First, that the Commission erred in holding the 
rule against collusion too ambiguous to put Mercury on notice 
reflexive bidding was a violation;  and, second, that the Com-
mission unreasonably departed from a putative policy making 
violation of the rule a ground for forfeiture.

     As for the first theory, our review is deferential:  the 
agency's interpretation of its own rule is given "controlling 
weight unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the 
regulation."  Capital Network Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 28 F.3d 201, 
205 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  The issue for the court, then, is 
whether the Commission plainly erred or contravened the 
rule against collusion when it read the rule as not providing 
notice that reflexive bidding was prohibited.  Here is the rule 
in relevant part:

     [A]fter the short-form application filing deadline, all ap-
     plicants are prohibited from cooperating, collaborating, 
     discussing or disclosing in any manner the substance of 
     their bids or bidding strategies ... with other applicants 
     until after the down payment deadline....
     
47 C.F.R. s 1.2105(c)(1) (2000).  Plainly, the rule does not 
refer specifically to reflexive bidding.  To engage in reflexive 
bidding, however, is to "disclos[e] ... bidding strategies," and 
Mercury unquestionably did that during the period covered 
by the rule.  Therefore, the rule probably did prohibit Mercu-
ry's conduct, but that is not the question before the court.  
Our task is to determine only whether the Commission rea-
sonably could conclude the rule failed to put Mercury on 
notice that reflexive bidding was impermissible.

     The Commission itself did not anticipate that participants 
might collude through the bidding process.  After High 
Plains filed its emergency motion to prevent Mercury from 
bidding for licenses at the auction, for example, the WTB 

declared that it had "reached no determinations on the merits 
of [the] argument" that reflexive bidding violated the anti-
collusion rule.  NALF Rescission, 13 F.C.C.R. 23755 at p 10 
n.20.  As the Commission later noted, this "neutral pro-
nouncement immediately following the initial allegation of 
reflexive bid signaling could reasonably have been interpreted 
by auction participants as indicative of an undefined position 
on whether reflexive bid signaling was covered under the 
anti-collusion rule."  Id. at p 10.

     To the extent the Commission ever contemplated that 
participants would convey information about their bidding 
strategies through the act of bidding, it considered the ex-
change of information to be a virtue of the open auction.  See 
2d R&O, 8 F.C.C.R. 7700 at p 83 ("Multiple round bidding 
provides information about other bidders' estimates of com-
mon values, allowing all bidders to improve their estimates of 
these common values.").  The Commission did anticipate that 
an auction with multiple rounds of bidding might increase the 
opportunity for collusion, but only because the regime could 
facilitate enforcement of collusive agreements reached else-
where, see id. at p 85 ("Using a single sealed bid could reduce 
the likelihood of such collusive behavior since it provides 
colluding bidders greater incentive to defect"), not because 
the participants could use the open, iterative bidding process 
itself to collaborate.  Not until after the DEF auction was 
over did the Commission identify the sorts of disclosure that, 
if encoded within a bid, would violate the anti-collusion rule.  
See NALF Order, 12 F.C.C.R. at 17981 (concurring statement 
of Commissioner Ness).

     In sum, whether reflexive bidding violated the rule against 
collusion appears to have been an unsettled -- indeed, an 
unasked -- question before the DEF auction.  In this circum-
stance it was not unreasonable for the Commission to have 
deemed the rule ambiguous with respect to whether reflexive 
bidding was prohibited.

     Having determined that the Commission reasonably 
deemed the anti-collusion rule ambiguous, we may dispose in 
short order of High Plains' argument that the Commission 

nevertheless erred in awarding to Mercury the licenses for 
which it had bid using that tactic.  That the rule did not 
afford adequate notice reflexive bidding was unlawful is itself 
sufficient justification for the Commission not to penalize 
Mercury.  See Satellite Broad. Co., Inc. v. FCC, 824 F.2d 1, 3 
(D.C. Cir. 1987) ("Traditional concepts of due process incorpo-
rated into administrative law preclude an agency from penal-
izing a private party for violating a rule without first provid-
ing adequate notice of the substance of the rule").

     High Plains' other arguments -- for example, that Mercu-
ry's use of reflexive bidding makes it unfit to hold a license 
from the Commission -- misconceive the relationship be-
tween the court and the Commission.  We do not review the 
decisions of the agency de novo.  We inquire whether Com-
mission action was arbitrary and capricious, an abuse of dis-
cretion, or otherwise contrary to law;  and we uphold the 
agency's decision when it is reasonable.  See Global Naps, 
Inc. v. FCC, 247 F.3d 252, 257-58 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  There-
fore, we reject summarily the appellant's other arguments;  
aimed only at showing the agency was wrong, they have not 
the power to persuade that the agency was unreasonable.

C.   The Ex Parte Rules

     With certain exceptions clearly not applicable here, the 
Commission prohibits "ex parte presentations" during the 
pendency of an administrative adjudication and any subse-
quent judicial review.  47 C.F.R. s 1.1208.  The regulations 
define a "presentation" as a "communication directed to the 
merits or outcome of a proceeding."  Id. at s 1.1202(a).  A 
written presentation is "ex parte" if it is "not served on the 
parties to the proceeding."  Id. at s 1.1202(b).  Thus, a 
written presentation comes within the prohibition of the rules 
only if it is both "directed to the merits or outcome of a 
proceeding" and "not served on the parties."  Responsibility 
for a violation of the ex parte rules extends to a party that 
"solicit[s] or encourage[s] others to make any improper pre-
sentation," id. at s 1.1210, as High Plains alleges Mercury did 
in this case.  See Freeman Eng'g Assocs. v. FCC, 103 F.3d 
169, 184 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (listing factors that inform the 

analysis whether a proceeding is "irrevocably tainted" by ex 
parte contacts and therefore void).

     High Plains does not identify a single written contact 
between a Member of Congress and the Commission that 
meets both criteria.  The appellant does refer the court to 
some congressional letters that arguably called upon the 
Commission to give Mercury the licenses being withheld 
during the inquiry into its bidding practices.  High Plains 
also avers that it was not served with copies of certain 
congressional correspondence, but there is no overlap in the 
two epistolary lists.

     In its brief High Plains also claims it did not receive some 
of the congressional letters written on behalf of Mercury 
"until the FCC submitted the Certified List of Items in the 
Record to the Court," that is, well after the Commission had 
closed its inquiry into Mercury's bidding practices.  If High 
Plains did not receive the letters until then, and if the letters 
addressed the merits of the licensing dispute, then reversal of 
the order and remand to the Commission might have been 
appropriate.  At oral argument, however, High Plains ac-
knowledged that it had received the letters long before the 
Commission closed the record;  indeed, the company attached 
the letters as exhibits in a proceeding before the Commission 
more than three years ago.  See High Plains' Opp. to Mercu-
ry's Pet. for Recons. at Exh. C (Oct. 7, 1997).

     In the end High Plains has not proffered a single instance 
in which a congressional contact violated the ex parte rules.  
We conclude, therefore, that the Commission had substantial 
evidence that High Plains did not orchestrate a campaign of 
such contacts.

D.   Candor

     Finally, High Plains argues that Mercury was not candid 
with the Commission during the investigation into its bidding 
tactics, and that its lack of candor disqualifies Mercury from 
holding a Commission license.  The Commission found that 
Mercury never attempted to mislead the Commission about 
its having used bids to convey messages;  Mercury's defense 

had always been that the rule against collusion did not 
prohibit its reflexive bidding.

     The gravamen of High Plains' factual claim is that a 
representative of Mercury falsely declared in a submission to 
the Commission that Mercury had not "utilized trailing num-
bers to send secret signals to anyone as alleged by High 
Plains," and that Mercury had used reflexive bidding only to 
"bluff or confuse other bidders as to Mercury's overall auction 
strategy."  In a later deposition this same person admitted he 
used reflexive bidding "to threaten High Plains that I was 
fixing to come blister their butt in Amarillo."  Mercury, 15 
F.C.C.R. 9654 at p 17 n.57.  The Commission did not consider 
the apparent contradiction, but neither did the appellant first 
present it to the Commission.  The matter is therefore be-
yond our ken.  See 47 U.S.C. s 405(a)(2) (requiring a litigant 
first to present an argument to the Commission on reconsid-
eration if it "relies on questions of fact or law upon which the 
Commission ... has been afforded no opportunity to pass").

     High Plains also adduces some lesser inconsistencies in 
Mercury's submissions to the Commission as evidence of 
Mercury's disdain for the truth.  Again, however, High Plains 
attempts to persuade the court that the Commission was 
wrong, not that it was unreasonable.  There being no claims 
to the contrary, we must conclude that the decision of the 
Commission is reasonable and is supported by substantial 
evidence on the record as a whole.  See 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(C).

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the decision of the Commission 
to award to Mercury the F block license for Lubbock is

                                                                      Affirmed.

                                                                           