                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 15, 2000   Decided January 19, 2001 

                           No. 99-7206

                        David H. Marlin, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

       District of Columbia Board of Elections and Ethics, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02566)

     Robert K. Kelner argued the cause for the appellant.  
Mark H. Lynch was on brief.  Michael A. Dawson entered 
an appearance.

     Rudolph McGann Jr. argued the cause for the appellee.  
Kenneth J. McGhie was on brief.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  David H. Mar-
lin appeals the district court's grant of summary judgment to 
the District of Columbia Board of Elections and Ethics 
(Board).  Marlin brought this action alleging the Board's 
enforcement of polling place regulations to prohibit him from 
wearing a campaign sticker into his polling place on election 
day violates the First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution.  We agree with the district court that the 
Board's enforcement reflects reasonable, viewpoint-neutral 
regulation of polling place speech and therefore does not 
violate the First Amendment.  Accordingly we affirm the 
district court's summary judgment.

                                I.

     The material facts are not in dispute.  On September 15, 
1998 Marlin, a resident and registered voter of the District of 
Columbia (District), went to his polling place to vote in a 
primary election while wearing a campaign sticker in support 
of mayoral candidate Anthony Williams.  When Marlin at-
tempted to turn in his completed ballot, an election worker 
informed him he "could not cast his ballot while wearing the 
sticker."  Affidavit of David H. Marlin p 10.  After a second 
election worker accepted Marlin's ballot, the first worker told 
Marlin he would not be permitted to vote in the general 
election if he was wearing "any sticker, button, emblem, or 
clothing that showed support for a candidate."  Id.  After the 
primary Marlin and his counsel contacted the Board, which 
told Marlin's counsel that the District's election regulations, 
promulgated by the Board,1 prohibited voters from wearing 
political paraphernalia inside a polling place but that, if 
Marlin insisted on wearing a campaign sticker, he would be 

__________
     1 The Board is authorized by statute to promulgate regulations 
governing conduct of elections.  See D.C. Code Ann. s 1-1324.

permitted to vote curbside at the general election.  Marlin 
wore a sticker and voted curbside on November 3, 1998.

     Meanwhile, on October 23, 1998 Marlin filed this action in 
the district court challenging the Board's enforcement of the 
regulations.  In a memorandum opinion and order filed Sep-
tember 8, 1999 the district court granted summary judgment 
in favor of the Board.  Marlin appealed.

                               II.

     Marlin challenges two District election regulations.  The 
first provides:

     No partisan or nonpartisan political activity, or any other 
     activity which, in the judgment of the Precinct Captain, 
     may directly or indirectly interfere with the orderly 
     conduct of the election, shall be permitted in, on, or 
     within a reasonable distance outside the building used as 
     a polling or vote counting place.
     
3 D.C.M.R. s 708.4.  The second defines "political activity" to 
"include without limitation, any activity intended to persuade 
a person to vote for or against any candidate or measure or to 
desist from voting."  3 D.C.M.R. s 708.8.  Marlin contends 
the Board's enforcement of these regulations to prevent him 
from wearing a political sticker when voting inside the polling 
place is an unjustified restriction of his right to free expres-
sion under the First Amendment.2  The district court held 
that the political activity ban is a reasonable viewpoint-
neutral regulation of a non-public forum and therefore does 
not violate the First Amendment.  We agree.

     The United States Supreme Court has

__________
     2 Although section 708.4 broadly prohibits political activity "in, on, 
or within a reasonable distance outside" a polling place, Marlin 
challenges the regulation only as applied, that is, to prevent him 
from wearing the sticker inside the polling place.  In addition, the 
Board's counsel assured the district court that its policy is to 
enforce the ban only "inside the polling place."  JA 102.

     identified three types of fora:  the traditional public 
     forum, the public forum created by government designa-
     tion, and the nonpublic forum.  Traditional public fora 
     are those places which "by long tradition or by govern-
     ment fiat have been devoted to assembly and debate."  
     [Perry Educ. Assn. v. Perry Local Educators' Assn., 460 
     U.S. 37, 45 (1983)].  Public streets and parks fall into this 
     category.  See Hague v. CIO, 307 U.S. 496, 515, 59 S.Ct. 
     954, 963, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939).  In addition to traditional 
     public fora, a public forum may be created by govern-
     ment designation of a place or channel of communication 
     for use by the public at large for assembly and speech, 
     for use by certain speakers, or for the discussion of 
     certain subjects. Perry Education Assn., supra, 460 U.S., 
     at 45 and 46, n. 7, 103 S.Ct., at 955, n. 7.  Of course, the 
     government "is not required to indefinitely retain the 
     open character of the facility."  Id., at 46, 103 S.Ct., at 
     955.
     
Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Educ. Fund, 473 U.S. 
788, 802 (1985).  A content-based regulation, such as the 
District's, which restricts expression in either a traditional 
forum or a designated forum will be upheld only if the state 
shows it "is necessary to serve a compelling state interest and 
that it is narrowly drawn to achieve that end."  Perry Educ. 
Ass'n, 460 U.S. at 45 (citing Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 455, 
461 (1980)).  By contrast, a restriction on speech in a non-
public forum is permissible so long as it is viewpoint neutral 
and "reasonable in light of the purpose which the forum at 
issue serves."  Id. at 46-49.3

     The forum here, the interior of a polling place, is neither a 
traditional public forum nor a government-designated one.  It 

__________
     3 Although Marlin argues that public forum analysis does not 
apply to polling places because they are not "proprietary" to the 
government, see Brief of Appellant at 9-12, Supreme Court prece-
dent establishes that the public forum analysis is appropriate.  See, 
e.g., Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992) (applying public forum 
analysis to Tennessee statute prohibiting display of campaign mate-
rials in or near polling places).

is not available for general public discourse of any sort.  The 
only expressive activity involved is each voter's communica-
tion of his own elective choice and this has long been carried 
out privately--by secret ballot in a restricted space.  See 
Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191, 201-06 (1992) (describing 
early problems with voter fraud and intimidation in the 
United States and the states' responses, including secret 
ballot and restricted zones around polls).  In the District of 
Columbia specifically, the record demonstrates that at least 
as early as 1960 the Board's regulations prohibited all "parti-
san political activity," either written or oral, "in any building 
while it is in use as a polling place."  JA 28.  District 
regulations also restrict election day activity at polling places 
to "the conduct of the election" and limit polling place access 
to Board representatives, police officers, duly qualified elec-
tion watchers, persons engaged in voting and others autho-
rized by the Board.  3 D.C.M.R. s 708.3.  Given these long-
standing limitations on polling place speech, we do not see 
how the polls can fairly be described either as "places which 
'by long tradition or by government fiat have been devoted to 
assembly and debate,' " or as places designated by the gov-
ernment "for use by the public at large for assembly and 
speech, for use by certain speakers, or for the discussion of 
certain subjects."  Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 802.  As the Su-
preme Court declared in Cornelius:  "We will not find that a 
public forum has been created in the face of clear evidence of 
a contrary intent, nor will we infer that the government 
intended to create a public forum when the nature of the 
property is inconsistent with expressive activity."  473 U.S. at 
803.

     Having concluded that polling places are non-public fora, 
we further conclude that the Board's enforcement of the 
challenged election regulations constitutes reasonable view-
point-neutral regulation of expression within polling places.  
In Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992), the petitioner 
challenged similar but more extensive polling place restric-
tions in force in Tennessee.  The challenged statutes prohibit-
ed "the display of campaign posters, signs or other campaign 
materials, distribution of campaign materials, and solicitation 

of votes for or against any person or political party or 
position" within the polling building or 100 feet from its 
entrance.  The Burson majority concluded the regulation 
satisfied at least the reasonableness test applied to regulation 
of speech in non-public fora.4  The same result is compelled 
here.5

     Marlin does not dispute that the regulations, which apply to 
all political activity, are viewpoint neutral.  Nor does he 
question the validity of the interests identified by the Board, 
namely protecting "the orderly conduct of elections" by "cre-
ating a neutral zone within the polling place, preventing 
altercations over hot-button issues, intimidation of voters, 
eleventh hour smear campaigns and the like," Brief of Appel-
lee at 20-21 (emphasis original)--which interests parallel 
those endorsed in Burson, namely protecting "the right of 
[Tennessee's] citizens to vote freely for the candidates of their 
choice" and safeguarding "the right to vote in an election 
conducted with integrity and reliability," 504 U.S. at 198-99.  
Marlin contends only that the broad ban is unnecessary to 
prevent the evils the Board has identified.  To pass constitu-
tional muster, however, regulation of speech in a nonpublic 
forum need "not be the most reasonable or the only reason-
able limitation" and, "[i]n contrast to a public forum, a finding 

__________
     4 The plurality in Burson applied the more exacting public forum 
test because it concluded the area outside the polling place was a 
public forum, noting the Court had characterized as a "quintessen-
tial public forum" "those places 'which by long tradition or by 
government fiat have been devoted to assembly and debate,' such as 
parks, streets, and sidewalks."  504 U.S. at 196-98 (quoting Perry 
Educ. Assn., 460 U.S. at 45).  Concurring in the judgment, Justice 
Scalia expressed his view that the area outside the polling place was 
a non-public forum subject only to the reasonableness test.  We are 
not concerned with the area outside the polling place because the 
Board applies the ban only within the site.  See supra note 1.

     5 Marlin attempts to distinguish this case from Burson on the 
ground the challenge there was facial while his is as applied.  That 
a challenge is as applied, however, does not alter the level of 
scrutiny applied in a nonpublic forum--to wit reasonableness.  See, 
e.g., United States v. Kokinda, 497 U.S. 720 (1990).

of strict incompatibility between the nature of the speech or 
the identity of the speaker and the functioning of the nonpub-
lic forum is not mandated."  473 U.S. at 808 (citing Perry 
Educ. Assn., supra;  Lehman v. City of Shaker Heights, 418 
U.S. 298 (1974)).  The "decision to restrict access to a non-
public forum need only be reasonable," id., and the district's 
decision to ban campaign paraphernalia from polling places is 
a reasonable means of ensuring an orderly and peaceful 
voting environment, free from the threat of contention or 
intimidation.  That narrower regulations might be as effective 
or more so, as Marlin contends, does not invalidate the means 
the District has chosen.  Regulation of a non-public forum, 
unlike that of a public forum, need not be "narrowly drawn to 
achieve [its] end."  Perry Educ. Ass'n, 460 U.S. at 45 (citing 
Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 455, 461 (1980)).  Because the 
Board's enforcement of 3 D.C.M.R. ss 708.4 and 708.8 to 
regulate political activity inside polling places is "reasonable 
in light of the purpose which the forum at issue serves," 
Cornelius, 460 U.S. at 49, given the history and function of 
polling places, see Burson, 504 U.S. at 200-09, we hold that 
the regulations do not violate the First Amendment.

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court is

                                                                      Affirmed.

                    