                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 5, 2000       Decided July 7, 2000 

                           No. 99-1327

                 Joseph T. Ryerson & Son, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

             International Brotherhood of Teamsters, 
                     AFL-CIO, Local 714 and 
            United Steelworkers of America, AFL-CIO, 
                           Intervenors

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Stephen D. Erf argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Michael F. Rosenblum, Timothy S. Bishop 
and Jeffrey W. Sarles.

     Sonya Spielberg, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Linda R. Sher, 
Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy 
Associate General Counsel, and Peter Winkler, Supervisory 
Attorney.

     David I. Goldman argued the cause for intervenors.  With 
him on the brief was Susan Brannigan.

     Before:  Silberman and Rogers, Circuit Judges and 
Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Joseph T. Ryerson & Sons, Inc. 
petitions for review of an order of the National Labor Rela-
tions Board that the company violated ss 8(a)(1) and (5) of 
the National Labor Relations Act by refusing to bargain with 
the certified representative of the bargaining unit, namely 
with Local 714 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters 
("Teamsters") and the United Steelworkers of America 
("Steelworkers"), which jointly petitioned to represent a bar-
gaining unit at four of the company's plants in Chicago, 
Illinois.  The company contends that the Board erred in 
failing to set aside the election for three reasons:  (1) the Act 
does not authorize either joint election petitions or separate 
administration by two unions of a collective bargaining agree-
ment;  (2) there is not substantial evidence in the record to 
support the Board's finding that the unions did not misrepre-
sent the intended nature of their joint representation to the 
bargaining unit employees during the election campaign;  and 
(3) the hearing officer abused his discretion in denying the 
company's subpoena for the unions' entire joint bargaining 
agreement and other internal documents relating to the joint 
petitions for representation, thereby denying the company a 
full and fair hearing.  Because the company failed to preserve 
its statutory argument for review by the court, and because 
we conclude that the company's other contentions are unper-
suasive, we deny the petition and grant the Board's cross-
application for enforcement of its order.

                                I.

     Joseph T. Ryerson & Sons, Inc. operates four plants in 
Chicago, Illinois--the 16th Street, 83rd Street, 103rd Street, 
and 111th Street--known collectively as the "Chicago Com-
plex."  After a number of unsuccessful attempts by the 
Steelworkers--due, in part, to lack of support at the 16th and 
83rd Street plants--to organize Ryerson production and 
maintenance employees in Chicago, the Teamsters, in 1997, 
began a campaign to represent production and maintenance 
employees at the 16th and 83rd Street plants.  After the 
Teamsters filed a petition with the Board seeking certification 
as the exclusive bargaining representative of the bargaining 
unit at the 16th and 83rd Street plants, a struggle between 
the Teamsters and Steelworkers ensued, resulting in the 
Steelworkers' campaign to represent the employees at the 
103rd and 111th Street plants.  After the petitions for repre-
sentation of the 800 employees were consolidated for hearing, 
the Steelworkers distributed a flyer at the 103rd Street and 
111th Street plants stating that:

     The workers at 103rd Street don't want to be represent-
     ed by the Teamsters and have overwhelming[ly] signed 
     Steelworker cards ...  The Teamsters are arguing for 
     one election including 83rd and 16th Street workers....  
     The Steelworkers are fighting to get an election for the 
     103rd Street workers.
     
Employees at the 16th and 83rd Street plants, without objec-
tion from the Teamsters, circulated a petition opposing the 
Steelworkers:  "We, the undersigned, DO NOT want the 
Steelworkers to represent us.  Rather than have them, we 
will remain NON-UNION." (emphasis in original)

     After failed attempts at mediation and on the eve of 
arbitration, the unions agreed to file a joint petition for 
certification.  Following execution of a joint petition agree-
ment, the unions distributed flyers to the employees that set 
out the first two paragraphs of the joint petition agreement:

     At the National Relations Board hearing, the [Steelwork-
     ers] and the [Teamsters] agree to engage in a joint 
     
     organizing/representa[ ]tion campaign at the Chicago 
     Complex of [the company] for a bargaining unit consist-
     ing of all four facilities, including 16th Street, 83rd 
     Street, 103rd and 111th streets.  This will involve an 
     amended representation petition to seek a joint certifica-
     tion, unless otherwise agreed to by the [Teamsters] and 
     [Steelworkers].
     
     Assuming that the campaign is successful, the union[s] 
     will jointly negotiate for a collective bargaining agree-
     ment and will divide responsibility for administering the 
     contract as follows:
     
                      -16th and 83rd streets -- [Teamsters]
                 -103rd and 111th Streets -- [Steelworkers]
              Dues and membership will follow the same lines.

No other portion of the joint petition agreement was divulged 
to the employees.  The unions circulated separate authoriza-
tion cards, and filed amended petitions to jointly petition to 
represent "[a]ll full-time and regular part-time production 
and maintenance employees" at the four Chicago Complex 
plants.

     During the election campaign, the Steelworkers distributed 
literature and campaigned exclusively at 103rd and 111th 
Streets, while the Teamsters distributed literature and cam-
paigned exclusively at 16th and 83rd Streets.  Each union 
held its own rallies.  Organizers from both unions made 
statements to employees that the unions would part ways 
with respect to representation after the certification, dividing 
the four plants between them for the election campaign and 
thereafter for contract administration.1

     On September 25, 1997, the unions won the election.2  The 
company filed objections to the election, noting among other 
__________
     1  According to the Bureau of National Affairs, under the joint 
representation agreement, the Teamsters will represent 525 em-
ployees at two plants and the Steelworkers will represent 275 
employees at the other two Chicago Complex plants.  See BNA 
Daily Labor Report, Nov. 6, 1997, at A3.
     2  Of the 820 employees eligible to vote in the election, 786 
voted:  418 voted for the unions and 352 voted against the unions, 
with 16 ballots challenged and one declared void.

things that the unions "stated [their] intention to negotiate as 
separate unions in separate bargaining units, and not as a 
joint bargaining representative" and "misrepresented how 
bargaining and contract administration would occur if [they] 
won the election."  The company also served a subpoena on 
the unions for "[a]ll documents relating to the joint represen-
tation arrangement" between the Teamsters and the Steel-
workers.  The unions objected to the subpoena as seeking 
irrelevant documents and as vague and unduly burdensome.  
The hearing officer denied the subpoena except as to the first 
two paragraphs of the joint petition agreement that had been 
disclosed to the employees during the election campaign, on 
the ground that the unions' internal communications were 
irrelevant because they did not shed light on what the unions 
had communicated to the employees during the election cam-
paign.  Following a hearing over the course of several days, 
the hearing officer found "no direct evidence that the [unions] 
do not intend to bargain jointly," observing that the unions 
had "consistently maintained that they would bargain jointly, 
but administer the jointly-negotiated contract separately at 
specific locations," and that there was no evidence "that the 
[unions] misrepresented how bargaining and contract admin-
istration would occur if [they] won the election." The Board 
adopted the hearing officer's findings and recommendations 
in the unions' favor, and certified the unions as the exclusive 
bargaining representative of the bargaining unit employees.

     When the company subsequently refused to bargain, the 
unions filed an unfair labor practice charge.  The Board, in 
response to the company's attack on the certification because 
of the unions' conduct during the election campaign, ruled 
that the company could not relitigate issues litigated in the 
representation proceeding, and granted the General Counsel's 
motion for summary judgment on the complaint charging the 
company with violating ss 8(a)(1) and (5) of the Act.  See 
Joseph T. Ryerson & Sons, Inc. v. NLRB, 328 NLRB No. 168 
(August 6, 1999).  The company petitions for review of the 
Board's unfair labor practice order, and the Board filed a 
cross-application for enforcement of its order.

                               II.

     In contending that the Board erred by failing to set aside 
the election, the company makes three challenges.  We ad-
dress each in turn.

     A. Statutory challenge.  The company contends that the 
National Labor Relations Act does not authorize the Board 
to certify more than one union as exclusive bargaining repre-
sentative, or to divide a bargaining unit for purposes of 
contract administration.3  Specifically, the company makes 
two statutory contentions.  First, it maintains that the Board 
acted contrary to the Act, which authorizes a union to be-
come the exclusive bargaining-unit representative only if it 
obtains the support of a majority of the bargaining unit 
employees, by certifying two unions, each of which garnered 
only minority support, as the "exclusive representative" for 
the company's single Chicago Complex bargaining unit.  Sec-
ond, the company maintains that, even if the Act did permit 
joint petitioning and representation, it does not permit the 
unions to divide up a bargaining unit for purposes of bargain-

__________
     3  While acknowledging that the court rejected a challenge to 
joint petitioning in NLRB v. National Truck Rental Co., 239 F.2d 
422 (D.C. Cir. 1986), the company maintains that the issue should 
be revisited because the court's rationale is "obsolete and legally 
invalid."  To support its contention that the Board exceeded its 
authority under the National Labor Relations Act, the company 
cites cases for the propositions that (1) an exclusive collective 
bargaining agent must enjoy the support of the majority of employ-
ees in the unit, see, e.g., Carothers v. Presser, 818 F.2d 926, 934 
(D.C. Cir. 1987);  Human Dev. Ass'n v. NLRB, 937 F.2d 657, 665 
(D.C. Cir. 1991), and (2) contract bargaining and contract adminis-
tration are linked, such that allowing separate administration would 
violate the Act.  See, e.g., Air Line Pilots Ass'n, Int'l v. O'Neill, 499 
U.S. 65, 77 (1991);  United Steelworkers v. Warrior & Gulf Naviga-
tion Co., 363 U.S. 574, 578, 581 (1960).  The Board, in turn, cites 
National Truck Rental as to joint representation, and cites several 
Board decisions for the proposition that a bargaining unit may be 
divided by unions for purposes of contract administration, Utility 
Servs., Inc., 158 NLRB 592, 593 (1966);  Swift & Co., 114 NLRB 
159, 160 (1955).

ing, contract administration, and representation.  As ex-
plained in its brief, in the company's view, the Board's 
authorization for the unions to divide up the Chicago Com-
plex bargaining unit and administer the contract separately 
rests on "a false dichotomy between contract bargaining and 
contract administration" inasmuch as contract administration, 
and in particular the processing of grievances, is "inextrica-
bly linked with collective bargaining."  While the second 
statutory contention poses a serious legal issue that the court 
has not yet addressed, see supra note 3, a threshold issue is 
whether these contentions are properly before the court.  
The Board maintains that the company "waived" its statutory 
contentions by failing to raise them in the representation 
proceeding before the Board and waiting until its opposition 
to the General Counsel's motion for summary judgment on 
the unfair labor practice complaint to raise the issues for the 
first time.

     "It is well established that in the absence of newly discover-
ed evidence or other special circumstances requiring reexami-
nation of the decision in the representation proceeding, a 
respondent is not entitled to relitigate in a subsequent refus-
al-to-bargain proceeding representation issues that were or 
could have been litigated in the prior representation proceed-
ing."  Thomas-Davis Med. Ctrs., P.C. v. NLRB, 157 F.3d 909, 
912 (D.C. Cir 1998) (quoting Westwood One Broad. Servs., 
Inc., 323 N.L.R.B. No. 175 (June 16, 1997) (citing Pittsburgh 
Plate Glass Co. v. NLRB, 313 U.S. 146, 162 (1941))).  The 
company, seeming to acknowledge the need to have raised its 
statutory argument in the representation proceeding, at-
tempts to demonstrate that it did by pointing to various pages 
in the record.  The assertion that it raised the statutory 
challenge in that proceeding is not borne out by the record.  
Neither the company's citations to the record nor counsel's 
response at oral argument demonstrates that the company 
made its statutory argument during the representation pro-
ceeding.

     Apparently aware of the weakness of its position, the 
company falls back on its assertion that its statutory chal-
lenge was "implicit" in its argument that the unions' conduct 

demonstrated that they intended to divide the bargaining unit 
for separate representation.  But the thrust of the company's 
reliance on the unions' conduct was to show that the joint 
representation agreement was a sham and the bargaining 
unit employees were confused about what they were voting 
for in the election, which is unrelated to the statutory chal-
lenge it raised in opposing summary judgment.  Further-
more, as the Board stated in granting summary judgment on 
the unfair labor practice charge, the company did not "offer 
to adduce at a hearing any newly discovered and previously 
unavailable evidence, nor [did] it allege any special circum-
stances that would require the Board to reexamine the deci-
sion made in the representation proceeding."  Ryerson, 328 
NLRB No. 168, at 1.  In any event, an implicit argument is 
hardly the same as giving notice so the Board has an opportu-
nity to rule on the argument.  Cf. Alois Box Co. v. NLRB, 
No. 99-1340, slip. op. at 13-14 (D.C. Cir. June 30, 2000).  
Indeed, the record suggests that rather than being an implicit 
argument in the company's arsenal attacking the election, the 
statutory challenge was an afterthought, interposed as a new 
argument aimed at avoiding summary judgment.  This is 
evident from the fact that the company did not file an 
exception to the certification decision on statutory grounds 
muchless thereafter raise a statutory challenge in its answer 
to the unfair labor practice charge.

     The company's explanation that it was unable to litigate its 
statutory objections "with all of the information it needed" as 
a result of the denial of its subpoena for the entire joint 
representation agreement rings hollow.  Even if access to the 
entire agreement might possibly have strengthened a statuto-
ry challenge, cf. Construction & Gen. Laborers' Local Union 
No. 190 v. NLRB, 998 F.2d 1064, 1066-67 (D.C. Cir. 1993), 
the lack of such access did not preclude the company from 
raising the statutory challenge, particularly as it was suggest-
ed by the evidence on which the company relies to show that 
the unions did not intend to bargain jointly or to administer 
the parties' contract jointly.  See infra Part II(B).  Had the 
company made a statutory challenge during the representa-
tion proceeding, moreover, it might well have had a better 

argument in favor of enforcing the subpoena.  See infra Part 
III(C).

     The company's current contention that the Board failed in 
its responsibility to ensure that "fundamental labor princi-
ples" are not violated, see Associated Milk Producers, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 193 F.3d 539, 543 (D.C. Cir. 1999), misses the mark.  
Although it is not entirely clear, the company appears to be 
contending that the Board's responsibility to protect funda-
mental principles of labor law constitutes a "special circum-
stance" as would excuse the company's failure to raise its 
statutory argument during the representation proceeding.  
Were that the case, the Board's non-relitigation rule would be 
seriously compromised, eviscerating the non-relitigation rule 
for legal arguments having to do with the Board's authority 
under the Act.  On the other hand, to the extent the company 
is suggesting that it is foreclosed from obtaining relief if its 
suspicions about how the unions will conduct themselves are 
confirmed, it is in error.  Were the unions, for example, not 
to engage jointly in the collective bargaining process or not to 
engage in joint contract administration by taking divergent 
grievance and arbitration positions, cf. International Bhd. of 
Teamsters v. NLRB, 587 F.2d 1176, 1181 (D.C. Cir. 1978), the 
company would not be without a remedy.  The Board ac-
knowledged in the certification order that the company could 
then file a petition to modify or revoke the unions certifica-
tion, or file a refusal to bargain charge, or, as the Board 
acknowledged at oral argument, the company could simply 
refuse to bargain with an inappropriate unit.  See Utility 
Servs., 158 N.L.R.B. 592, 593 (1966).

     Because the company did not preserve its right to raise its 
statutory contentions in appealing the Board's unfair labor 
practice order, those contentions are not properly before the 
court and we do not address them.

     B. Misrepresentation challenge.  Seeking to overturn 
the election on other grounds, the company contends that the 
Board's finding that the unions did not misrepresent to the 
bargaining unit employees during the election campaign the 
character of their proposed joint representation is unsupport-

ed by substantial evidence in the record.  Because the unions 
engaged in misrepresentation, the company maintains, the 
Board erred in failing to set aside the result of the tainted 
election.  The company relies on evidence in the record that 
certain individuals told bargaining unit employees that the 
Steelworkers and Teamsters intended to bargain separately 
and that this message was reinforced by the separate cam-
paigns waged by the unions. Specifically, the company relies 
upon statements attributed to union officials such as "don't 
worry about the Teamsters, we're gonna be Steelworkers 
here," and the "Teamsters [are] going to be at 16th and 83rd 
and we are not worried about what the Steelworkers are 
going to do."

     Obviously, the members of the bargaining unit must have 
accurate information to inform their election decisions.  See, 
e.g., General Teamsters Local Union No. 174 v. NLRB, 723 
F.2d 966, 972 (D.C. Cir. 1983);  Automatic Heating & Serv. 
Co., 194 N.L.R.B. 1065 (1972);  Suburban Newspaper Pubs., 
Inc., 230 N.L.R.B. 1215, 1217 (1977).  However, the problem 
for the company's position is two-fold.

     First, the Board's rejection of the company's contention is 
well founded.  The court must affirm the Board's decision if it 
reasonably rests on factual findings supported by substantial 
evidence.  See Family Serv. Agency San Francisco v. NLRB, 
163 F.3d 1369, 1377 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  Amalgamated Clothing 
& Textile Workers Union v. NLRB, 736 F.2d 1559, 1562-63 
(D.C. Cir. 1984).  The Board's finding that there were no 
misrepresentations by the unions during the election cam-
paign rests on two grounds.  First, the testimony of union 
supporters and officials was clear about the unions' intention 
to bargain jointly.  Thus, Denise Williams, a Steelworkers 
organizer, testified that she informed bargaining unit employ-
ees that the unions would bargain jointly.  Likewise, Gerald 
Jagodzinski, an organizer for Teamsters Local 714, testified 
that he never told employees that the unions would bargain 
separately.  The Board also points to statements made by 
Jagodzinski to a reporter that "the two unions plan to negoti-
ate a collective bargaining agreement" once they were certi-
fied. Second, the evidence showed that management from the 

company distributed fliers during the election campaign in-
forming employees that the unions would bargain jointly, and 
that no fewer than seven managers spoke directly to employ-
ees telling them they would be voting for both unions.  
Viewed together, these grounds establish substantial evidence 
to support the Board's finding that the members of the 
bargaining unit had accurate data to inform their election 
choices.4

     Second, the evidence the company cites is insufficient to 
rebut even the prima facie showing.  See, e.g., Gene Fielder 
Chevrolet Co., 245 N.L.R.B. 1075, 1076 n.3 (1979);  Utility 
Servs., Inc., 158 N.L.R.B. 592, 592 (1966);  Florida Tile 
Indus., Inc., 130 N.L.R.B. 897, 897 (1961).  The statements 
on which the company relies are consistent with the interpre-
tation that contract administration would be handled at the 
separate plants while joint bargaining would occur in a joint 
fashion.  Administration without deviation at the separate 
plants clearly would not be inconsistent with joint representa-
tion.  Further, a number of the allegedly misleading state-
ments that the company claims were made by the unions 
were in fact made by employees in the bargaining unit--John 
Jeziorski, James Malizio, Ron Butler, John Grey, Jesus Go-
mez, Mike Ross--not union officials.  Because the Board 
reasonably found that the company did not show that these 
employees were acting as agents of the unions when these 
statements were made, it was justified in not attributing the 
statements to the unions.  See, e.g., Overnite Transp. Co. v. 
NLRB, 140 F.3d 259, 266 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  Amalgamated 
Clothing, 736 F.2d at 1565.

__________
     4  The cases on which the company relies are readily distin-
guishable.  In Suburban Newspaper Publications, Inc., 230 
N.L.R.B. 1215, 1217 (1977), the Board nullified an election because 
"the employees were told [by the unions and their representatives] 
there would be separate units represented by the respective labor 
organizations, not merely serviced by them."  Id. at 1217 n.5.  
Likewise, in Automatic Heating & Service Co., 194 N.L.R.B. 1065 
(1972), union officials admitted at the hearing that they had no 
intention of jointly bargaining or representing all the bargaining 
unit employees.

     Thus, absent evidence that could rebut the substantial 
evidence on which the Board relied in finding that the unions 
did not misrepresent their intent to bargain jointly, the 
company fails to show that the Board erred in refusing to set 
aside the election for the alleged misrepresentation.

     C. Subpoena challenge.  Finally, the company contends 
that it was denied a full and fair hearing because the hearing 
officer denied the company's subpoena for the unions' entire 
joint representation agreement and other internal union com-
munications about jointly representing the bargaining unit. 
The company maintains that the entire agreement was "high-
ly relevant" and "central" to its argument that the unions did 
not intend to bargain jointly and the joint representation 
agreement was a sham.  Reviewing the hearing officer's 
partial denial of the company's subpoena for abuse of discre-
tion, we find none in view of the nature of the arguments that 
the company presented during the representation proceeding.  
See Perdue Farms, Inc., Cookin' Good v. NLRB, 144 F.3d 
830, 834 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

     The hearing officer partially denied the subpoena on the 
ground that he found relevant only "whatever communica-
tions have been made to employees regarding the status of 
the joint petitioners," observing that the company "will have 
the right to file an unfair labor practice charge" if the unions 
do not bargain jointly.  Given the nature of the company's 
challenge to the union election in the representation proceed-
ing, that the unions made misrepresentations to the bargain-
ing unit employees during the campaign, and given the histor-
ical antagonism that the company identified between the two 
unions, the company's position that it was deprived of infor-
mation relevant to its reasonable suspicion is plausible, see 
Surburban Newspapers, 230 N.L.R.B. at 1216, and the denial 
of the subpoena is thus troubling.  Placing a barrier in the 
way of a party's ability to present its case would, if prejudi-
cial, be grounds for reversing the Board.  Cf. Drukker Com-
munications, Inc. v. NLRB, 700 F.2d 727, 731, 734;  (D.C. 
Cir. 1983);  Indiana Hosp., Inc. v. NLRB, 10 F.3d 151, 154 
(3d Cir. 1993).

     Nevertheless, under the abuse of discretion standard, we 
conclude that it was still reasonable for the hearing officer to 
find that the full joint petition agreement and like internal 
communications had little relevance to the misrepresentation 
issue.  See NLRB v. Blackstone Mfg. Co., 123 F.2d 633, 635 
(2d Cir. 1944);  cf. Carothers v. Pressler, 818 F.2d 926, 934 
(D.C. Cir. 1987) (observing that viewing Labor Management 
Reporting and Disclosure Act as creating a substantive "right 
of access" to a union's mailing list could subvert union's 
legitimate role as bargaining representative).  Because the 
company has not shown that it was prejudiced by the Board's 
denial of the subpoena inasmuch as it is not without a remedy 
if the unions fail to bargain jointly, see supra Part III(A), 
when a subpoena of the entire agreement would no longer be 
premature and would arguably be enforceable, we conclude 
that the reasons given by the hearing officer for partially 
denying the subpoena fall within the alternatives available to 
him in the exercise of reasoned discretion.  See generally 
Kickapoo Tribe v. Babbitt, 43 F.3d 1491, 1497 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).

     Accordingly, because the company failed to preserve its 
statutory challenge to the certification of the unions as the 
exclusive representative for the bargaining unit, and because 
the company's other contentions are unpersuasive, we deny 
the petition for review and grant the Board's cross application 
for enforcement of its order.

                     