                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 1, 2002   Decided December 17, 2002 

                           No. 01-1299

          Alabama Municipal Distributors Group, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

              Southern Natural Gas Company, et al., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Joshua L. Menter argued the cause for petitioners and 
supporting intervenors.  With him on the briefs were Wil-
liam T. Miller and James R. Choukas-Bradley.  L. Clifford 
Adams Jr. entered an appearance.

     Beth G. Pacella, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 
the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.  Lona T. Perry and Monique L. 
Watson, Attorneys, entered appearances.

     Patrick B. Pope, R. David Hendrickson, Howard L. Nel-
son, Roy R. Robertson, Jr., Lyle D. Larson and Bridget E. 
Shahan were on the brief for intervenors Southern Natural 
Gas Company, et al., in support of respondent.  Daniel F. 
Collins and Donna J. Bailey entered appearances.

     Before: Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed By Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  Petitioners either are 
purchasers or represent purchasers of gas transported on 
Southern Natural Gas Company's pipeline system.  They 
protest the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's grant 
to Southern of a certificate of public convenience and necessi-
ty for construction and operation of pipeline facilities intended 
to provide fuel to Southern Company Services ("SCS") for 
some new gas-fired power facilities planned by SCS for 
Alabama.  See s 7(c)(1)(A) of the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. 
s 717f(c)(1)(A) (requiring certification for new service).  
Their specific objection is to FERC's having certificated the 
transaction at discount rates, lower than those paid by peti-
tioners.  We dismiss the petitions for want of jurisdiction.

                             *  *  *

     In deciding exactly where to locate new gas-fired electric 
generation facilities, SCS sought to have the gas delivered as 
economically as possible.  At least two potential carriers were 
available, Southern and Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Cor-
poration.  Competition between the two carriers evidently 
ensued--or so FERC concluded, over objections by petition-
ers that the appearance of competition was illusory.  Hence 
in seeking certification Southern claimed that it could not 

have won the SCS business without offering discounted rates.  
The Commission was persuaded, and approved Southern's 
application for a certificate embodying the proposed initial 
rates.  Southern Natural Gas Co., 94 FERC p 61,297, order 
on reh'g, 95 FERC p 61,220 (2001).

     At the outset FERC and a group of intervenors (SCS, 
Southern and another pipeline) raise jurisdictional issues.  
FERC questions petitioners' standing, specifically whether 
they have suffered or are in imminent peril of suffering injury 
in fact--"invasion of a legally protected interest which is (a) 
concrete and particularized ... and (b) 'actual and imminent, 
not conjectural or hypothetical.' "  Lujan v. Defenders of 
Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992) (citations omitted).  And the 
intervenors argue that petitioners' claims are unripe, a claim 
that the court could in fact raise on its own.  Reno v. Catholic 
Soc. Servs., Inc., 509 U.S. 43, 57 n.18 (1993).  The ripeness 
inquiry is familiar: we must evaluate the "fitness of the issues 
for judicial decision and the hardship to the parties of with-
holding court consideration."  Abbott Laboratories v. Gard-
ner, 387 U.S. 136, 149 (1967).  The two issues overlap signifi-
cantly, as we shall see.  The contingencies that stand between 
the orders here and any injury to petitioners tend both to 
show the injury's lack of imminence and to render their claim 
unripe.

     As one basis for standing, petitioners claim that FERC's 
allegedly improper certification will raise demand for gas in 
the region, and thus the prices they will pay for gas.  But 
they are unable to demonstrate any connection between the 
allegedly improper FERC action and higher prices.  It is 
likely true that construction and operation of the SCS facility 
will increase the regional demand for gas.  But petitioners 
nowhere suggest that SCS was contemplating use of any 
other fuel for its new facilities; indeed, the assumption that 
SCS had already settled on gas was the basis for petitioners' 
proclaiming that the case raised fundamental issues of gas-on-
gas competition.  See Petitioners' Initial Br. at 3-4.  Nor do 
petitioners suggest that without a discount SCS might have 
completely abandoned any plan for new generation facilities.  
So the only way Southern's transportation discount could 

raise demand would be if it were to cause SCS's delivered gas 
costs to be lower than they would otherwise have been, and 
thus its electricity prices to be ever so slightly lower than 
they would have been, thereby driving up electricity con-
sumption, and with it gas consumption, compared to what 
they would have been without the discount.  But petitioners 
have not even mentioned this possibility, much less offered 
supporting empirical analysis.  So we need not decide wheth-
er the possible effect is sufficiently non-speculative to support 
standing.  See Florida Audubon Soc'y v. Bentsen, 94 F.3d 
658, 667-68 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (en banc).

     At oral argument petitioners hinted at a related theory of 
standing based on direct competitive injury--specifically, that 
the lower electricity costs that might result from this discount 
could prompt consumers to choose electricity over gas for 
their energy needs.  But petitioners never made such an 
argument in their briefs, and have given us no evidence of 
such competitive injury.  Their mere invocation of the con-
cept in response to a question from the bench is not an 
adequate basis for standing.

     Petitioners also assert that the Commission's action here 
will adversely affect them as users of Southern's transporta-
tion services.  Here an initial hurdle to their claim of injury is 
their acknowledgement that they will ultimately benefit from 
Southern's service to SCS.  Because a carrier's unit rate is 
normally determined by dividing its total throughput into its 
"revenue requirements" (i.e., total cost), see Interstate Natu-
ral Gas Ass'n of America v. FERC, 285 F.3d 18, 56 (D.C. Cir. 
2002) ("INGAA"), an increase in throughput will decrease the 
unit rate, unless there is a more-than-offsetting rise in aver-
age costs.  As there is no evidence of such a rise in average 
costs, it appears undisputed that once Southern adopts sys-
tem rates reflecting the new service, the effect will be to 
reduce petitioners' rates.

     Thus petitioners' claim is not that they will be worse off 
under the Commission orders than if there were no SCS-
Southern transaction, but that they will be worse off than 
under a Commission decision by which Southern carried the 

SCS gas but at a lower discount or none at all.  This 
argument draws on the Commission's practice of making 
"discount adjustments."  In dividing throughput into cost to 
yield a unit rate, the Commission makes a downward adjust-
ment to the volume of throughput expected under a discount, 
to reflect the reality that its contribution to revenue will be 
lower than that of a similar volume carried under undiscount-
ed rates.  INGAA, 285 F.3d at 56.  But the Commission 
grants these adjustments only if it finds the discount to have 
been required by competitive conditions.  See Williston Ba-
sin Interstate Pipeline Co., 67 FERC p 61,137 at 61,378-80 
(1994), order on reh'g, 71 FERC p 61,019 (1995).  Some critics 
of the Commission contend that where the only competition is 
from another gas pipeline--as is evidently true here--this 
constraint on discounts and discount adjustments is not 
enough.  For gas-on-gas competition, they say, discounts and 
discount adjustments do not increase overall gas transporta-
tion but merely shift it among pipelines, giving competitive 
customers a lower rate but forcing the non-competitive cus-
tomers to shoulder a higher proportion of fixed costs.  See 
INGAA, 285 F.3d at 57.  The Commission has promised to 
review this issue more fully.  Id.

     The orders that petitioners challenge here do not resolve or 
even tackle the issue of what discount adjustment, if any, the 
Commission should allow.  The effect that the SCS transac-
tion will have on petitioners' rates will be decided in South-
ern's next rate case under s 4 of the Natural Gas Act, 15 
U.S.C. s 717c (or conceivably in a Commission-initiated rate 
proceeding under s 5, 15 U.S.C. s 717d).  What that precise 
effect will be, no one can now say.  The injury has not yet 
materialized nor has the factual record related to that injury 
been established.  The case closely parallels Mississippi Val-
ley Gas Co. v. FERC, 68 F.3d 503 (D.C. Cir. 1995), where "the 
future impact of the FERC orders [embodying its discount 
adjustment policy was] uncertain ..., and [would] likely be 
more clear once [the] actual rates ... have been finalized" in 
the then pending s 4 rate cases, and we accordingly found 
attacks on the policy not fit for judicial review.  Id. at 509.  
As there was no showing that delay of adjudication would 

inflict hardship, we found the claim unripe.  Id. at 509-10.  
Because the petitioners' theory of an immediate impact on the 
price of gas has failed, and no rate change (of whatever 
degree) will take effect independently of Southern's next rate 
case, here too delay will cause them no harm.  See also New 
York State Elec. & Gas Corp. v. FERC, 177 F.3d 1037, 1040-
41 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (finding a rate-related claim unripe before 
completion of the actual rate proceeding under s 4).

     Petitioners argue, however, that in a future s 4 proceeding 
their claims will be compromised by the Commission's deter-
minations here.  They say that the test for allowing a dis-
count adjustment in a rate proceeding is essentially the same 
as for allowing a discount in a s 7 certification, and that the 
current ruling will be binding on them when that issue is 
resolved in the s 4 rate case.  The Commission is somewhat 
obscure on the relationship between the two proceedings, 
stressing only that the burden will be on the pipeline to 
justify any discount adjustment.  Commission Br. at 31-32.  
Although petitioners present the argument in the context of 
standing, it would--if correct--tend to supply ripeness as 
well: if failure to obtain judicial review now would lead to 
dispositive issue preclusion, petitioners' hardship would be 
severe indeed.

     In so far as petitioners rely on precedential effect within 
the Commission, they assert a type of "injury" that is clearly 
insufficient to satisfy our Article III jurisdictional require-
ments.  Sea-Land Serv., Inc. v. Dep't of Transp., 137 F.3d 
640, 648 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  Obviously the Commission's deci-
sion here will not be a binding precedent for any reviewing 
court.  But petitioners suggest that the adverse administra-
tive determination here might bind them, via collateral estop-
pel, in a later judicial review of the s 4 rate setting.  They 
argue that this possible effect might confer Article III stand-
ing, citing our dictum in International Brotherhood of Elec-
trical Workers v. ICC ("IBEW"), 862 F.2d 330, 334 (D.C. Cir. 
1988).

     In Sea-Land we discussed but did not resolve whether the 
possibility of a collateral estoppel effect could afford standing.  
As we noted, neither IBEW nor any decision of the Supreme 
Court had actually found standing on the basis of collateral 

estoppel.  Sea-Land, 137 F.3d at 648.  We thought the issue 
complicated and possibly circular, in that if there were ap-
pealability, and if the other prerequisites of collateral estop-
pel were present, then collateral estoppel would follow; 
whereas absent appealability there would be no basis for 
collateral estoppel under standard doctrine.  Id. at 648-49.

     But in fact it seems inescapable that neither standing nor 
ripeness could properly grow out of a harm predicated on a 
potential collateral estoppel effect.  The argument for stand-
ing would necessarily have a bootstrap quality: it would infer 
standing in an initial case from the possibility of collateral 
estoppel in a later one--a possibility that of course could only 
materialize if standing were found in the first case.  To 
create standing out of the preclusive effect that would flow 
from granting standing is to create it ex nihilo.  In contrast, 
our denial of standing here necessarily implies that petition-
ers may not be estopped from challenging these findings in a 
later court case. Sea-Land, 137 F.3d at 648.  Whatever 
weight the present orders may have in the Commission, in 
court petitioners will be able to point to any errors in the 
present agency action that prove to affect their interests 
adversely in the rate case.  For the same reasons, collateral 
estoppel possibilities could not ripen an otherwise unripe 
claim.

     As we lack jurisdiction to hear petitioners' claims, we 
dismiss their petition.  That dismissal moots FERC's conten-
tion that the interventions on petitioners' behalf must be 
dismissed because of those intervenors' failure to seek re-
hearing as required by s 19(b) of the Natural Gas Act, 15 
U.S.C. s 717r(b).

                                                            So ordered.

                                                                