                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 12, 2001    Decided July 31, 2001 

                      Nos. 00-5050 & 00-5396

                  Andrx Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 
                             Appellee

                                v.

               Biovail Corporation International, 
                            Appellant

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv00099)

     Richard J. Leighton argued the cause for the appellant.  
John B. Dubeck, Douglas J. Behr and Eric H. Singer were on 
brief.

     Louis M. Solomon argued the cause for the appellee.  
Eugene M. Pfeifer, James D. Miller and Peter M. Todaro 
were on brief.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Appellant Bio-
vail Corporation (Biovail) appeals two district court decisions. 
One dismissed with prejudice its antitrust counterclaim 
against appellee Andrx Pharmaceuticals, Inc (Andrx).  The 
second denied its motion for reconsideration of the court's 
dismissal.  For the reasons that follow, we affirm the district 
court's dismissal of the counterclaim but reverse its decision 
to do so with prejudice.

                     I. Statutory Background

     A company wishing to market a new drug must seek the 
approval of the United States Food & Drug Administration 
(FDA) by completing a "New Drug Application" (NDA).  See 
American Bioscience, Inc. v. Thompson, 243 F.3d 579, 580 
(D.C. Cir. 2001);  Mova Pharm. Corp. v. Shalala, 140 F.3d 
1060, 1063 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  see also 21 U.S.C. s 355(a) ("No 
person shall introduce or deliver for introduction into inter-
state commerce any new drug, unless an approval of an 
application filed pursuant to (b) or (j) of this section is 
effective with respect to such drug.").  An NDA is time-
consuming and costly to prepare because it must include data 
from studies showing the drug's safety and effectiveness.  See 
Mova, 140 F.3d at 1063. In 1984 the Congress enacted the 
Hatch-Waxman Amendments to the Food, Drug and Cosmet-
ic Act (Amendments) to, inter alia, simplify the procedure for 
FDA approval.  See Drug Price Competition and Patent 
Term Restoration Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-417, 98 Stat. 
1585 (1984) (codified in various sections of titles 21, 35 & 42 
U.S.C.);  see generally Allan M. Fox & Allan R. Bennett, The 
Legislative History of the Drug and Patent Term Restora-
tion Act of 1984, at 259 (1987);  James J. Wheaton, "Generic 
Competition and Pharmaceutical Innovation:  the Drug Price 
Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984," 35 
Cath. Univ. L. Rev. 433 (1986).  Under the Amendments, the 
original applicant for FDA approval (the "pioneer" applicant) 

must still prepare an NDA. Subsequent applicants who wish 
to manufacture generic versions1 of the pioneer drug, howev-
er, need only complete an Abbreviated New Drug Application 
(ANDA) that relies on the FDA's previous determination that 
the drug is safe and effective.2  See Mova, 140 F.3d at 1063.  
The generic drug share of the prescription drug market has 
grown from 19 per cent in 1983 to over 40 per cent in 1995.  
See Congressional Budget Office, How Increased Competition 
from Generic Drugs Has Affected Prices and Returns in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry ix (1998).  In addition, almost all of 
the most popular pioneer drugs with expired patents now 
have generic versions available.  Id. at xii.

     Although the Congress was interested in increasing the 
availability of generic drugs, it also wanted to protect the 
patent rights of the pioneer applicants.  See David A. Balto, 
"Pharmaceutical Patent Settlements:  The Antitrust Risks," 
55 Food & Drug L.J. 321, 324 (2000).  The Amendments, 
therefore, require that an NDA contain a list of any patents 
"which claim[ ] the drug ... or which claim[ ] a method of 
using such drug and with respect to which a claim of patent 
infringement could reasonably be asserted if a person not 
licensed by the owner engaged in the manufacture, use, or 
sale of the drug."  21 U.S.C. s 355(b)(1).  The FDA main-
tains a record of such information in its publication entitled 
Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence, 
commonly known as the Orange Book.  See 21 U.S.C. 
s 355(j)(7)(A). For each patent applicable to the pioneer drug 
listed in the Orange Book, an ANDA applicant must certify 

__________
     1 A generic version of a pioneer drug (often described as a brand-
name drug) contains the same active ingredients, but not necessari-
ly the same inactive ingredients, as the pioneer drug.  A generic 
drug, as the name implies, is ordinarily sold without a brand name 
and at a lower price.  See United States v. Generix Drug Corp., 460 
U.S. 453, 454-55 (1983).

     2 Before the Amendments, an earlier version of the ANDA proce-
dure was available to a generic drug manufacturer of a pioneer 
drug approved before 1962.  A generic version of a pioneer drug 
approved after 1962, however, could be approved only through a full 
NDA.  See Fox & Bennett, supra, at 95.

whether the proposed generic drug would infringe that patent 
and, if not, why not.  An ANDA applicant has four certifica-
tion options. It may certify (1) that the required patent 
information has not been filed, (2) that the patent has expired, 
(3) that the patent has not expired but will expire on a 
particular date or (4) that the patent is invalid or will not be 
infringed by the drug for which the applicant seeks approval.  
See 21 U.S.C. s 355(j)(2)(A)(vii).  The last of these options, 
and the one relevant here, is the Paragraph IV certification.  
After an applicant makes a Paragraph IV certification, the 
statute provides a 45-day window during which the patent 
holder may bring suit against the applicant.  If the patent 
holder brings a timely suit, the statute bars the FDA from 
approving the applicant's ANDA, or any subsequent ANDA, 
for thirty months or until the successful resolution of the 
patent infringement suit, whichever is earlier, at which time 
the first ANDA applicant is eligible for FDA approval and 
upon such approval is awarded a 180-day exclusivity period in 
which to market its generic version.  See 21 U.S.C. 
s 355(j)(5)(B)(iii). The statute permits the court to lengthen 
or shorten the 30-month waiting period if it determines that 
either party has failed to "reasonably cooperate in expediting 
the action."  Id.3

__________
     3 The full text of section 355(j)(5)(B)(iii) provides:

     If the applicant made a certification described in subclause (IV) 
     of paragraph (2)(A)(vii), the approval shall be made effective 
     immediately unless an action is brought for infringement of a 
     patent which is the subject of the certification before the 
     expiration of forty-five days from the date the notice provided 
     under paragraph (2)(B)(i) is received.  If such an action is 
     brought before the expiration of such days, the approval shall 
     be made effective upon the expiration of the thirty-month 
     period beginning on the date of the receipt of the notice 
     provided under paragraph (2)(B)(i) or such shorter or longer 
     period as the court may order because either party to the 
     action failed to reasonably cooperate in expediting the action, 
     except that--
     
           (I) if before the expiration of such period the court decides 
          that such patent is invalid or not infringed, the approval shall 
          be made effective on the date of the court decision,
          
                          II. Background

     Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc. (HMRI) is the manufacturer, 
marketer and patent holder of the brand name prescription 
drug Cardizem CD, which consists of a once-daily dosage of 
the chemical compound dilitiazem hydrochloride. Cardizem 
CD is widely prescribed for the treatment of chronic chest 
pains (angina) and hypertension and for the prevention of 
heart attacks and strokes.  See In re Cardizem CD Antitrust 
Litig., 105 F. Supp. 2d 618, 622 (E.D. Mich. 2000).  On 
September 22, 1995 Andrx filed an ANDA with the FDA 
seeking approval to manufacture and sell a generic form of 
Cardizem CD.  On December 31, 1995 it made the Paragraph 
IV certification with regard to all unexpired patents included 
in the Orange Book's Cardizem CD entry and certified that 
its generic form of Cardizem CD did not infringe the patents 
owned or controlled by HMRI or its affiliates.  See 21 U.S.C. 
s 355(j)(2)(A)(vii)(IV);  21 C.F.R. s 314.94(a)(12)(i)(A)(4). In 
early 1996 HMRI filed a timely suit against Andrx for patent 

__________
           (II) if before the expiration of such period the court 
          decides that such patent has been infringed, the approval 
          shall be made effective on such date as the court orders 
          under section 271(e)(4)(A) of Title 35, or
          
           (III) if before the expiration of such period the court 
          grants a preliminary injunction prohibiting the applicant 
          from engaging in the commercial manufacture or sale of the 
          drug until the court decides the issues of patent validity and 
          infringement and if the court decides that such patent is 
          invalid or not infringed, the approval shall be made effective 
          on the date of such court decision.
          
     In such an action, each of the parties shall reasonably 
cooperate in expediting the action.  Until the expiration of 
forty-five days from the date the notice made under para-
graph (2)(B)(i) is received, no action may be brought under 
section 2201 of Title 28, for a declaratory judgment with 
respect to the patent.  Any action brought under section 
2201 shall be brought in the judicial district where the 
defendant has its principal place of business or a regular 
and established place of business.

infringement.4  The filing of the suit triggered the statutory 
30-month waiting period during which any subsequent ANDA 
applicant, including Biovail, could not receive final approval of 
its generic version of Cardizem CD. See 21 U.S.C. 
s 355(j)(5)(B)(iii).

     In June 1997 Biovail filed an ANDA with the Paragraph IV 
certification for its generic version of Cardizem CD but 
HMRI filed no patent infringement suit against it.  On 
September 15, 1997 the FDA issued its tentative approval of 
Andrx's ANDA.5  Nine days later, on September 24, 1997, 
HMRI and Andrx entered into an agreement (Agreement or 
HMRI-Andrx Agreement) purporting to maintain the status 
quo pending the outcome of HMRI's patent infringement suit 
against Andrx.  Under the terms of the Agreement, Andrx 
agreed not to sell its generic version of Cardizem CD until a 
specific time agreed upon by the parties.  It also agreed to 
diligently prosecute its ANDA and not to relinquish or other-
wise compromise any right accruing thereunder.  HMRI 
agreed to make interim payments to Andrx in the amount of 
$40 million per year, payable quarterly, beginning on the date 
Andrx's generic version of Cardizem CD received FDA ap-
proval and ending on the date Andrx either began to sell its 
generic version or was adjudged liable for patent infringe-
ment.

     In early 1998 Andrx filed suit against the FDA and certain 
ANDA applicants (including Biovail) to clarify its right as the 
first to file an ANDA for Cardizem CD.  The suit sought 
injunctive relief requiring the FDA to provide Andrx with "a 
period of 180 days of marketing exclusivity for its controlled-
release generic formulations of the drugs Dilacor XR and 
Cardizem CD."  JA 13.  It also requested injunctive relief 
prohibiting the FDA "from approving any ANDA submitted 
by defendant Biovail ... for a generic version of Cardizem 
CD that contains a paragraph 4 certification until 180-days 
after Andrx begins marketing its generic formulation of Car-
__________
     4 Later in 1996 Faulding Inc. filed an ANDA with a Paragraph IV 
certification for its generic version of Cardizem CD.  In January 
1997 HMRI also filed suit against Faulding for patent infringement.

     5 The FDA issued tentative, as opposed to final, approval due to 
the pending infringement suit and the resulting 30-month statutory 
waiting period.

dizem CD or a court enters a judgment in the patent litiga-
tion brought by HMRI in the Southern District of Florida, 
whichever is earlier."  JA 22.  Biovail counterclaimed, alleg-
ing that Andrx had violated sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman 
Act as well as New Jersey common law.6

     On July 3, 1998 the FDA granted final approval to Andrx's 
ANDA for a generic version of Cardizem CD.  JA 44.  By 
then, the 30-month waiting period had expired and Andrx 
was no longer restricted under the statutory scheme from 
marketing and selling its generic drug.  Andrx, however, did 
not do so and on July 9, 1998, pursuant to the Agreement, 
HMRI began making quarterly payments of $10 million to 
Andrx.  By not marketing its generic version of Cardizem 
CD, Andrx did not trigger the 180-day market exclusivity 
period, which in turn prevented the FDA from giving final 
approval to any subsequently filed applications for competing 
generic versions of Cardizem CD.

     Approximately one year later, HMRI and Andrx terminat-
ed their Agreement and entered into a stipulation settling the 
patent litigation.  On June 23, 1999, Andrx then began to 
market its generic version and its 180-day exclusivity period 
began to run.  In October 1999 the FDA gave tentative 
approval to Biovail's ANDA and final approval on December 

__________
     6 On July 14, 1998 the FDA published a notice entitled "Guidance 
for Industry on 180-Day Generic Drug Exclusivity Under the 
Hatch-Waxman Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act;  Availability," interpreting the Hatch-Waxman Amend-
ments so as to give Andrx the relief it sought in its complaint. The 
Guidance explained that the FDA intended to delete the "successful 
defense" provisions from s 314.107(c)(1) and that the FDA would 
not enforce the "successful defense" provisions in the interim. See 
63 Fed. Reg. 37,890 (July 14, 1998);  see also JA 62 (Federal 
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss);  JA 198 (Notice of Dismissal). 
Accordingly, the district court subsequently dismissed the com-
plaint.  See JA 199.  Andrx had earlier moved to dismiss Biovail's 
counterclaim for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be 
granted because, inter alia, Biovail lacked standing to assert an 
antitrust violation.

23, 1999.7  Neither Andrx nor Biovail, however, informed the 
district court of these developments.  On January 6, 2000 the 
district court granted Andrx's Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss 
Biovail's counterclaim, the federal antitrust counts with preju-
dice and the state law claims without prejudice.  The court 
concluded that Biovail did not, and in fact could not, plead an 
antitrust injury causally linked to Andrx's alleged anticompet-
itive behavior.  Andrx Pharm., Inc. v. Friedman, 83 F. Supp. 
2d 179, 185-87 (D.D.C. 2000) ("Court cannot find that Biovail 
can establish that it has suffered 'antitrust injury.' ").  On 
February 2, 2000 Biovail moved for reconsideration under 
FRCP 60(b) and on February 4, 2000 it filed a notice of 
appeal (No. 00-5050).  The district court subsequently denied 
the motion for reconsideration and Biovail noticed its appeal 
of that decision (No. 00-5396) on November 3, 2000.  This 
court granted Biovail's motion to consolidate the appeals.

                          III. Analysis

     We give de novo review to a Rule 12(b)(6) dismissal.  See 
NRA v. Reno, 216 F.3d 122, 126 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  see also 
Amarel v. Connell, 102 F.3d 1494, 1507 (9th Cir. 1997) 
(holding that antitrust standing is question of law reviewed de 
novo).  "The complaint should not be dismissed unless plain-
tiffs can prove no set of facts in support of their claim which 
would entitle them to relief."  Kowal v. MCI Communica-
tions Corp., 16 F.3d 1271, 1276 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  We liberally 
construe the complaint in the plaintiff's favor and grant the 
plaintiff the benefit of all inferences that can be derived from 
the facts alleged.  "However, the court need not accept 
inferences drawn by plaintiffs if such inferences are unsup-
ported by the facts set out in the complaint.  Nor must the 
court accept legal conclusions cast in the form of factual 
allegations."  Id.  The court reviews the denial of the appel-
lant's Rule 60(b) motion for abuse of discretion "unless the 
decision is 'rooted in an error of law.' "  United Mine Work-

__________
     7 In a letter dated October 22, 1999 the FDA explained to Biovail 
that it had "completed review" of its ANDA and found its generic 
"safe and effective."  JA 322.  It gave tentative, rather than final, 
approval because of "the exclusivity granted by the agency to 
Andrx."  JA 323;  see also JA 327.

ers of Am. 1974 Pension v. Pittston Co., 984 F.2d 469, 476 
(D.C. Cir. 1993) (citation omitted).

     Section 4 of the Clayton Act provides that a private person 
"injured in his business or property by reason of anything 
forbidden in the antitrust laws ... shall recover threefold the 
damages by him sustained, and the cost of suit, including a 
reasonable attorney's fee."  15 U.S.C. s 15(a).  The Clayton 
Act includes the Sherman Act8 as one of the "antitrust laws."  
See 15 U.S.C. s 12. A person "threatened [with] loss or 
damage by a violation of the antitrust laws" can seek injunc-
tive relief under section 16 of the Clayton Act.  15 U.S.C. 
s 26.  The availability of a private antitrust action, and its 
accompanying treble damages remedy, serves both to com-
pensate private persons for their injuries and to punish 
wrongdoers.  See 2 Phillip E. Areeda, Herbert Hovenkamp & 
Roger D. Blair, Antitrust Law p 330, at 273 (2d. ed. 2000).  
Private enforcement of the nation's antitrust laws also in-
creases the likelihood that violators will be discovered.  See 
Blue Shield of Va. v. McCready, 457 U.S. 465, 473 n.10 (1982) 
("Only by requiring violators to disgorge the 'fruits of their 
illegality' can the deterrent objectives of the antitrust laws be 
fully served.") (citation omitted).  In fact, private enforce-
ment actions account for the overwhelming majority of anti-
trust litigation in the United States.  See William F. Dolan, 
Developments in Private Antitrust Enforcement in 1999, 
1181 PLI/Corp 971, 975 (2000).

     "On its face, s 4 contains little in the way of restrictive 
language."  Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442 U.S. 330, 337 
(1979).  "The statute does not confine its protection to con-

__________
     8 Section 1 of the Sherman Act prohibits contracts, combinations 
or conspiracies "in restraint of trade or commerce among the 
several States, or with foreign nations."  15 U.S.C. s 1.  Section 2 
states that "[e]very person who shall monopolize, or attempt to 
monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or 
persons, to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce among 
the several States, or with foreign nations, shall be deemed guilty of 
a felony."  15 U.S.C. s 2.  In its counterclaim, Biovail alleged that 
Andrx violated both sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act.  JA 20-
21.

sumers, or to purchasers, or to competitors, or to sellers....  
The Act is comprehensive in its terms and coverage, protect-
ing all who are made victims of the forbidden practices by 
whomever they may be perpetrated."  Mandeville Island 
Farms, Inc. v. American Crystal Sugar Co., 334 U.S. 219, 236 
(1948).  The Supreme Court, however, has recognized that 
"the potency of the remedy implies the need for some care in 
its application" and does not construe the section 4 language 
to allow suit by every party affected by an antitrust violator's 
"ripples of harm."  McCready, 457 U.S. at 476-77. An anti-
trust plaintiff must establish an injury-in-fact or a threatened 
injury-in-fact caused by the defendant's alleged wrongdoing.  
See Associated Gen. Contractors of Cal., Inc. v. California 
State Council of Carpenters, 459 U.S. 519, 535 (1983).  More-
over, the injury must affect the plaintiff's business or proper-
ty and must be the kind of injury the antitrust laws were 
intended to prevent;  it must "flow[ ] from that which makes 
defendants' acts unlawful."  Brunswick Corp. v. Pueblo 
Bowl-O-Mat, Inc., 429 U.S. 477, 489 (1977).  Additional 
factors to be considered in determining whether the plaintiff 
has "antitrust standing" include:  the directness of the injury, 
whether the claim for damages is "speculative," the existence 
of more direct victims, the potential for duplicative recovery 
and the complexity of apportioning damages.  See Associated 
Gen. Contractors, 459 U.S. at 542-45;  see also Adams v. Pan 
Am. World Airways, Inc., 828 F.2d 24, 26 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  
We review the district court's decision dismissing Biovail's 
antitrust counterclaim with prejudice in light of these stand-
ing requirements.

     A.   Injury-in-Fact and Causation
          
     As in any civil action for damages, the plaintiff in a private 
antitrust lawsuit must show that the defendant's illegal con-
duct caused its injury.  See 2 Areeda et al., supra, p 338, at 
316;  see also Restatement (Second) of Torts ss 431, 433 
(1965). The plaintiff's first step is to plead an injury-in-fact or, 
in a suit for equitable relief, a threatened injury-in-fact to 
business or property.9  See Hecht v. Pro-Football, Inc., 570 

__________
     9 Section 4 of the Clayton Act authorizes a private suit only for 
injury to "business or property."  15 U.S.C. s 15;  see 2 Areeda et 

F.2d 982, 993 (D.C. Cir. 1977).  The "burden of proving the 
fact of damage under s 4 of the Clayton Act is satisfied by [ ] 
proof of some damage flowing from the unlawful conspiracy;  
inquiry beyond this minimum point goes only to the amount 
and not the fact of damage."  Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazel-
tine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100, 114 n.9 (1969) (emphasis 
original).  The district court held that Biovail not only failed 
to plead an injury or a threatened injury but also was unable 
to do so because Biovail had yet to receive FDA approval for 
its generic version of Cardizem CD and gave no assurance 
that it would have entered the market had it gained approval.  
Cf. Indium Corp. of Am. v. Semi-Alloys, Inc., 781 F.2d 879, 
882 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (because plaintiff was not prepared to 
enter market, defendant's conduct caused no injury).

     When competitors violate the antitrust laws and another 
competitor is forced from a market, the latter suffers an 
injury-in-fact.  A competitor that has not yet entered the 
market may also suffer injury but courts require a "potential" 
competitor to demonstrate both its intention to enter the 
market and its preparedness to do so.  See Hecht, 570 F.2d at 
987, 994 ("[A] potential competitor cannot achieve standing 
merely by demonstrating his intention to enter a field;  he 
must also demonstrate his preparedness to do so." (emphasis 
original));  see Indium Corp., 781 F.2d at 882 (no injury if 
plaintiff not prepared to enter market).  "Indicia of prepared-
ness include adequate background and experience in the new 
field, sufficient financial capability to enter it, and the taking 
of actual and substantial affirmative steps toward entry, 'such 
as the consummation of relevant contracts and procurement 
of necessary facilities and equipment.' "  Hecht, 570 F.2d at 
994 (footnote and citation omitted).  Thus, in evaluating 
whether Biovail sufficiently pleaded or can sufficiently plead 

__________
al., supra, p 336, at 303.  At the very least, "business or property" 
includes "commercial interests or enterprises."  Hawaii v. Stan-
dard Oil Co., 405 U.S. 251, 264 (1972).  In Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 
the Supreme Court noted that "the word 'property' has a naturally 
broad and inclusive meaning."  Id. at 338.  On appeal, the parties 
do not raise the issue of whether Biovail sufficiently alleged an 
injury to "business or property."

an injury or threatened injury, we must examine its intent 
and preparedness to enter the market from which it alleges it 
was excluded, that is, the Cardizem CD, or controlled-release 
dilitiazem-based drug, market.

     In the pharmaceutical industry, FDA approval is a prereq-
uisite to enter any drug market.  See 21 U.S.C. s 355(a) ("No 
person shall introduce or deliver for introduction into inter-
state commerce any new drug, unless an approval of an 
application filed pursuant to subsection (b) or (j) of this 
section is effective with respect to such drug.").  The district 
court concluded that Biovail suffered no injury as a result of 
the HMRI-Andrx Agreement "because even today, Biovail 
could not go to market with a generic version of Cardizem, 
because it had not received FDA approval."10  Andrx 
Pharm., 83 F. Supp. 2d at 186 (emphasis original).  The only 
facts Biovail alleged to support its claim of injury were that 
the Agreement "prevent[ed] generic Cardizem CD products 
by Biovail and others from reaching the market as soon as 
they would otherwise be allowed," JA 44 (p 19), and that 
Biovail had filed an ANDA for a generic version of Cardizem 
CD, JA 50 (p 41).  Biovail did not explicitly allege that it was 
prepared to bring a generic version of Cardizem CD to 
market or that it anticipated FDA approval.  In addition, 
when the FDA eventually approved its ANDA, Biovail inex-
plicably failed to inform the district court.  Based on Biovail's 
failure to plead sufficient intent and preparedness to enter 
the market, the district court dismissed Biovail's antitrust 
counterclaim.11  See Andrx Pharm., 83 F. Supp. 2d at 187.

__________
     10 By the time of the district court's decision, however, the FDA 
had approved Biovail's ANDA for its generic version of Cardizem 
CD although the court was not apprised of that development.

     11 The issues of injury-in-fact and causation are closely linked on 
this point. By not alleging facts indicating its intent and prepared-
ness to enter the Cardizem CD market, Biovail failed to allege both 
an injury (no loss of profits because not prepared to enter market) 
and causation (any damages not related to HMRI-Andrx Agree-
ment because Agreement did not cause loss of profits).

     The district court, however, went beyond dismissing the 
counterclaim based on the pleading's insufficiency.  It dis-
missed Biovail's antitrust counterclaim with prejudice.  In so 
doing it decided, as a matter of law, that Biovail was unable to 
set forth any set of facts that would entitle it to the relief it 
sought.  "[D]ismissal with prejudice should be granted only 
when a trial court determines that 'the allegation of other 
facts consistent with the challenged pleading could not possi-
bly cure the deficiency.' "  Jarrell v. United States Post. 
Serv., 753 F.2d 1088, 1091 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (quoting Bonnano 
v. Thomas, 309 F.2d 320, 322 (9th Cir. 1962)).  The district 
court did not conclude that Biovail did not intend to enter the 
market or that it was not sufficiently prepared to do so but 
instead that it had not sufficiently alleged its intent and 
capacity to enter the market.  See Andrx Pharm., Inc., 83 
F. Supp. 2d at 184-85. Its statement that the FDA had not 
yet approved Biovail's ANDA as of the date of its ruling was 
understandable in light of the parties' failure to inform the 
court to the contrary but the statement was nonetheless 
erroneous and not a ground to dismiss with prejudice.

     As its motion for reconsideration manifests, Biovail can 
allege facts sufficient to indicate its intent and preparedness. 
See JA 297, 300-02. And even before the FDA approved 
Biovail's ANDA, Biovail could have alleged its intent and 
preparedness to enter the market by claiming that FDA 
approval was probable. Andrx's original suit, which sought to 
enjoin the FDA from approving Biovail's ANDA, suggests 
that Biovail (or so Andrx believed) may have intended and 
been sufficiently prepared to enter the market.  See Zenith 
Radio, 395 U.S. at 130 ("[Section 16] authorizes injunctive 
relief upon the demonstration of 'threatened' injury. That 
remedy is characteristically available even though the plaintiff 
has not yet suffered actual injury;  he need only demonstrate 
a significant threat of injury from an impending violation of 
the antitrust laws or from a contemporary violation likely to 
continue or recur.") (citation and footnote omitted);  L.A. 
Mem'l Coliseum Comm'n v. National Football League, 468 
F. Supp. 154, 159 (C.D. Cal. 1979).  And unlike the plaintiffs 
in Confederate Memorial Association, Inc. v. Hines, 995 F.2d 

295 (D.C. Cir. 1993), where this court upheld the trial court's 
dismissal with prejudice of the plaintiffs' RICO claims be-
cause the plaintiffs failed to allude to facts "entitling them to 
recover," Biovail has (in its motion for reconsideration) allud-
ed to facts--FDA approval and intent to enter market--that 
may entitle it to relief.  Id. at 299;  cf. Askins v. District of 
Columbia, 877 F.2d 94, 99 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (dismissal with 
prejudice of unripe legal claim is legal error).  Because 
Biovail may be able to cure its pleading deficiency, we 
conclude that dismissal with prejudice was erroneously grant-
ed.

     Andrx responds, however, that an independent legal 
ground supports dismissal with prejudice.  It argues Biovail 
is unable to allege causation.  To sufficiently plead causation, 
a plaintiff must allege that the defendant violated the anti-
trust laws, that the defendant's alleged violation "had a 
tendency to injure" the plaintiff's business or property, Amer-
inet, Inc. v. Xerox Corp., 972 F.2d 1483, 1495 (8th Cir. 1992), 
and that the plaintiff suffered a decline in its business or 
property "not shown to be attributable to other causes."  
Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., 327 U.S. 251, 264 
(1945).  The Supreme Court has explained "[i]t is enough that 
the illegality is shown to be a material cause of the injury;  a 
plaintiff need not exhaust all possible alternative sources of 
injury in fulfilling his burden of proving compensable injury 
under [section 4 of the Clayton Act]."  Zenith Radio, 395 
U.S. at 114 n.9.

     The district court found that Biovail failed to establish the 
requisite causal connection between its injury and the alleged 
anticompetitive conduct.  It concluded that any injury Biovail 
may have suffered was caused not by the HMRI-Andrx 
Agreement but instead by the lack of FDA approval of its 
generic version of Cardizem CD and by the delay period 
prescribed by the Hatch-Waxman Amendments.  We dis-
agree.  Although we affirm the district court's dismissal to 
the extent Biovail failed to allege an injury-in-fact, we dis-
agree with its conclusion that any injury Biovail might plead 
would be caused by "the existence of a troublesome statutory 
scheme that prohibits it from marketing a drug until the first 
ANDA recipient goes to market, and which places no restric-
tions on when, or even whether, that applicant must to [sic] 

go to market."  Andrx Pharms., 83 F. Supp. 2d at 185.  We 
also reject Andrx's argument that any rational actor like itself 
would not market its generic drug until the patent infringe-
ment suit against it was resolved, making any loss of profits 
caused by Biovail's exclusion from the market a result of the 
statutory scheme, not Andrx's conduct.  A reasonable juror 
could conclude that Andrx's argument contradicts the very 
premise of the HMRI-Andrx Agreement.  Under the Agree-
ment, HMRI paid Andrx 10 million dollars per quarter effec-
tively not to enter the market.  One can fairly infer from 
these facts, which were alleged in the counterclaim, that but 
for the Agreement, Andrx would have entered the market.  
As one commentator has noted, "[a] payment flowing from 
the innovator to the challenging generic firm may suggest 
strongly the anticompetitive intent of the parties in entering 
the agreement and the rent-preserving effect of that agree-
ment."  Balto, supra, at 335.

     Andrx, however, argues that it "did nothing other than to 
act in accordance with rights granted to it under the Hatch-
Waxman [Amendments].  The exercise of these statutory 
rights, exclusionary though they may be, cannot support a 
claim under the antitrust laws."  Appellee Br. 31.  Andrx 
may be correct that "[a] plaintiff cannot be injured in fact by 
private conduct excluding him from the market when a stat-
ute prevents him from entering that market in any event."  
City of Pittsburgh v. West Penn Power Co., 147 F.3d 256, 268 
(3d Cir. 1998) (quoting Philip E. Areeda & Herbert Hoven-
kamp, Antitrust Law, p 363(b) at 222 (1995)).  Although the 
Hatch-Waxman Amendments provide a 180-day period of 
market exclusivity to the first applicant to file an ANDA for a 
generic version of a pioneer drug, see 21 U.S.C. 
s 355(j)(5)(B)(iv),12 through the Amendments, "Congress 
__________
     12 Section 355(j)(5)(B)(iv) provides:

     If the application contains a certification described in subclause 
     (IV) of paragraph (2)(A)(vii) and is for a drug for which a 
     previous application has been submitted under this subsection 
     continuing such a certification, the application shall be made 
     effective not earlier than one hundred and eighty days after--
     
sought to get generic drugs into the hands of patients at 
reasonable prices--fast."  In re Barr Lab., Inc., 930 F.2d 72, 
76 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  We disagree with Andrx that "its 
conduct was not only permitted under but clearly contemplat-
ed by the Hatch-Waxman" Amendments.  Appellee Br. 32.  
Although it is true that the first to file an ANDA is permitted 
to delay marketing as long as it likes, the statutory scheme 
does not envision the first applicant's agreeing with the 
patent holder of the pioneer drug to delay the start of the 
180-day exclusivity period.  See Mova Pharm., 140 F.3d at 
1072 (acknowledging and describing as anomaly fact situation 
here presented).13

     By accepting payments from HMRI, Andrx received the 
benefit of the 180-day exclusivity period without starting the 
clock.  By agreeing with HMRI to share HMRI's profits 
from the sale of Cardizem CD, it was able to exclude other 
competitors from entering the market.  Andrx's commitment 

__________
          (I) the date the Secretary receives notice from the applicant 
     under the previous application of the first commercial market-
     ing of the drug under the previous application, or
     
          (II) the date of a decision of a court in an action described in 
     clause (iii) holding the patent which is the subject of the 
     certification to be invalid or not infringed,
     whichever is earlier.
     
     13 The court stated in a footnote:

     An amicus brief filed by Biovail Corporation International 
     dramatically illustrates an analogous risk, not necessarily in-
     volving collusion.  Biovail was the second applicant to file a 
     paragraph IV ANDA for a generic version of a heart medi-
     cation. Biovail was not sued by the pioneer drug company.  
     The first applicant and the pioneer drug company are now in 
     litigation, and, Biovail claims, the pioneer is paying the first 
     applicant some $10 million per quarter in exchange for the first 
     applicant's agreement not to sell its product after the 30-month 
     waiting period expires.  Under these circumstances, neither 
     party would seem to have maximum incentive to bring the 
     litigation to a close.
     
Id. at 1072 n.14.

not to trigger the running of the 180-day exclusivity period 
could have caused Biovail's injury (assuming FDA approval 
was probable and it was sufficiently prepared to enter the 
market) by denying it the ability to proceed to market with 
its own generic version. Although the 180-day provision of 
the Hatch-Waxman Amendments legally barred it from sell-
ing its product, Andrx's manipulation of the exclusivity period 
trigger date extended the legal bar.

     Andrx maintains that the Agreement was not a restraint 
cognizable under the antitrust laws because, under the FDA 
regulations in effect at the time, it could not have caused the 
delay of FDA approval of Biovail's ANDA.  In September 
1997 (when the Agreement was signed) Andrx contends that 
the FDA regulations provided that the first ANDA applicant 
to file a Paragraph IV certification would not be granted a 
180-day exclusivity period unless it had "successfully defend-
ed" any patent infringement action brought by the patent 
holder "before a subsequent applicant's ANDA was ready to 
be approved."  Appellee Br. 37-38 (citing 21 C.F.R. 
s 314.107(c)(i) (1997)).  We rejected the FDA's "successful 
defense" regulation in Mova Pharm., 140 F.3d at 1076.  
Andrx argues that before the court invalidated the regulation, 
it could have done nothing to prolong its exclusivity period by 
delaying FDA approval of Biovail's ANDA because it was 
entitled to the exclusionary period only if it successfully 
defended the patent litigation before the FDA approved a 
subsequent applicant's ANDA.  Had the FDA approved Bio-
vail's ANDA, Andrx asserts, the Agreement would not have 
prevented Biovail from entering the market under the old 
regulation.

     We reject this argument.  On January 23, 1997 the district 
court in Mova issued a preliminary injunction against the 
FDA, holding that its "successful defense" regulation was 
inconsistent with the plain language of the statute and there-
fore unenforceable.  See Mova Pharm. Corp. v. Shalala, 955 
F. Supp. 128, 131-32 (D.D.C. 1997).  HMRI and Andrx did 
not enter into their agreement until September 1997, almost 
nine months after the court's ruling.  On April 14, 1998 this 
court affirmed the district court.  Mova, 140 F.3d at 1076.  

The Agreement did not go into effect until three months 
later, in July 1998.  The timing of the Agreement and of the 
demise of the successful defense requirement defeats Andrx's 
argument on this point.

     Andrx nevertheless relies on the holding in Polk Bros., Inc. 
v. Forest City Enters., Inc., 776 F.2d 185 (7th Cir. 1985).  In 
Polk Bros., two companies, one that sold appliances and home 
furnishings and the other that sold building materials, lum-
ber, tools and related products, reached an agreement to 
build on a large parcel of land one building, partitioned on the 
interior, to house both stores.  Id. at 187.  The arrangement 
was attractive to both firms due to the complementary nature 
of their products.  They feared, however, that one day com-
petition might replace cooperation so they negotiated a cove-
nant restricting the products each could sell.  Id.  Years later 
one of the firms wanted to sell certain products in violation of 
the covenant and challenged the covenant on antitrust 
grounds when the other firm sought to enforce it.  Id. at 187-
88.  Although the case arose under Illinois antitrust law, state 
law used federal antitrust law as a guide.  Id. at 188.  The 
Seventh Circuit upheld the validity of the covenant on the 
ground that, although "naked" restraints on trade are unlaw-
ful per se, ancillary restraints that facilitate productive activi-
ty are not.  The court provided the following example:

     If A hires B as a salesman and passes customer lists to 
     B, then B's reciprocal covenant not to compete with A is 
     "ancillary."  At the time A and B strike their bargain, 
     the enterprise (viewed as a whole) expands output and 
     competition by putting B to work.  The covenant not to 
     compete means that A may trust B with broader respon-
     sibilities, the better to compete against third parties.  
     Covenants of this type are evaluated under the Rule of 
     Reason as ancillary restraints, and unless they bring a 
     large market share under a single firm's control they are 
     lawful.  See United States v. Addyston Pipe & Steel Co., 
     85 F. 271, 280-83 (6th Cir. 1898) (Taft, J.), aff'd, 172 U.S. 
     211 (1899).
     
Id. at 189.  Thus even were we to adopt Andrx's characteriza-
tion of the Agreement as "designed to preserve the status 
quo by duplicating relief that the court could have ordered 
had HMR[I] proceeded with" its motion for a preliminary 
injunction in the patent infringement litigation, the Agree-
ment's allegedly anticompetitive provisions, including Andrx's 
pledge to continue to pursue its ANDA so as to forestall other 
applicants from receiving final FDA approval, were not neces-
sarily ancillary restraints but rather could reasonably be 
viewed as an attempt to allocate market share and preserve 
monopolistic conditions.

     Finally, Andrx contends that there were reasonable alter-
natives available to Biovail that could have avoided the exclu-
sionary effect of the Agreement by triggering the 180-day 
period.  Andrx relies on CBS Broad. Sys., Inc. v. ASCAP, 620 
F.2d 930, 935 (2d Cir. 1980), which held that "a practice that 
is not a per se violation ... does not restrain trade when the 
complaining consumer elects to use it in preference to realis-
tically available marketing alternatives."  There the court 
found that to avoid injury, the consumer plaintiff had only to 
do nothing "more extraordinary than offer to buy from com-
peting sellers."  Id. at 936.  Andrx argues that Biovail had 
two alternatives in lieu of waiting for Andrx to market its 
generic version of Cardizem CD. First, Biovail could have 
triggered the start of the 180-day exclusivity period itself 
under the "court decision" prong of the Hatch-Waxman 
Amendments, 21 U.S.C. s 355(j)(5)(B)(iv)(II), by seeking a 
declaratory judgment of non-infringement or invalidity of 
HMRI's patent.  The successful resolution (or dismissal) of 
the declaratory judgment action would have started the 180-
day exclusivity period.  See Teva Pharm. USA, Inc. v. FDA, 
182 F.3d 1003, 1007-08 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Alternatively, Bio-
vail could have petitioned the FDA to nullify Andrx's 180-day 
exclusivity period. FDA regulations provide that "if FDA 
concludes that the applicant submitting the first application is 
not actively pursuing approval of its abbreviated application, 
FDA will make the approval of subsequent abbreviated appli-
cations immediately effective if they are otherwise eligible for 

an immediately effective approval."  21 C.F.R. 
s 314.107(c)(3).

     The CBS holding is easily distinguishable;  the language on 
which Andrx relies appears in the context of determining 
whether an agreement determined not to be per se unlawful 
nonetheless restrains trade on the facts.  There the agree-
ment benefitted the consumer by bundling various music 
copyright licenses, relieving the consumer of having to negoti-
ate licenses with every individual artist.  Andrx has cited no 
consumer benefit here. Biovail could have sought a declarato-
ry judgment;  however, as evidenced by the HMRI-Andrx 
patent infringement litigation, the time involved to obtain 
such a judgment made this option less than "fully available."  
CBS, 620 F.2d at 935. Likewise, as long as Andrx was 
pursuing FDA approval, Biovail could not use 21 C.F.R. 
s 314.107(c)(3) to revoke the 180-day exclusivity period.  In-
deed, according to the HMRI-Andrx Agreement, Andrx was 
to continue to pursue approval, which prevented the FDA 
from denying it the 180-day exclusivity period.  Accordingly, 
we conclude the district court erred in dismissing with preju-
dice Biovail's counterclaim for failure to plead injury caused 
by Andrx's alleged unlawful restraint of trade.  See supra 
note 8.

     B.   Antitrust Injury
          
     "A private antitrust plaintiff does not acquire standing 
merely by showing that it was injured in a proximate and 
reasonably measurable way by conduct of the defendant 
violating the antitrust laws (injury-in-fact).  Nor is it enough 
that the injury be causally connected to the acts that violate 
the antitrust laws (causation)."  2 Areeda et al., supra, p 337a, 
at 305.  In Brunswick, the Supreme Court explained that 
"[p]laintiffs must [also] prove antitrust injury, which is to say 
injury of the type the antitrust laws were intended to prevent 
and that flows from that which makes defendants' acts unlaw-
ful."  429 U.S. at 489 (emphasis original).  "The injury should 
reflect the anticompetitive effect either of the violation or of 
anticompetitive acts made possible by the violation. It should, 
in short, be 'the type of loss that the claimed violations ... 

would be likely to cause.' "  Id. (quoting Zenith Radio, 395 
U.S. at 125).14  The Supreme Court has declared that the 
antitrust laws "were enacted for 'the protection of competi-
tion not competitors.' "  Id. at 488 (quoting Brown Shoe Co. 
v. United States, 370 U.S. 294, 320 (1962)) (emphasis original).  
Thus a competitor may not claim an injury resulting from 
competition even when such competition was actually caused 
by conduct that violates the antitrust laws.  See 2 Areeda et 
al., supra, p 337, at 306;  see also Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. 
v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 596 n.20 (1986) (competi-
tors suffer no harm from conspiracy to raise prices);  J. 
Truett Payne Co. v. Chrysler Motors Corp., 451 U.S. 557, 568 
(1981) (violation of antitrust laws not enough to confer stand-
ing).

     In asserting that Biovail cannot assert an antitrust injury, 
Andrx compares it to the Brunswick plaintiffs.  In Bruns-
wick, the plaintiffs, three bowling alleys, complained that the 
defendant's acquisition of several financially troubled bowling 
centers violated section 7 of the Clayton Act.  In seeking 
damages, the plaintiffs "attempted to show that had [the 
defendant] allowed the defaulting centers to close, [the plain-
tiffs'] profits would have increased."  Brunswick, 429 U.S. at 
481.  The Supreme Court held that even though the plaintiffs' 
injury--loss of profits--was caused by the defendant's poten-
tially unlawful acquisitions, the plaintiffs suffered no antitrust 
injury because the increased competition resulting from the 
defendant's purchase and operation of competing bowling 
alleys was not an injury antitrust laws were designed to 
prevent.  Id. at 488.  The Court explained that the plaintiffs' 
injury resulted from competitive, not anticompetitive, con-
duct.  Further, because the plaintiffs would have suffered the 
same injury had their rivals been lawfully acquired by some-

__________
     14 In a suit for equitable relief under section 16 of the Clayton 
Act, the plaintiff must also establish an antitrust injury, although 
the injury need only be threatened.  See Zenith Radio, 395 U.S. 130 
(section 16 "invokes traditional principles of equity and authorizes 
injunctive relief upon the demonstration of 'threatened' injury");  
see also Cargill, Inc. v. Monfort of Colo., Inc., 479 U.S. 104, 122 
(1986).

one else, their injury did not occur " 'by reason of anything 
forbidden in the antitrust laws':  while [plaintiffs'] loss oc-
curred 'by reason of' the unlawful acquisitions, it did not 
occur 'by reason of' that which made the acquisitions unlaw-
ful."  Id.  Unlike the Brunswick plaintiffs' injury, Biovail's 
alleged injury is the type the antitrust laws were designed to 
prevent.  If Biovail's allegations are correct, the Andrx-
HMRI Agreement neither enhanced competition nor benefit-
ted consumers;  if anything, it accomplished just the opposite 
by preserving HMRI's monopoly.  Moreover, Biovail alleged 
that its exclusion from the market occurred not only by 
reason of the unlawful Agreement but also by reason of that 
which made the Agreement unlawful, that is, an illegal re-
straint of trade.  See Brunswick, 429 U.S. at 488.

     Andrx next argues that it could have lawfully excluded 
Biovail from the Cardizem CD market by deciding, on its 
own, to delay marketing of its generic version of Cardizem 
CD and therefore Biovail's alleged injury does not constitute 
an antitrust injury.  It contends that because its underlying 
conduct was legal, the fact that it combined to act that way 
cannot give rise to an antitrust violation.  See ES Dev., Inc. v. 
RWM Enters., Inc., 939 F.2d 547, 553 (8th Cir. 1991) (explain-
ing that "[t]he evidence must also establish that the alleged 
participants combined or conspired to 'achieve an unlawful 
objective' ").  Under the Hatch-Waxman Amendments, 
Andrx was lawfully entitled to unilaterally delay marketing its 
product until the patent infringement claims against it were 
resolved. Although its unilateral decision not to market its 
generic version of Cardizem CD would have prevented others, 
including Biovail, from entering the market, the counterclaim 
alleges that Andrx entered into an anticompetitive agreement 
with HMRI in order to exclude others;  HMRI's ten million 
dollar quarterly payments were presumably in return for 
something that Andrx would not otherwise do, that is, delay 
marketing of its generic.  Andrx's argument that any rational 
actor would wait for resolution of the patent infringement suit 
is belied by the quid of HMRI's quo.  See 54 Fed. Reg. 
42,873, 42,882-83 ("[I]t can be mutually beneficial for the 
innovator and the generic company that is awarded 180 days 

of generic exclusivity to enter into agreements that block 
generic competition for extended periods.  This delayed com-
petition harms consumers by slowing the introduction of 
lower priced products into the market and thwarts the intent 
of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments.").15

     Antitrust law looks at entry into the market as one mecha-
nism to limit and deter exploitation of market power by those 
who may temporarily possess it.  "Existing firms know that if 
they collude or exercise market power to charge supracom-
petitive prices, entry by firms currently not competing in the 
market becomes likely, thereby increasing the pressure on 
them to act competitively."  FTC v. H.J. Heinz Co., 246 F.3d 
708, 717 n.13 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  The FDA acknowledges that 
"[u]nder current regulatory provisions, the first generic appli-
cant to file a substantially complete ANDA with a paragraph 
IV certification can delay generic competition by entering into 
certain commercial arrangements with an innovator compa-
ny."  64 Fed. Reg. 42,882.16  Such an arrangement can 

__________
     15 The statutorily granted monopoly of patent rights is similar.  
Like a drug's 180-day exclusive market period, a patent grant in 
and of itself is "an exception to the general rule against monopolies 
and to the right to a free and open market."  Walker Process 
Equip., Inc. v. Food Mach. & Chem. Corp., 382 U.S. 172, 177 (1965) 
(quoting Precision Instrument Mfg. Co. v. Automotive Mainte-
nance Mach. Co., 324 U.S. 806, 816 (1945)).  But even a patent-right 
holder is not immune from antitrust liability.  In United States v. 
Singer Mfg. Co., 374 U.S. 174 (1963), two competitors, Singer and 
Gegauf, entered into a cross-licensing agreement to settle a Patent 
Office interference proceeding involving their conflicting patent 
claims. Although Singer (like Andrx) had no obligation to pursue a 
patent grant and could have, on its own, withdrawn from the 
interference proceeding, it nevertheless acted unlawfully when it 
agreed with a competitor to settle the dispute, suppress information 
and exclude others from the market.  See id. at 196;  see also 
American Cyanimid Co., 72 F.T.C. 623 (1967), aff'd sub nom. 
Charles Pfizer & Co. v. FTC, 401 F.2d 574 (6th Cir. 1968) (Tetracy-
cline case).

     16 The FDA has proposed a "triggering period" during which 
there must exist either a favorable court decision regarding the 

manipulate the statutory grant of a monopoly to bar competi-
tive entries.  See Balto, supra, at 331 ("The competitive 
concern is that the 180-day exclusivity provision can be used 
strategically by a patent holder to prolong its market power 
in ways that go beyond the intent of the patent laws and the 
Hatch-Waxman Act by delaying generic entry for a substan-
tial period.").  Andrx argues that the Agreement merely 
preserved the status quo--in effect a stipulated preliminary 
injunction--until the conclusion of the patent infringement 
suit. When the court grants preliminary injunctive relief, 
however, it does so only after considering the public interest 
and the likelihood of success on the merits.  See Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Comm'n v. Holiday Tours, Inc., 559 
F.2d 841, 842-43 (D.C. Cir. 1977);  accord Serono Labs., Inc. 
v. Shalala, 158 F.3d 1313, 1317-18 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  CityFed 
Fin. Corp. v. Office of Thrift Supervision, 58 F.3d 738, 746-47 
(D.C. Cir. 1995).17  Moreover, even if Andrx's agreement to 
maintain the status quo was lawful, its commitment to contin-
ue to prosecute its ANDA and do nothing to jeopardize its 
180-day exclusivity period went beyond preserving the status 
quo.  "To be ancillary, and hence exempt from the per se 
rule, an agreement eliminating competition must be subor-

__________
alleged infringed patent or the first applicant must begin commer-
cial marketing.  If the first applicant does neither, it forfeits its 
180-day exclusivity period.  See 64 Fed. Reg. 42,877.  "In most 
cases, the triggering period would begin to run on the day a 
subsequent ANDA applicant with a paragraph IV certification 
receives a tentative approval stating that but for the first appli-
cant's exclusivity, the subsequent ANDA would receive final approv-
al."  Id.  The triggering period would also begin to run upon 
expiration of any 30-month stay in place.

     17 By contrast, a private agreement purporting to maintain the 
status quo may not be in the public interest or may have little 
likelihood of success on review.  See generally Sheila F. Anthony, 
Prepared Remarks before the ABA "Antitrust and Intellectual 
Property:  The Crossroads" Program, Riddles and Lessons from 
the Prescription Drug Wars:  Antitrust Implications of Certain 
Types of Agreements Involving Intellectual Property (June 1, 2000), 
available at www.ftc.gov/speeches/anthony/sfip000601.htm.

dinate and collateral to a separate, legitimate transaction....  
If [the restraint] is so broad that part of the restraint 
suppresses competition without creating efficiency, the re-
straint is, to that extent, not ancillary."  Rothery Storage & 
Van Co. v. Atlas Van Lines, Inc., 792 F.2d 210, 224 (D.C. Cir. 
1986). As Biovail has pleaded the facts, HMRI and Andrx 
combined to achieve an unlawful objective, namely, the exten-
sion of the exclusivity period granted under the Hatch-
Waxman Amendments.  Accordingly, we conclude that Bio-
vail can allege an antitrust injury, that is, one the antitrust 
laws were designed to prevent and that flows from that which 
makes the defendant's conduct unlawful.

     C.   Speculative Nature of Harm
          
     Standing may yet be denied if damages "rest[ ] at bottom 
on some abstract conception or speculative measure of harm."  
McCready, 457 U.S. at 475 n.11.  In Associated General 
Contractors, the Court denied standing because the plaintiff's 
damages claim was "highly speculative."  459 U.S. at 542;  
accord Adams, 828 F.2d at 30.  It noted that the plaintiff 
union did not allege (1) that any of its collective bargaining 
agreements were terminated as a result of the defendant's 
alleged anticompetitive acts, (2) that union firms' aggregate 
share of the contracting market had been diminished and (3) 
that its revenue from dues and initiation fees had decreased. 
On the other hand, in Bigelow, the Court held that the 
plaintiff's damages were not too speculative to support the 
jury's verdict of damages.  327 U.S. at 265.  There, the movie 
theater owner plaintiffs claimed that defendant distributors 
and affiliated movie theaters conspired to prevent the plain-
tiffs from obtaining movies for their theaters until after the 
defendant theaters had shown them.  Id. at 254.  The Court 
permitted the jury to consider evidence of decline in prices, 
profits and values not shown to be attributable to other 
causes to calculate the quantum of damage caused by the 
defendants' unlawful acts.  Id. at 264.

     We find Biovail's damages claim, assuming it can plead its 
intent and preparedness to enter the market, more like that 
in Bigelow than in Associated General Contractors.  Accord-

ing to its counterclaim, Biovail was not an inexperienced 
newcomer;  it already manufactured generic pharmaceuticals. 
It had already developed its product and, once FDA gave 
tentative approval to its ANDA, was simply waiting out 
Andrx's 180-day exclusivity period.18  Although damages may 
be difficult to quantify, "[t]he most elementary conceptions of 
justice and public policy require that the wrongdoer shall 
bear the risk of the uncertainty which his own wrong has 
created."  Bigelow, 327 U.S. at 265;  see Story Parchment Co. 
v. Paterson Parchment Paper Co., 282 U.S. 555, 562 (1931).  
Biovail may ultimately fail to establish the amount of dam-
ages beyond a nominal amount, see Associated Gen. Contrac-
tors, 459 U.S. at 544-45, but Biovail could continue to seek (if 
not moot) injunctive relief.  See Blue Cross & Blue Shield of 
Wis. v. Marshfield Clinic, 152 F.3d 588, 595 (7th Cir. 1998).19

__________
     18 Biovail received tentative approval in October 1999. On Novem-
ber 5, 1999 Andrx petitioned for reconsideration and for a stay of 
the FDA's tentative approval.  The parties dispute the effect of the 
petition on the timing of Biovail's final approval on December 23, 
1999.  Even if Biovail's damages period were relatively short, 
Biovail would nevertheless be able to seek recovery.  Moreover, 
"[d]ifficulty of ascertainment [should not be] confused with right of 
recovery."  McCready, 457 U.S. at 475 n.11 (quoting Bigelow, 327 
U.S. at 265).

     19 Antitrust standing also requires proximity between the alleged 
cause and the alleged injury.  See Associated Gen. Contractors, 459 
U.S. at 540;  McCready, 457 U.S. at 476-77 (" '[D]espite the broad 
wording of s 4 there is a point beyond which the wrongdoer should 
not be held liable.' " (citation omitted));  2 Areeda et al., supra, 
p 339, at 325-26.  In evaluating whether an injury is too remote, 
"we look (1) to the physical and economic nexus between the alleged 
violation and the harm to the plaintiff, and (2), more particularly, to 
the relationship of the injury alleged with those forms of injury 
about which Congress was likely to have been concerned in making 
defendant's conduct unlawful and in providing a private remedy 
under s 4."  McCready, 457 U.S. at 478;  see In re Multidistrict 
Vehicle Air Pollution M.D.L., 481 F.2d 122, 129 (9th Cir. 1973).  In 
McCready, the Supreme Court held that health insurance subscrib-
ers had standing to sue their insurance company for colluding with 
physicians and psychiatrists to deny them reimbursement for pay-

     D.   Existence of More Appropriate Plaintiff
          
     In evaluating standing, courts also consider whether there 
exists a more directly injured plaintiff to vindicate the public 
interest.  See Associated Gen. Contractors, 459 U.S. at 544.  
"Inferiority" to another plaintiff does not necessitate that we 
deny standing but it is a relevant factor.  See 2 Areeda et al., 
supra, p 339, at 332.  We are more likely to find no standing 
if the plaintiff's injury both derives from and is measured by 
another's more direct injury.  See Adams, 828 F.2d at 30-31 
(existence of superior plaintiffs--employer airline as well as 
consumers of transatlantic air transportation--militated 
against employees' standing).  Additionally, lack of standing 
is more likely as layers of superior plaintiffs increase.  See 2 
Areeda et al., supra, p 339, at 332.

     The district court held that "[t]hose most directly affected 
by [Andrx's] violation would be the consumers faced to pay 
artificially high prices for Cardizem."  Andrx Pharm., 83 
F. Supp. 2d at 186.  It reasoned that "[i]f Andrx's activity 
violates the antitrust laws, it is because it is keeping others 
out of the market and thereby maintaining artificially high 
costs for generic drugs."  Id.  But Biovail's alleged injury is 
not derived from or measured by the injury to consumers;  
instead it is measured by the loss of profits it would have 
otherwise made had it not been excluded from the market.  
See Story Parchment, 282 U.S. at 562-64;  Eastman Kodak 
Co. v. Southern Photo Co., 273 U.S. 359, 378-79 (1927).  

__________
ments made to psychologists.  The Court acknowledged that while 
the psychologists (not the patients) were the targets of the conspir-
acy, standing "cannot reasonably be restricted to those competitors 
whom the conspirators hoped to eliminate from the market."  
McCready, 457 U.S. at 479. It thus affirmed the subscribers' 
standing.  Applying the same reasoning, we conclude that Biovail's 
alleged injury is "so integral an aspect" of the alleged anticompeti-
tive behavior, "there can be no question but that the loss was 
precisely 'the type of loss that the claimed violations ... would be 
likely to cause.' "  Id. (quoting Brunswick, 429 U.S. at 489).  When 
a competitor is excluded from a market by the collusive acts of its 
rivals, its loss of profits is directly caused by that anticompetitive 
behavior.

Biovail does not seek damages for profits it would have 
earned at higher, less competitive prices.  See, e.g., Atlantic 
Richfield Co. v. USA Petroleum Co., 495 U.S. 328, 337 (1990);  
Brunswick, 429 U.S. at 487-89.  It seeks damages to compen-
sate for profits it would have earned by competing in the 
market.  Irrespective of consumer injury, an excluded com-
petitor like Biovail suffers a distinct injury if it is prevented 
from selling its product.  "[A] rival has clear standing to 
challenge the conduct of rival(s) that is illegal precisely 
because it tends to exclude competitors from the market."  2 
Areeda et al., supra, p 348, at 387.  Unlike the "high probabil-
ity of substantial overlap" the Adams court found between 
the injury the plaintiffs there alleged (employees' lost jobs 
and lower wages) and those of more direct victims (company's 
loss of profits and transatlantic passengers' increased airfare), 
Biovail's alleged injury is not measured by or derived from 
consumer plaintiffs.  Adams, 828 F.2d at 30 n.12.  And to the 
extent Biovail seeks injunctive relief, its standing is plainly 
not derivative.

     E.   Duplicative Recovery and Complex Apportionment of 
          Damages
          
     In Illinois Brick Co. v. Illinois, 431 U.S. 720 (1977), the 
Supreme Court held that antitrust suits brought by indirect 
purchasers increased both the risk of multiple recoveries and 
the difficulty of apportionment of damages.  The Court ex-
plained that in addition to adding complexity to the case, 
apportionment pares the direct purchasers' recovery, thereby 
diminishing their incentive to bring treble damage actions 
under section 4 of the Clayton Act.  Id. at 737-47;  see 
McCready, 457 U.S. at 475 n.11.

     The district court concluded that the existence of both 
consumer suits and Biovail's own suit against HMRI raised 
"the potential here for duplicative recoveries and inconsistent 
holdings."  Id.  As we have explained, however, Biovail's 
injuries are neither derived from nor measured by injuries 
consumers may have suffered.  Any injury to consumers 
would result from paying a supracompetitive price for Cardiz-
em CD. Biovail's injury, on the other hand, is the result of 

foregone profits, i.e., the difference between the competitive 
market price it would have charged had it been in the market 
and its total costs.  See Eastman Kodak, 273 U.S. at 378-79.  
Moreover, Biovail has settled its suit with HMRI.  See Bio-
vail Corp. Int'l v. Aktiengesellschaft, Civ. No. 98-1434 (D.N.J. 
Jan. 31, 2001).20

     F.   Noerr-Pennington Doctrine
          
     Having concluded that dismissal with prejudice was errone-
ously granted, we must consider Andrx's claim that the 
Agreement is litigation-related conduct exempted from anti-
trust liability by the Noerr-Pennington doctrine.  The Noerr-
Pennington doctrine insulates from antitrust challenge com-
petitors' decision to combine to petition the government, even 
if their underlying intention is to restrain competition or gain 
advantage over competitors.  See United Mine Workers of 
Am. v. Pennington, 381 U.S. 657, 670 (1965);  see also City of 
Columbia v. Omni Outdoor Adver., Inc., 499 U.S. 365, 379-80 
(1991) ("The federal antitrust laws also do not regulate the 
conduct of private individuals in seeking anticompetitive ac-
tion from the government.").  The doctrine is rooted in First 
Amendment law and "rests ultimately upon a recognition that 
the antitrust laws, 'tailored as they are for the business world, 
are not at all appropriate for application in the political 
arena.' "  Omni, 499 U.S. at 380 (citation omitted).21

__________
     20 Moreover, the Federal Trade Commission has withdrawn its 
complaint against HMRI and Andrx and entered into consent 
agreements with both manufacturers prospectively barring them 
from entering into certain anticompetitive agreements and requir-
ing that future interim settlements of patent litigation be approved 
by the court with notice to the Commission.  See 66 Fed. Reg. 
18,636 (proposed consent decree).

     21 The doctrine derives its name from two Supreme Court deci-
sions.  The first, Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v. Noerr 
Motor Freight, Inc., 365 U.S. 127 (1961), held that the antitrust laws 
do not apply to conduct resulting from valid government actions. 
The Supreme Court held that attempts by railroads to influence 
legislation designed to restrict competition from the trucking indus-
try were exempt from antitrust liability.  The Court remarked, "no 

     In California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited, 
the Court extended the right to petition all departments of 
the government, including the "courts, the third branch of 
Government."  404 U.S. 508, 510 (1972)  ("The right of access 
to the courts is indeed but one aspect of the right of peti-
tion.").  Whether conduct falls with "[t]he scope of this pro-
tection depends, however, on the source, context, and nature 
of the anticompetitive restraint at issue."  Allied Tube & 
Conduit Corp. v. Indian Head, Inc., 486 U.S. 492, 499 (1988).  
If anticompetitive harm is caused by the decision of a court, 
even though granted at the request of a private party, no 
private restraint of trade occurs because the intervening 
government action breaks the causal chain.  See 1 Phillip 
Areeda & Herbert Hovenkamp, Antitrust Law p 202c, at 159-
62 (2d ed. 2000).

     Andrx argues that its Agreement should receive the same 
protection as threatened litigation or an offer of settlement.  
See, e.g., Coastal States Mktg., Inc. v. Hunt, 694 F.2d 1358, 
1367 (5th Cir. 1983) (extending doctrine to cover activities not 
necessarily part of petitioning process, but reasonably inci-
dent or normally attendant to it, e.g., genuine litigation 
threat);  McGuire Oil Co. v. Mapco, Inc., 958 F.2d 1552, 1560 
(11th Cir. 1992) (same).22  We disagree.  Although certain 

__________
violation of the [Sherman] Act can be predicated upon mere at-
tempts to influence the passage or enforcement of laws."  Id. at 
135.  The Court came to the same conclusion in Pennington, 381 
U.S. 657 (1965).  There, mine operators and workers petitioned the 
Executive Branch to induce the Tennessee Valley Authority to 
curtail spot market purchases and to increase minimum wages.  
The Court explained that "[j]oint efforts to influence public officials 
do not violate the antitrust laws even though intended to eliminate 
competition.  Such conduct is not illegal, either standing alone or as 
a part of a broader scheme itself violative of the Sherman Act."  Id. 
at 670.

     22 See also 1 Areeda & Hovenkamp, supra, p 205e, at 238 ("Most 
lawsuits are prefaced by various communications, such as demand 
letters that expressly or impliedly threaten suit unless the address-
ee alters its conduct or provides other relief.  Such prelitigation 
communications provide useful notice and facilitate the resolution of 

litigation conduct is protected under the doctrine, it does not 
extend to the HMRI-Andrx Agreement.  See California Mo-
tor Transp., 404 U.S. at 512-13 (examples of unprotected 
litigation conduct include perjury by witnesses and fraudu-
lently obtained patent);  cf. Omni, 499 U.S. at 380 ("sham" 
petitioning such as filing frivolous objections to license appli-
cation of a competitor to impose expense and delay not 
protected).  In In re Cardizem CD Antitrust Litigation, 105 
F. Supp. 2d 618, the district court found the alleged anticom-
petitive harm stemming from the Agreement separate from 
any anticompetitive effects that may have resulted from 
resolution of the HMRI patent infringement suit.  The harm, 
the court declared, was not the result of a court decision.  
"Rather, it is the result of purely private conduct and thus 
constitutes a private restraint of trade subject to liability 
under the antitrust laws."  Id. at 635;  see also In re Brand 
Name Prescription Drugs Antitrust Litig., 186 F.3d 781, 789 
(7th Cir. 1999) ("[T]he doctrine does not authorize anticom-
petitive action in advance of government's adopting the in-
dustry's anticompetitive proposal.  The doctrine applies when 
such action is the consequence of legislation or other govern-
mental action, not when it is the means for obtaining such 
action (or in this case inaction)." (emphasis original)).  The 
Agreement is not unlike a final, private settlement agreement 
resolving the patent infringement litigation by substituting a 
market allocation agreement. Such a settlement agreement 
would not enjoy Noerr-Pennington immunity and neither 
does the Agreement here.

                          IV. Conclusion

     In sum, although the district court correctly dismissed 
Biovail's antitrust counterclaim for failure to sufficiently al-
lege injury caused by the HMRI-Andrx Agreement, it should 
have granted the dismissal without prejudice to allow Biovail 
the opportunity to replead.  Accordingly, appeal No. 00-5050 

__________
controversies.  It would be foolish to adopt antitrust rules encour-
aging suit before communication by penalizing the communication 
but not the suit.").

is remanded to the district court for proceedings not inconsis-
tent with this opinion.  In light of our holding, we dismiss as 
moot appeal No. 00-5396.

                                                            So ordered.

                                                                          