                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 8, 2002    Decided April 9, 2002 

                           No. 00-1092

            Sithe/Independence Power Partners, L.P., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

   Public Service Commission of the State of New York, et al., 
                           Intervenors

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Richard P. Bress argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were David L. Schwartz and Minh N. Vu.

     Beth G. Pacella, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 

the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, Acting General Counsel, 
and Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Elias G. Farrah, Rebecca J. Michael and Arnold H. Quint 
were on the brief for intervenors New York Independent 
System Operator, Inc. and New York Transmission Owners.

     Before:  Edwards and Sentelle, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  Sithe petitions for re-
view of two orders by the Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission, one conditionally accepting a proposal to restructure 
wholesale electricity sales and transmission services in New 
York State, the second denying Sithe's application for rehear-
ing.  Because FERC failed to explain adequately its decision 
to depart from its longstanding cost-causation principle in 
approving a component of the proposal, we grant Sithe's 
petition for review in part.

                                I.

     Sithe describes itself as a non-utility generator that owns 
and operates an electric generation facility in New York.  Its 
facility interconnects with the utility Niagara Mohawk Power 
Corporation's transmission system.  Petitioner sells energy, 
on a wholesale basis, to Niagara and Consolidated Edison 
Company of New York, Inc. under privately negotiated power 
purchase agreements.  Sithe challenges the Commission's 
approval of new tariff provisions governing charges for so-
called transmission losses.  In Order 888,1 FERC generally 

__________
     1  Promoting Wholesale Competition Through Open Access 
Non-Discriminatory Transmission Servs. by Pub. Utils.;  Recov-
ery of Stranded Costs by Pub. Utils. & Transmitting Utils., Order 
No. 888, FERC Stats & Regs. p 31,036 (1996), order on reh'g, Order 
No. 888-A, FERC Stats & Regs. p 31,048, order on reh'g, Order 
888-B, 81 FERC p 61,248 (1997), order on reh'g, Order No. 888-C, 
82 FERC p 61,046 (1998), affirmed in relevant part, remanded in 
part on other grounds sub nom. Transmission Access Policy Study 

required each public utility to file tariffs for open access 
transmission services to remedy undue discrimination in ac-
cess to their monopoly-owned transmission wires and re-
quired certain power pools, including the New York Power 
Pool (comprising eight utilities, including Niagra and Con Ed, 
referred to as the "Member Systems"), to file reformed 
pooling agreements by December 31, 1996.  Under the Order, 
open access transmission tariffs were to contain at least 
equivalent terms and conditions for non-discriminatory ser-
vice to those set out in a Commission-prescribed pro forma 
tariff.  It also encouraged the formation of independent sys-
tem operators (ISOs) to administer transmission services and 
new markets for wholesale electricity transactions.  These 
ISOs were to adopt transmission (and ancillary services) 
pricing policies to promote the efficient use of, and invest-
ment in, generation, transmission, and consumption.  In re-
sponse, the Member Systems filed a proposal to replace the 
existing New York power pool structure with a newly created 
ISO:  the New York Independent System Operator.  Accord-
ing to the proposal, the NYISO would be an independent, 
non-profit administrator of transmission services and of the 
new markets for wholesale electricity transactions in New 
York--the accompanying tariff was intended to provide a 
single open access tariff over the entire New York State 
transmission system.

     This case involves the propriety of the Member Systems' 
proposed transmission services pricing, specifically the pric-
ing for transmission losses.  Transmission losses refer to the 
amount of electric energy lost when electricity flows across a 
transmission system:  it is a function of the square of the 
amount of the current flowing on the wire and of the resis-
tance it encounters.  In general, the current on a given 
transmission line remains a constant, and the loss associated 
with a single transmission of electricity is primarily a function 
of the distance the electricity is transmitted.  Northern 
States Power Co. (Minn) v. FERC, 30 F.3d 177, 179-80 (D.C. 

__________
Group v. FERC, 225 F.3d 667 (D.C. Cir. 2000), aff'd sub nom. New 
York v. FERC, 122 S. Ct. 1012 (2002).

Cir. 1994).  Utilities (who control the transmission lines) must 
deliver to the electricity customer the entire amount contract-
ed for, regardless of the inevitable loss, so a transmission 
customer (an entity such as Sithe who pays a utility to 
transmit electricity across its lines) generally compensates a 
utility for lost energy either by providing more energy at the 
injection point than the electricity customer receives at the 
withdrawal point, or by providing energy in-kind to the 
transmitting utility.

     The Member Systems propose tariffs that would charge 
transmission customers for transmission losses predicted on a 
"locational based marginal pricing" (LBMP) method, which 
would take into account costs imposed by congestion on the 
system.  As its name implies, the methodology has both a 
marginal and a locational element.  We gather from the 
parties' submissions that it predicts costs taking into account 
location, because the efficiency of a given electricity with-
drawal or injection location may depend on the relative 
crowdedness of a transmission route at that time.  It also 
projects costs on the margin, meaning that it takes into 
account how much electricity is already on the system when 
an additional unit is added, because the more electricity on 
the system at a given time the higher the costs.  For 
example, in the event of ten consecutive transactions each 
adding one unit of electricity to the system, the tenth transac-
tion imposes a greater cost than the first additional unit.  The 
parties do not make clear whether the LBMP method also 
includes traditional cost factors such as the distance load 
traveled.  Previously, losses had been calculated using either 
a "rolled-in" rate or through modeling techniques that allocat-
ed charges to each transmission customer based on average 
(or approximate) system-wide costs imposed by the addition 
of load.  When utilities allocated losses through a "rolled-in" 
average system transmission loss factor, system-wide losses 
were divided pro rata, and each customer paid a standard, 
per-unit amount.  Similarly, utilities have previously allocated 
losses based on their transmission customers' incremental 
usage, using load flow models and prioritization systems to 
approximate the marginal losses caused by each transmission 
customer.  The Member Systems asserted that their pro-

posed LBMP-based tariff would be an improvement.  It 
would send efficient price signals to market participants 
because it could calculate the actual marginal losses transmis-
sion customers impose on the system.

     But in its tariff, the Member Systems did not propose to 
rely on a straight LBMP methodology;  instead, they added a 
"simplifying assumption" that is the crux of this case.  Every 
Mwh of energy injected into the system is treated as the 
"last" Mwh of energy on the system, and therefore this 
assumption would lead to the systematic overcollection of the 
amount of revenue needed to offset the transmission system's 
actual losses.  The record indicates that the overcollection 
would be as high as 31%.  The Member Systems proposed 
using the excess amounts to offset the NYISO's Scheduling, 
System Control and Dispatch Service charge (the "Scheduling 
Charge"), before allocating such costs among transmission 
customers.  Generally, the total Scheduling Charge paid by a 
particular transmission customer is the product of the Sched-
uling Charge rate and the amount of power withdrawn by the 
customer from the system.  That rate equals the NYISO's 
monthly overhead and other costs and expenses, minus cer-
tain credits such as overcollections for transmission losses, 
divided by the total number of billing units in the system.  
The Member Systems proposed to provide a sort of indirect 
refund of overcollections to those transmission customers 
subject to the Scheduling Charge.  Unfortunately, as dis-
cussed below, FERC has never established that each entity 
that would be overcharged by the LBMP methodology is 
subject to and would benefit from a reduced Scheduling 
Charge.

     In relevant part, FERC conditionally accepted the Member 
Systems' proposal;  summarily rejected Sithe's objections to 
the proposed treatment of transmission losses;  and set re-
maining issues for hearing.  Sithe petitioned for rehearing, 
which the Commission denied.

                               II.

     Petitioner challenges as arbitrary and capricious both 
FERC's approval of the LBMP methodology--with its simpli-

fying assumption--as well as the agency's endorsement of the 
proposed refund mechanism.  FERC disputes our jurisdiction 
over the first issue;  section 313(b) of the Federal Power Act, 
16 U.S.C. s 825l(b), provides that "[n]o objection to the order 
of the Commission shall be considered by the court unless 
such an objection shall have been urged before the Commis-
sion in the application for rehearing unless there is a reason-
able ground for failure to do so."

     And in its rehearing request, Sithe made the following 
statement:

     Sithe does not seek rehearing of the Commission's deter-
     mination that the ISO may charge for losses using a 
     marginal methodology.  However, Sithe requests that 
     the Commission reconsider its decision permitting the 
     ISO to re-allocate to all loads (through the Scheduling 
     charge) the amount of revenue that the ISO admittedly 
     overcharged customers for transmission losses.  (Em-
     phasis added.)
     
Sithe, rather unpersuasively, contends that its statement 
below should be construed as not challenging the concept of 
"a" LBMP charge but as raising a challenge to this particular 
application of the methodology.  Nice try--but no cigar.  
Although the record provides some indication that Sithe was 
unhappy with the simplifying assumption (for example, it 
submitted expert testimony as to different methodologies for 
assessing transmission loss costs), it is also clear that Sithe 
limited its challenge to the refund mechanism.

     On the other hand, FERC reads Sithe's waiver too broadly.  
The Commission would have us accept for purposes of this 
case the LBMP methodology with the simplifying assumption 
as if it were graven in stone, and therefore in judging its 
response to Sithe's objection to the refund mechanism that 
methodology must be regarded as sacrosanct.  But although 
its challenge was directed to the refund mechanism, petition-
er did clearly say that "[u]ntil [the member systems] can 
deliver a means of assessing losses on a marginal basis that 
permits refunds of overcharges to the customer that over-
pays, the Commission should reject [the] proposal."  Al-

though Sithe ostensibly has grabbed hold only of the tariff's 
tail, the tariff cannot go forward so long as petitioner's legal 
hold on its tail is sufficient.  And FERC cannot justify a 
perfunctory response to petitioner's refund complaint on 
grounds that the basic tariff methodology justifies it.

     It will be recalled that the proposed refund mechanism 
would reduce the Scheduling Charge for transmission custom-
ers.  Sithe objects on two grounds.  It contends that it does 
not even pay a Scheduling Charge because that charge is not 
imposed on transmission customers, such as itself, that 
"schedule" wholesale bilateral transactions within New York 
State and do not serve end-use consumers.  The Commis-
sion's counsel thought otherwise but could point to nothing in 
the record to support her belief.

     Assuming arguendo that Sithe is correct, it would be part 
of a class of transmission customers who have been over-
charged for transmission losses.  The Federal Power Act 
provides that a utility may not charge rates that "make or 
grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or 
subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage."  
16 U.S.C. s 824d(b);  see also Electricity Consumers Re-
source Council v. FERC ("ECRC"), 747 F.2d 1511 (D.C. Cir. 
1984) (remanding a marginal rate scheme that resulted in 
cross-subsidization of certain customers by other customers).  
Similarly, under section 205(a) of the Federal Power Act, a 
utility may charge only rates that are "just and reasonable."  
16 U.S.C. s 824d(a).2 Interpreting that mandate, we have 

__________
     2  When assessing whether rate tariffs are just and reasonable, 
we apply a standard akin to the APA's substantial evidence inquiry, 
ECRC, 747 F.2d at 1513, which is a subset of the APA's arbitrary 
and capricious standard.  Memorial Hospital/Adair County Health 
Ctr., Inc. v. Bowen, 829 F.2d 111, 116-17 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  Similar-
ly, approval of an unreasonable rate is arbitrary and capricious.  
MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. FCC, 842 F.3d 1296, 1303-04 
(D.C. Cir. 1988).  Arbitrary and capricious simply means unreason-
able.  Detroit Typographical Union No. 18 v. NLRB, 216 F.2d 109, 
118 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  Association of Data Processing Serv. Orgs., 
Inc. v. Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 745 F.2d 677, 
684 (D.C. Cir. 1984).

explained that such rates "should be based on the costs of 
providing service to the utility's customers, plus a just and 
fair return on equity."  Alabama Elec. Coop. v. FERC, 684 
F.2d 20, 27 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  We have consistently upheld 
rates based on such a cost-causation principle, see, e.g., id.; 
K N Energy, Inc. v. FERC, 968 F.2d 1295, 1300 (D.C. Cir. 
1992).

     Even if Sithe gains some benefit from the refund mecha-
nism, it also claims that it would be entitled to a refund that 
is equivalent to the amount it has been overcharged.  
FERC's response in its order on rehearing was merely that 
the tariffs and refund mechanism produced "efficient price 
signals," and that petitioner's requested refunds would some-
how disrupt that price signaling, would be "infeasible," and a 
matter of "unending controversy."  To be sure, we have 
acknowledged that feasibility concerns play a role in approv-
ing rates, indicating that FERC is not bound to reject any 
rate mechanism that tracks the cost-causation principle less 
than perfectly, see, e.g., Tejas Power Corp. v. FERC, 908 F.2d 
998, 1005 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  But the Commission's cursory 
response simply will not do.  At no point did the Commission 
explain how these considerations applied.  Why, we wonder, 
would a different method of refunds, based more closely on 
cost-causation principles, jeopardize desirable price signaling 
or be infeasible?

     It may well be that the Commission's refusal to consider 
petitioner's refund proposal is really attributed to a desire to 
protect the simplifying assumption.  It could be thought that 
a more precise refund mechanism--matching the refunds to 
overpayments--would render the simplifying assumption use-
less.  But we do not see how the Commission can justify its 
refusal to insist on equitable refunds, based on its approval of 
a presumably discriminatory tariff, just because petitioner 
challenged squarely only the refund mechanism.  If FERC's 
position were to be that the refund mechanism is inextricably 
intertwined with the simplifying assumption, then petitioner's 
challenge to the refund mechanism would perforce question 
the simplifying assumption.

                             * * * *

     Accordingly, the petition for review is granted in part and 
we remand the case to the Commission to more adequately 
respond to petitioner's contentions.

                                                             So ordered.

                                                                     