                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 19, 2002    Decided January 21, 2003 

                           No. 01-1381

                 Florida Municipal Power Agency, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

                 Florida Power & Light Company, 
                            Intervenor

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Robert A. Jablon argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Daniel I. Davidson.

     Judith A. Albert, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 

the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Clifford (Mike) Naeve was on the brief for intervenor.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Granted access to Florida Power & 
Light's electricity transmission lines for the purpose of estab-
lishing network transmission service, Petitioner Florida Mu-
nicipal Power Agency challenges three decisions of the Feder-
al Energy Regulatory Commission rejecting its request for 
pricing credits.  Finding the Commission's decisions sup-
ported by substantial evidence and neither arbitrary nor 
capricious, we deny the petition.

                                I.

     After determining that utilities were discriminatorily deny-
ing power suppliers access to electricity transmission lines, 
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission issued Order 
No. 888 requiring public utilities that own, control, or operate 
transmission facilities to file open access tariffs under which 
they agree to provide non-discriminatory access to their 
transmission networks in addition to the point-to-point service 
they had been offering.  Promoting Wholesale Competition 
Through Open Access Non-Discriminatory Transmission 
Services by Public Utilities;  Recovery of Stranded Costs by 
Public Utilities and Transmitting Utilities, Order No. 888, 
F.E.R.C. Stats. & Regs.  p 31,036, 61 Fed. Reg. 21540, 21541 
(1996), clarified, 76 F.E.R.C. p 61,009 and 76 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,347 (1996), modified, Order No. 888-A, F.E.R.C. Stats. & 
Regs. p 31,048, 62 Fed. Reg. 12,274 (1997), order on reh'g, 
Order No. 888-B, 81 F.E.R.C. p 61,248, 62 Fed. Reg. 64,688 
(1997), order on reh'g, Order No. 888-C, 82 F.E.R.C. p 61,046 
(1998), aff'd Transmission Access Policy Study Group v. 
FERC, 225 F.3d 667 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (per curiam) ("TAPS"), 
aff'd, New York v. FERC, 535 U.S. 1 (2002).  In point-to-point 
transmission service, utilities pay for energy transmission 
from designated points of receipt to designated points of 

delivery.  TAPS, 225 F.3d at 725 n.12.  As Order No. 888 
explains, however, "[n]etwork service allows more flexibility 
by allowing a transmission customer to use the entire trans-
mission network to provide generation service for specified 
resources and specified loads without having to pay multiple 
charges for each resource-load pairing."  Order No. 888, 61 
Fed. Reg. at 21,547 n.65.  Thus, unlike point-to-point service, 
network service permits a utility using another utility's trans-
mission lines "to fully integrate load [(the total demand for 
service on a utility system)] and resources on an instantane-
ous basis in a manner similar to the transmission owner's 
integration of its own load and resources."  Id. at 21,547.

     Three additional features of Order No. 888 are relevant to 
this case.  First, the order requires load ratio pricing for 
network transmission service, a form of transmission that 
"provides the customer with the same full system ability for 
transmitting power as the transmission owner."  TAPS, 225 
F.3d at 725.  "Under load ratio pricing, the costs of the 
transmission system are allocated on the basis of the ratio of 
the network customer's load to the transmission provider's 
entire load on its transmission system."  Respondent's Br. at 
7.

     The second relevant principle from Order No. 888 respond-
ed to arguments made by utility customers (like Petitioner 
Florida Municipal Power Agency (FMPA)) that because some 
customers sell power in a way that does not bear on network 
resources--known as behind-the-meter generation--load ra-
tio pricing's use of total load for determining a customer's 
rate might require payment for unneeded network transmis-
sion.  TAPS, 225 F.3d at 725-26.  These transmission cus-
tomers thought they should therefore receive pricing credits 
for all behind-the-meter facilities.  Id.  FERC agreed in part.  
Although holding that customers were entitled to pricing 
credits for facilities "integrated" into the transmission net-
work, the Commission cautioned that "[t]he fact that a trans-
mission customer's facilities may be interconnected with a 
transmission provider's system does not prove that the two 
systems comprise an integrated whole such that the transmis-
sion provider is able to provide transmission service to itself 

or other transmission customers over those facilities--a key 
requirement of integration."  Order No. 888, 61 Fed. Reg. at 
21,630 (emphasis in original).  "[F]or a customer to be eligible 
for a credit," FERC explained, "its facilities must not only be 
integrated with the transmission provider's system, but must 
also provide additional benefits to the transmission grid in 
terms of capability and reliability, and be relied upon for the 
coordinated operation of the grid."  Order No. 888-A, 62 Fed. 
Reg. at 12,330.  In other words, FERC would determine 
credits on a case-by-case basis.

     Third, Order No. 888 adopts the principle of "comparabili-
ty," meaning that the same integration standard that applies 
to transmission customers for the purpose of determining 
eligibility for pricing credits also applies to transmission 
providers for rate determination purposes.  Order No. 888, 61 
Fed. Reg. at 21,630 n.452.  Thus, if a transmission provider 
includes a facility in its rate base, then its transmission 
customers may receive rate credits for any similarly situated 
facilities.

     Running parallel to the development of Order No. 888, and 
in many respects providing a basis for it, this case began in 
1993 when FMPA, a nonprofit public agency that provides 
point-to-point electric power supply to its twenty-nine mem-
ber cities that sell retail electricity to the public, developed a 
plan for offering network transmission service.  FMPA re-
quested the right to purchase transmission service from 
Intervenor Florida Power & Light, owner of the state's 
largest transmission system.  When Florida Power rejected 
that request, FMPA filed a complaint with FERC.  Granting 
FMPA's request for network transmission service, FERC 
ordered the parties to agree on rates, conditions, and terms of 
service within sixty days.  Fla. Mun. Power Agency v. Fla. 
Power & Light Co., 65 F.E.R.C. p 61,125 (1993), reh'g dis-
missed, 65 F.E.R.C. p 61,372 (1993).

     When FMPA and Florida Power failed to reach an agree-
ment, FERC issued a final order addressing cost-of-service 
issues.  Fla. Mun. Power Agency v. Fla. Power & Light Co., 
67 F.E.R.C. p 61,167 (1994) ("FMPA I").  Foreshadowing 

Order No. 888, FERC adopted Florida Power's load ratio 
pricing proposal, but agreed that in certain circumstances 
FMPA might be entitled to pricing credits for facilities that 
are "integrated" into Florida Power's network.  The Commis-
sion explained:

     If FMPA has transmission facilities that will operate 
     as part of the integrated transmission system, a 
     credit would be reasonable.  Indeed, this is in line 
     with Florida Power's position that it is redefining 
     the native load served by the Florida Power trans-
     mission system to include all of FMPA's resources 
     and loads.  If FMPA owns grid facilities that are 
     now used to integrate the same resources and loads, 
     those facilities are part of the integrated transmis-
     sion system, and Florida Power must include an 
     appropriate credit for any such grid facilities when it 
     submits its compliance filing in this case.
     
Id. at 61,482 n.76.

     In 1996, acting on several requests for rehearing, FERC 
rejected FMPA's argument that Florida Power had improper-
ly refused to grant FMPA pricing credits, holding that none 
of FMPA's facilities was integrated into Florida Power's 
network.  Fla. Mun. Power Agency v. Fla. Power & Light, 74 
F.E.R.C. p 61,006 (1996) ("FMPA II").  At the same time, 
FERC recognized the comparability principle that later found 
its way into Order No. 888:  "Just as FMPA cannot obtain 
credit for facilities not used by Florida Power to provide 
service, so Florida Power cannot charge FMPA for facilities 
not used to provide transmission service."  Id. at 61,010 n.48.

     In FMPA II, FERC rejected FMPA's request to supple-
ment the record to include evidence relating to a facility 
FMPA operates in Lake Worth, Florida, as well as evidence 
relating to the "Rate Case."  Id. at 61,007.  The latter refers 
to a separately docketed FERC proceeding that began in 
1993 when Florida Power filed a proposed tariff adjustment 
that would have affected the prices it charged transmission 
users, including FMPA.  Fla. Power & Light Co., 64 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,361 (1993).  Although Florida Power and FMPA reached 

a settlement, that settlement did not resolve FMPA's claim 
that Florida Power's rate base should be adjusted to exclude 
facilities that are not "integrated" with the rest of Florida 
Power's transmission system.  Fla. Power & Light Co., 92 
F.E.R.C. p 61,241 (2000).  This issue, referred to as a "re-
served issue," remains pending before the Commission.  Re-
spondent's Br. at 10.  In FMPA II, therefore, FERC denied 
FMPA's request that "if the Commission rejects the proposed 
credits for FMPA facilities, Florida Power be directed to 
exclude from its transmission rates the cost of transmission 
facilities that FMPA believes are not part of the integrated 
grid...."  FMPA II, 74 F.E.R.C. at 61,010 n.48.  "This 
issue," the Commission explained, "is among the rate issues 
being litigated in the Rate Case, and the parties have agreed 
that all rate issues will be resolved in the Rate Case."  Id.

     Finally, in FMPA III, the Commission denied FMPA's 
second petition for rehearing.  Fla. Mun. Power Agency v. 
Fla. Power & Light, Co., 96 F.E.R.C. p 61,130 (2001).  Reject-
ing FMPA's request for pricing credits, FERC again held 
that FMPA failed to demonstrate that its facilities were 
integrated into Florida Power's network.  Id. at 61,545.  
FERC also ruled that FMPA's contention that the Commis-
sion should "reduce the Florida Power rate base to be 
consistent with a disallowance of FMPA facilities that are 
necessary to connect generation and load," fell outside the 
scope of the instant proceeding.  Id.  Noting FMPA's argu-
ment that the rate base reduction issue "was among the 
reserved issues in the settlement proceeding," FERC ex-
plained that "the reservation of an issue in one proceeding 
does not operate to transfer such issue to another proceed-
ing."  Id.

                               II.

     FMPA now challenges the Commission's denial of pricing 
credits in FMPA I, FMPA II, and FMPA III.  We review 
FERC's orders under the arbitrary and capricious standard 
and uphold FERC's factual findings if supported by substan-

tial evidence.  See, e.g., Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. FERC, 306 
F.3d 1112, 1115 (D.C. Cir. 2002);  Process Gas Consumers 
Grp. v. FERC, 292 F.3d 831, 836 (D.C. Cir. 2002).  "The 
'substantial evidence' standard," we have explained, "requires 
more than a scintilla, but can be satisfied by something less 
than a preponderance of the evidence."  FPL Energy Me. 
Hydro LLC v. FERC, 287 F.3d 1151, 1160 (D.C. Cir. 2002) 
(internal citation omitted).

     FMPA argues that the Commission erred by excluding 
evidence from the Rate Case, or alternatively, that it improp-
erly refused to consolidate the Rate Case with the FMPA 
cases.  As to its first argument, FMPA claims not that the 
excluded evidence pertains directly to the integration of its 
facilities, but rather that FERC has allowed Florida Power to 
include facilities in its rate base that are identical to FMPA 
facilities in terms of network benefits.  According to FMPA, 
because the comparability principle requires equal treatment 
of transmission providers and users, the Commission must 
grant FMPA credit for facilities similar to ones the Commis-
sion allowed Florida Power to include in its rate base.  We 
disagree.

     To begin with, FMPA never argues--fatally for its posi-
tion--that Rate Case evidence directly establishes that its 
facilities are integrated into Florida Power's network.  More-
over, even if FERC treats FMPA facilities differently from 
similar Florida Power facilities, the Commission's denial of 
pricing credits does not violate the comparability principle for 
an obvious reason:  FERC has yet to rule on FMPA's request 
for reductions in Florida Power's rate base.  See Petitioner's 
Br. at 16 (noting that the Commission has not ruled on 
reductions in Florida Power's rate base).  "As a theoretical 
matter," FMPA concedes, "FERC could order relief in the 
Rate Case."  Petitioner's Br. at 20.  Theoretical?  That 
FERC "could order relief in the Rate Case" is dispositive.  
Until FERC resolves FMPA's request for reductions in Flori-
da Power's rate base (one of the "reserved issues"), FERC's 
denial of pricing credits cannot violate the comparability 
principle.  FERC's exclusion of Rate Case evidence was thus 
not an abuse of discretion.

     Nor did FERC improperly refuse to consolidate the Rate 
Case with the FMPA proceedings.  Administrative agencies 
enjoy "broad discretion" to manage their own dockets, Tele-
comm. Resellers Assoc. v. FCC, 141 F.3d 1193, 1196 (D.C. Cir. 
1998), and FMPA offers no reason to believe that FERC 
abused that discretion in this case.  Even if, as FMPA claims, 
FERC has unreasonably delayed deciding the Rate Case, the 
place for resolving that issue is there, not here.

     FMPA next argues that FERC ignored evidence demon-
strating the integration of its facilities with those of Florida 
Power's.  This contention appears to rest almost entirely on 
FERC's statement in FMPA III that "FMPA has not demon-
strated, nor does FMPA even argue, that its facilities meet 
the [integration] test."  FMPA III, 96 F.E.R.C. at 61,545.  
"These statements," FMPA insists, "show that FERC was 
unaware of and, therefore, could not have considered basic 
evidence and argument of integration."  Petitioner's Br. at 
21.  Other statements in FMPA III, however, indicate that 
FERC understood FMPA's arguments and its evidence, but 
found them insufficient to justify granting credits.  "The key 
issue in the case," the Commission wrote in FMPA III, "is 
whether FMPA's facilities are integrated with Florida Pow-
er's transmission system....  In FMPA II, the Commission 
found that a credit was not appropriate."  FMPA III, 96 
F.E.R.C. at 61,543.  The Commission also discussed its core 
finding in FMPA II that FMPA's facilities are "interconnect-
ed with Florida Power's facilities[,] ... not integrated" with 
them.  Id.  Because FMPA presented no new evidence of 
integration in FMPA III--a point FMPA counsel conceded at 
oral argument--FERC's reliance on findings and conclusions 
from FMPA II was entirely appropriate.

     So what did FERC mean when it said that FMPA neither 
argued nor presented sufficient evidence of integration?  We 
have no idea.  The Commission's brief provides no explana-
tion, nor was agency counsel able to do so at oral argument.  
This enigma is not fatal, however, for under our deferential 
standard of review, we uphold agency decisions if supported 
by substantial evidence, "notwithstanding their expository 

shortcomings."  Pan-Alberta Gas, Ltd. v. FERC, 251 F.3d 
173, 176 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

     Here, substantial evidence supports FERC's denial of pric-
ing credits.  Florida Power's expert testified that five of the 
seven FMPA cities at issue--Key West, Lake Worth, Clewi-
ston, Green Cove Springs, and Jacksonville Beach--"are in-
terconnected only with the [Florida Power] transmission sys-
tem" and that each city is essentially a " 'dead-end' off the 
[Florida Power] system, in that ... power delivered from the 
Florida Power transmission system necessarily must be con-
sumed wholly within the city."  Third Adjemian Aff. p 7.  The 
expert also testified that the five FMPA facilities provide no 
benefit to the Florida Power network:  "[W]hile the internal 
facilities enable each utility to distribute power within its own 
system, the facilities in no way reduce [Florida Power's] costs 
in integrating the loads of each city with all of FMPA's other 
network resources because they do not impact the facilities 
required by [Florida Power] to transmit power to and from 
these utilities."  Id. p 16.  Although FMPA's other two cit-
ies--Ft. Pierce and Vero Beach--interconnect to Florida 
Power's network at multiple points, Florida Power's expert 
testified that those "facilities do not reduce [Florida Power's] 
costs in providing network transmission service because the 
[Ft. Pierce-Vero Beach] line has a negligible electrical impact 
on [Florida Power's] ability to transmit power to and from the 
two cities."  Id. p 18.  It is true, as FMPA points out, that the 
expert also testified that "a negligible amount of power can 
flow over the line," but the expert further explained that this 
flow provided no benefit to Florida Power because "even 
without the line, [Florida Power] is able to deliver power to 
retail customers in that area and to transmit power to [Flori-
da Power's] other load centers in South Florida."  Third 
Adjemian Aff. p 19.  According to FMPA, Florida Power 
relied on the Ft. Pierce-Vero Beach line during a planned 
transmission system outage, but Florida Power presented 
evidence that the line may not actually have assisted its 
network and that it had sufficient capacity to serve its 
customers during the outage.  See Fourth Adjemian Aff. at 
p p 2-7;  Birch Aff. p p 7, 10.

     Based on this and other record evidence, FERC concluded 
that "[t]he transmission facilities of most FMPA members are 
interconnected with the Florida Power transmission system 
at single points that are used only to transfer power between 
the Florida Power transmission system and each FMPA 
member's transmission system."  FMPA II, 74 F.E.R.C. at 
61,010.  The Commission further explained:

     While the FMPA facilities may serve a transmission 
     function on the FMPA side of the interconnection 
     point between FMPA and the Florida Power system, 
     they are not used by Florida Power to provide 
     transmission service to FMPA or any other party.  
     Nor are they used to transmit Florida Power's pow-
     er to its non-FMPA customers.
     
Id. Crediting Florida Power's expert regarding the Ft. 
Pierce-Vero Beach lines, FERC also concluded that the lines 
were not integrated because they provided, at best, "unneed-
ed redundancy" with Florida Power's network.  Id.  The 
Commission explained, "[a]n integrated transmission system 
(as opposed to two interconnected transmission systems) is 
comprised of transmission facilities operated as part of the 
same network, integrating all resources and loads on that 
network."  Id.

     To be sure, FMPA points to some contradictory evidence.  
See Petitioner's Br. at 22-23 (arguing that FMPA facilities 
benefit Florida Power by increasing reliability and that the 
Ft. Pierce-Vero Beach lines allow Florida Power to sell 
power in South Florida, increase Florida power grid capacity, 
and effect Florida Power planning).  The question we must 
answer, however, is not whether record evidence supports 
FMPA's version of events, but whether it supports FERC's.  
Ark. Elec. Energy Consumers v. FERC, 290 F.3d 362, 367 
(D.C. Cir. 2002) (explaining court's limited role in reviewing 
FERC decision under "substantial evidence" standard).  Ap-
plying our deferential standard of review--a particularly def-
erential standard where, as here, FERC decided between 
"disputing expert witnesses," Wis. Valley Improvement Co. v. 
FERC, 236 F.3d 738, 746-47 (D.C. Cir. 2001)--we have no 

doubt that the Commission's decision to deny credits is 
supported by substantial evidence.  See supra pp. 9-11.

     FMPA's remaining challenges are equally unpersuasive.  
FMPA says that FERC failed to consider evidence regarding 
Key West.  But the lone document FMPA cites never men-
tions Key West;  instead, it discusses FMPA's general argu-
ments regarding integration which FERC addressed in 
FMPA II.  See Fourth Malmsjo Aff. p 19.  FMPA says that 
FERC improperly rejected its motion to lodge Florida Pow-
er's proposal to buy the Lake Worth utility (allegedly showing 
that Florida Power would have included Lake Worth in its 
rate base) and ignored Breaker Diagrams showing the config-
uration of Florida Power's system.  But because both the 
Lake Worth evidence and the Breaker Diagrams relate to 
Florida Power's rate base, not to the integration of FMPA's 
facilities, FERC properly excluded them for the same reason 
that it properly excluded the rest of the Rate Case evidence.  
See supra pp. 7-8.  FMPA says that the Commission applies 
the integration standard inconsistently, but we rejected just 
that argument in TAPS.  See TAPS, 225 F.3d at 726-27 
(describing FERC's discussion of integration in FMPA I and 
FMPA II as "completely consistent with the Commission's 
resolution of the credits issue in the proceedings before us").

     Finally, FMPA argues that FERC's recently published 
Standard Market Design Notice of Proposed Rule Making, 
see Remedying Undue Discrimination Through Open Access 
Transmission Service and Standard Electricity Market De-
sign, 67 Fed. Reg. 55452 (Aug. 29, 2002) ("SMD-NPRM"), 
"appears to reflect a significant shift in Commission policy," 
Petitioner's Rep. Br. at 6-10, regarding the integration stan-
dard, thus requiring remand pursuant to Williston Basin 
Interstate Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 165 F.3d 54, 62-63 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999) (holding that agency's adoption of new rule during 
judicial proceeding requires immediate remand of pending 
cases involving discarded rule).  The NPRM, however, ex-
pressly states that it does not resolve any issues relating to 
integration.  "Which facilities will or will not be under a 
[Regional Transmission Organization's] operational control," 
the Commission explained, "does not predetermine transmis-

sion pricing, cost allocation, or rate design determina-
tions...."  SMD-NPRM, 67 Fed. Reg. at 55,500 n.173.  In 
any event, and unlike the rule at issue in Williston, FERC 
has yet to finalize the NPRM.  Even if, as FMPA suspects, 
FERC is applying the NPRM in other proceedings, adversely 
affected parties in those cases may challenge the Commis-
sion's actions pursuant to 16 U.S.C. s 825l(b).

     The petition for review is denied.

                                                       So ordered.

                      