                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                       Filed July 19, 2002

                        Division No. 98-1

                  In Re:  Bruce Edward Babbitt 
                   (Thornberry Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     This matter coming to be heard and being heard before the 
Special Division of the Court upon the petition of B. J. 
Thornberry for reimbursement of attorneys' fees and costs 
pursuant to section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 
1978, as amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591 et seq. (1994), and it 
appearing to the court for the reasons set forth more fully in 
the opinion filed contemporaneously herewith* that the peti-
tion is not well taken, it is hereby

__________
     * Separate opinion concurring in the judgment filed by Senior 
Circuit Judge Cudahy.

     ORDERED, ADJUDGED, and DECREED that the peti-
tion of B. J. Thornberry for attorneys' fees she incurred 
during the investigation by Independent Counsel Carol Elder 
Bruce be denied.

                                                                 Per Curiam 
                                                                 For the Court: 
                                                                 Mark J. Langer, Clerk
                                                           By:   Marilyn R. Sargent 
                                                                 Chief Deputy Clerk 

                                 






































                    United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                       Filed July 19, 2002

                        Division No. 98-1

                  In Re:  Bruce Edward Babbitt 
                   (Thornberry Fee Application)

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels 
           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                            ---------

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                ON APPLICATION FOR ATTORNEYS' FEES

     Opinion of the Special Court filed Per Curiam.

     Separate opinion concurring in the judgment filed by Sen-
ior Circuit Judge Cudahy.

     Per Curiam:  B. J. Thornberry petitions this court under 
section 593(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as 
amended, 28 U.S.C. s 591-599 (2000) (the "Act"), for reim-
bursement of attorneys' fees in the amount of $4,163.61 that 
she incurred during and as a result of the investigation 
conducted by Independent Counsel ("IC" or "OIC") Carol 
Elder Bruce.  Because we conclude that Thornberry has not 
carried her burden of showing that she was a subject of the 
investigation or that the fees would not have been incurred 
but for the requirements of the Act, we deny the petition in 
its entirety.

                            Background

     The facts of the investigation conducted by IC Bruce are 
set forth in detail in In re Babbitt (Babbitt Fee Application), 
290 F.3d 386 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 2002) (per curiam).  For 
present purposes, we briefly note that IC Bruce was appoint-
ed to investigate allegations that the White House had im-
properly influenced the 1995 decision of the U.S. Department 
of the Interior ("DOI") to deny the application of three Indian 
tribes to take off-reservation land into trust in order to 
establish a casino on the property, and that Secretary of the 
Interior Bruce Babbitt had lied about the decision to Con-
gress.  The allegations concerning the denial included contri-
butions of a substantial amount of money to the Democratic 
National Committee and other Democratic interests by cer-
tain Indian tribes opposed to the casino and that the DOI's 
decision to deny the casino application was influenced by 
these donations. B. J. Thornberry, the fee petitioner here, 
was Executive Director of the DNC from 1996 to 1998;  she 
had been a Deputy Assistant Secretary at DOI from 1993 to 
1994;  and she had also held the position of Deputy Chief of 
Staff at DOI.  In the IC's Final Report, Thornberry's only 
mention is a brief entry in a description of the DNC's 1996 
fund-raising efforts involving an Indian tribe.  Final Report 
of the Independent Counsel In re:  Bruce Edward Babbitt at 
345.

     Thornberry, pursuant to section 593(f)(1) of the Act, has 
petitioned this court for reimbursement of the attorneys' fees 
she incurred during the IC's investigation.  As directed by 
section 593(f)(2) of the Act, we forwarded copies of 
Thornberry's fee petition to the Attorney General and the IC 
and requested written evaluations of the petition.  The court 
expresses its appreciation to the IC and the Attorney General 
for submitting these evaluations, which we have given due 
consideration in arriving at the decision announced herein.

                             Analysis

     The Independent Counsel statute provides that

     Upon the request of an individual who is the subject of 
     an investigation conducted by an independent counsel 
     pursuant to this chapter, the division of the court may, if 
     no indictment is brought against such individual pursuant 
     to that investigation, award reimbursement for those 
     reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by that individual 
     during that investigation which would not have been 
     incurred but for the requirements of this chapter.
     
28 U.S.C. s 593(f)(1).  Accordingly, in order to obtain an 
attorneys' fees award under the statute, a petitioner must 
show that all of the following requirements are met:

     1) the petitioner is a "subject" of the investigation;
     
     2) the fees were incurred "during" the investigation;
     
     3) the fees would not have been incurred "but for" the 
     requirements of the Act;  and
     
     4) the fees are "reasonable."
     
See In re North (Dutton Fee Application), 11 F.3d 1075, 
1077-82 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1993) (per curiam).  For the 
reasons stated below, we conclude that Thornberry has not 
met either the "subject" or the "but for" requirement.

A.   "Subject" Status

     Thornberry argues that she was a subject of the IC's 
investigation because "it is clear from the questions posed to 
her that the Independent Counsel was investigating the possi-
bility of [her] involvement in illegal campaign contributions 
and other potential violations of Federal law."  She makes 
this argument in a conclusory manner without reference to 
any supporting facts.

     We have previously defined the term "subject" as a person 
whose conduct is within the scope of the independent coun-
sel's investigation in such fashion that "the Independent 
Counsel might reasonably be expected to point the finger of 
accusation" at him.  Dutton, 11 F.3d at 1078;  see also In re 
North (Shultz Fee Application), 8 F.3d 847, 850 (D.C. Cir., 
Spec. Div., 1993) (per curiam).  We are not persuaded that 
the IC was focused on any possible criminal culpability by 

Thornberry during the IC's investigation.  Her involvement 
with the investigation appears to have been minimal:  accord-
ing to the IC, she was interviewed on one occasion by the 
OIC staff.  She had no other contacts with the IC's office.  
Cf., e.g., In re North (Gregg Fee Application), 57 F.3d 1115, 
1116 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1995) (per curiam) (numerous 
interviews).  She was never informed by the IC that she was 
a subject of the investigation.  Cf., e.g., In re North (Haskell 
Fee Application), 74 F.3d 277, 280 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 
1996) (per curiam) (told was subject).  On the contrary, the 
IC asserts that Thornberry was explicitly and unequivocally 
told that she was only a witness--a status which we have 
previously held "is not sufficient to meet the elemental re-
quirement of 'subject' designation for purposes of the Act."  
In re Pierce (Abrams Fee Application), 190 F.3d 586, 590 
(D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) (per curiam).  Finally, the IC's 
Final Report mentions Thornberry only very briefly, in its 
description of the DNC's 1996 fund-raising efforts, supra.  
Cf., e.g., In re North (Adkins Fee Application), 33 F.3d 76, 
76-77 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1994) (per curiam) (no indictment 
but report asserts that subject violated law and lied to 
investigators).  We are thus in agreement with the IC and 
the DOJ that Thornberry has not carried her burden of 
establishing that she was in fact a subject of the IC's investi-
gation.

B.   Fees Not Incurred "But For" the Requirements of the 
     Act

     We have previously established that "[a]ll requests for 
attorneys' fees under the Act must satisfy the 'but for' 
requirement."  In re Sealed Case, 890 F.2d 451, 452 (D.C. 
Cir., Spec. Div., 1989) (per curiam).  And we have repeatedly 
held that "[t]he most difficult element for a fee applicant to 
establish under the Act is that the fees 'would not have been 
incurred but for the requirements of [the Act].' "  In re North 
(Bush Fee Application), 59 F.3d 184, 188 (D.C. Cir., Spec. 
Div., 1995) (per curiam) (quoting Dutton, 11 F.3d at 1079).  
In order to establish eligibility for an award, the fee applicant 
must show that the amounts claimed are only those fees and 

expenses above and beyond those she would have incurred as 
a result of an investigation by the DOJ.  In re Sealed Case, 
890 F.2d at 452-53.  As we stated in In Re Pierce (Olivas Fee 
Application), 178 F.3d 1350, 1355 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div., 1999) 
(per curiam), "[i]f the investigative act generating the defen-
sive costs would, in the absence of the Act, have been pursued 
by other authorities--'had the case been handled by the 
Department of Justice or other executive authorities rather 
than the Independent Counsel'--then Congress did not con-
template the award of counsel fees.  In Re North (Dutton 
Fee Application), 11 F.3d at 1080."

     Relying chiefly on In re Sealed Case, Thornberry argues 
that she satisfies the "but for" requirement in two ways.  
First, she claims that she was subjected to a more rigorous 
application of the criminal law than she would have been in 
the absence of the Act because in that situation the U.S. 
Department of Justice "would not have conducted an investi-
gation with the breadth, scope or duration of that conducted 
by the OIC."  Second, Thornberry argues that "but for" the 
provisions of the Act, which prevented the DOJ from follow-
ing its normal procedures, the investigation could have been 
terminated much sooner, or severely limited.  In support of 
this argument, Thornberry claims that the Attorney General 
in her application for appointment of an independent counsel 
"stated unequivocally that she believed that there was no 
requisite intent in the statements made by Bruce Babbitt and 
wished to decline to seek appointment [of an independent 
counsel]."

     In In re Sealed Case the Attorney General requested the 
appointment of an independent counsel to investigate an 
alleged tax violation by a government official.  890 F.2d at 
453.  We found the "but for" requirement fulfilled because 
the government official (the fee applicant) had been subjected 
to a more rigorous application of the criminal law than is 
applied to other citizens.  Id. at 454.  We made this finding 
on the basis of two reasons.  First, the Attorney General in 
his application for appointment of an independent counsel 
represented that the Act's restrictions were a hindrance to 
his conducting an adequate preliminary investigation.  We 

noted that if the Attorney General had not been so hindered 
then the government official "might have been subjected to a 
lesser investigation, or perhaps exonerated at this early 
stage."  Id. at 453.  Here, although the Attorney General in 
her application for appointment of an independent counsel 
noted that there was evidence that Babbitt lacked criminal 
intent concerning the false statements to Congress allega-
tions, she also noted that there was evidence that Babbitt 
may have indeed testified falsely and that the White House 
may have dictated the casino denial decision.  As such, we 
concluded in Babbitt "that there is nothing in the record or in 
the circumstances of Babbitt's alleged offenses that indicates 
that the Attorney General, if freed of the restrictions of the 
Act, would have subjected Babbitt to a lesser investigation, or 
perhaps exonerated him at the preliminary investigation 
stage."  290 F.3d at 393.  We therefore do not agree with 
Thornberry that this investigation would have been terminat-
ed much sooner, or severely limited, but for the provisions of 
the Act.

     The second reason for our finding in In re Sealed Case was 
that the independent counsel had been appointed to investi-
gate the applicant's 1981, 1982, and/or 1984 tax returns but 
actually examined the applicant's tax returns for nine years, 
from 1976 to 1984.  890 F.2d at 454.  We stated that the 
ordinary examination of a taxpayer for a similar tax offense 
"would have been substantially less probing."  Id. at 454.  
But here, no such less probing examination would have been 
made in the absence of the Act.  As we made clear in Babbitt, 
if IC Bruce had not investigated the deep and widespread 
allegations surrounding the denial of the casino application 
then other prosecuting authorities would surely have done so.  
290 F.3d at 391.  Thornberry, therefore, would have been 
questioned in the absence of the Act just as she was by the 
IC.

                            Conclusion

     The petition of B. J. Thornberry for reimbursement of 
attorneys' fees is denied for failure to meet the "subject" and 
"but for" requirements of 28 U.S.C. s 593(f)(1).

     Richard D. Cudahy, Senior Circuit Judge, concurring in 
the judgment:

     I agree that for the reasons noted in the majority opinion, 
Ms. Thornberry has not established that she was a "subject" 
of the investigation primarily directed at Secretary Babbitt.  
Therefore, she is not entitled to fees.

     However, I do not agree that her application fails to meet 
the "but for" test.  Like the investigation of Catherine Baker 
Stetson, the investigation involving Ms. Thornberry was 
merely a part of the Babbitt investigation, and its status with 
respect to the "but for" test must be the same as that 
assigned to Secretary Babbitt's request for fees.  Ms. 
Thornberry was involved only peripherally and would not 
have been involved at all absent the inquiry into Secretary 
Babbitt's affairs.  Since I have taken the position that the 
Secretary has passed the "but for" test with flying colors 
(since he would not have incurred fees "but for" the special 
provisions of the Independent Counsel Act regarding proof of 
criminal intent), other parties involved in his investigation for 
the same reason would have incurred attorneys' fees "but for" 
the Act.  See In Re:  Bruce Edward Babbitt (Stetson Fee 
Application), __F.3d__.

     The Department of Justice, in its evaluation of Ms. 
Thornberry's application for attorneys' fees reached the same 
conclusion with respect to her satisfaction of the "but for" test 
and supports my analysis.

                                     