                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 2, 2000      Decided April 11, 2000 

                           No. 99-1002

                  National Whistleblower Center 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Nuclear Regulatory Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

               Baltimore Gas and Electric Company, 
                            Intervenor

                        Consolidated with 
                             99-1043

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                  Nuclear Regulatory Commission

                            ---------

     Peter B. Bloch argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Stephen M. Kohn, Michael D. Kohn and 
David K. Colapinto.

     John F. Cordes, Jr., Solicitor, United States Nuclear Regu-
latory Commission, argued the cause for respondents.  With 
him on the briefs were Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney 
General, United States Department of Justice, Mark Haag, 
Attorney, Karen D. Cyr, General Counsel, United States 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, E. Leo Slaggie, Deputy 
Solicitor, and Marjorie S. Nordlinger, Senior Attorney.

     David R. Lewis, argued the cause for intervenor Baltimore 
Gas and Electric Company.  With him on the briefs was 
James B. Hamlin.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Sentelle, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  The petition for review in this case 
presents a claim by the National Whistleblower Center 
("Center") seeking to overturn a decision by the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission ("NRC" or "Commission") denying 
intervention by the Center in a nuclear power plant license 
renewal proceeding.  The relicensing at issue involves the 
Calvert Cliffs nuclear facilities operated by Baltimore Gas & 
Electric ("BG&E").  This is the second time that this matter 
has come before this court.  On November 12, 1999, the court 
issued a judgment holding that the NRC erred in rejecting 
the Center's petition to intervene in the Calvert Cliffs license 
renewal proceeding.  See National Whistleblower Center v. 
NRC, No. 99-1002, Slip. Op. (D.C. Cir. Nov. 12, 1999).  Fol-
lowing a sua sponte inquiry by the court, however, this 
judgment was vacated, see National Whistleblower Center v. 
NRC, 196 F.3d 1271 (D.C. Cir. 1999), and the case was 
reargued before the court on March 2, 2000.  Upon reconsid-
eration, we deny the Center's petition for review.

     Any third party seeking to participate in a relicensing 
proceeding must file a motion to intervene, followed by a 
timely submission of "contentions."  A contention is a specific 

issue of law or fact that the third party seeks to have 
adjudicated;  it must be substantiated by an explanation of its 
bases, a statement of supporting facts or expert opinion, 
appropriate references and citations, and sufficient informa-
tion to indicate that a genuine dispute exists between the 
party seeking to intervene and the applicant.  The Center's 
problems in this case arose when it failed to make a timely 
filing of contentions in support of its petition to intervene in 
the Calvert Cliffs relicensing proceeding.

     The Center complains that the NRC erred in applying an 
overly rigid standard in assessing their requests for exten-
sions of time.  According to the Center, the Commission was 
required to adhere to a well-established "good cause" test in 
considering petitions for extensions of time.  The NRC re-
plies, in turn, that it gave clear notice in a published policy 
statement and in a subsequent referral order in the Calvert 
Cliffs proceeding that the agency intended to adopt a stream-
lined schedule in license renewal proceedings.  The referral 
order specifically directed that "the Licensing Board should 
not grant requests for extensions of time absent unavoidable 
and extreme circumstances."  In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. 
Co., Order Referring Petition for Intervention and Request 
for Hearing to Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel, 
CLI-98-14,6 (Aug. 19, 1998), reprinted in Joint Appendix 
("J.A.") 23, 28.

     We hold, first, that the NRC was free to adopt, without 
resort to notice-and-comment rulemaking, the "unavoidable 
and extreme circumstances" standard for application in the 
Calvert Cliffs proceeding, so long as affected parties had 
proper notice of the standard and it was not arbitrary and 
capricious, or otherwise in violation of the law.  There is no 
doubt here that the agency's policy statement and subsequent 
referral order at the start of the Calvert Cliffs proceeding 
gave the Center and other interested parties adequate notice.  
Furthermore, the agency's adoption of the "unavoidable and 
extreme circumstances" standard did not reflect any arbi-
trary and capricious, or otherwise unlawful action.  The re-
vised standard was not an extreme departure from the "good 
cause" standard and it was adequately explained by the 

Commission;  and the agency was not bound by any law to 
adhere to the old "good cause" standard.

     Furthermore, on the record at hand, the Center can show 
no cognizable injury.  The disputed "unavoidable and extreme 
circumstances" test was undoubtedly applied once, when the 
Licensing Board denied the Center's request for an extension 
of time to file contentions.  However, that action was re-
versed by the NRC when it granted the Center's petition for 
more time.  The Center thereafter failed to meet the extend-
ed deadline.  The Center claims that it filed a subsequent 
motion for an extension upon missing the extended deadline, 
but the record belies this claim.  And, even assuming, ar-
guendo, that the October 1, 1998 filings to which the Center 
refers can be viewed as a request for an additional extension 
of time, it is clear that those filings do not indicate even good 
cause for the purported request.  In other words, the Center 
was not denied any extension of time that might otherwise 
have been obtained if the Commission had applied the "good 
cause" standard. Thus, the Center suffered no prejudice from 
the agency's application of the disputed "unavoidable and 
extreme circumstances" test.

     The record in this case indicates that the contested motion 
to intervene was properly denied by the Commission, because 
the Center failed to submit the required contentions within 
the prescribed deadline.  Accordingly, the petition for review 
is hereby denied.

                          I. Background

     The Calvert Cliffs relicensing process officially commenced 
on April 8, 1998, when BG&E applied to renew its licenses to 
operate the nuclear power plant.  A few weeks later, the 
application was made public and the Commission announced 
that interested third parties would have an opportunity to 
request a hearing.  See Notice of Receipt of Application, 63 
Fed. Reg. 20,663 (1998).  On May 19, 1998, the Commission 
accepted BG&E's application for docketing, again noted that 
the application was publicly available, and again announced 
that third parties would be afforded an opportunity to request 

a hearing.  See Notice of Acceptance for Docketing of the 
Application, 63 Fed. Reg. 27,601 (1998).  On July 8, 1998, the 
NRC published a notice outlining the rights of third parties to 
seek a hearing in the Calvert Cliffs proceeding.  See Notice 
of Opportunity for a Hearing, 63 Fed. Reg. 36,966 (1998).  
The July 8 Notice indicated that anyone seeking a hearing 
would be required to file a request and an application to 
intervene by August 7, 1998.  The Notice also indicated that 
such parties would be required to file "a supplement to the 
petition to intervene which must include a list of contentions 
which are sought to be litigated in the matter."  Id. at 36,966.

     The Calvert Cliffs case is the first of many nuclear power 
plant license renewal proceedings.  In view of the anticipated 
large number of license renewal applications, and also in 
response to "recent experience and criticism of agency pro-
ceedings," the Commission announced its intention to stream-
line procedures for adjudicatory actions before the agency.  
Policy on Conduct of Adjudicatory Proceedings, 63 Fed. Reg. 
41,872, 41,873 (1998).  The NRC recognized that "the oppor-
tunity for hearing should be a meaningful one";  the Commis-
sion, however, noted that "applicants for a license are also 
entitled to a prompt resolution of disputes concerning their 
applications."  Id.  Accordingly, in this policy statement, the 
Commission "identified certain specific approaches for its 
boards to consider implementing in individual proceedings, if 
appropriate, to reduce the time for completing licensing and 
other proceedings."  Id.  In particular, the Commission stat-
ed that requests for extensions of time should only be granted 
"when warranted by unavoidable and extreme circum-
stances."  Id. at 41,874.

     A few days after issuance of the policy statement, the 
Center filed a petition to intervene in the Calvert Cliffs 
proceeding.  The Commission referred the motion to inter-
vene to an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board ("Board") for 
further action.  See In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co., Order 
Referring Petition for Intervention and Request for Hearing 
to Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel, CLI-98-14 
(Aug. 19, 1998), reprinted in J.A.  23.  The NRC's Referral 
order contained a number of directives to the Board, includ-

ing limitations on the scope of the proceeding and a suggested 
schedule for completing the proceeding.  Drawing from its 
policy statement, the Commission instructed the Board not to 
grant "requests for extensions of time absent unavoidable and 
extreme circumstances."  Id. at 6, reprinted in J.A. 28.

     On August 20, 1998, the Licensing Board issued an Initial 
Prehearing Order.  See In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co., 
ASLBP No. 98-749-01-LR, Memorandum and Order, Initial 
Prehearing Order (Aug. 20, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 42.  The 
order contained deadlines for submissions as well as other 
procedural directives.  Specifically, the order directed the 
Center to file its required contentions by September 11, 1998, 
and noted that a prehearing conference would be held during 
the week of October 13.  The order also stated that any 
requests for extensions of time were to be submitted three 
business days before the due date for the pleading and 
emphasized that such requests must "demonstrate 'unavoid-
able and extreme circumstances.' "  Id. at 10, reprinted in 
J.A. 51.

     The day after the Board issued its Prehearing Order, the 
Center filed two motions, one directed to the Commission 
requesting that it vacate the referral order, and another 
directed to the Board requesting that it extend the time for 
contentions and delay the prehearing conference until at least 
December 1, 1998.  In the Motion to Vacate, the Center 
objected to the NRC's directive that extensions of time be 
granted only in "unavoidable and extreme circumstances."  
The Center argued that "[i]t is illegal and improper for the 
[Commission] not to follow the 'good cause' standard" set 
forth in 10 C.F.R. s 2.711(a).  Petition's [sic] Motion to 
Vacate Order CLI-98-14, 7 (Aug. 21, 1998).  In denying the 
motion to vacate, the NRC stated that the agency had 
"plenary supervisory authority over its adjudications and 
adjudicatory boards," which "allows it to interpret and cus-
tomize its process for individual cases."  In re Baltimore Gas 
& Elec. Co., Memorandum and Order, CLI-98-15, 6-7 (Aug. 
26, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 55, 60-61.  The Commission also 
noted that the unavoidable and extreme circumstances stan-
dard "simply gives content ... to [the] rule's general 'good 

cause' standard."  Id. at 6-7 n.5, reprinted in J.A. 60-61 n.5.  
For these and other reasons, the Commission denied the 
Center's Motion to Vacate.

     The Board, in turn, denied the Center's Motion for En-
largement of Time.  The Board held that the Center had 
failed to demonstrate the requisite "unavoidable and extreme 
circumstances" required to justify an extension of time.  See 
In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co., ASLBP No. 98-749-01-LR, 
Memorandum and Order, Denying Time Extension Motion 
and Scheduling Prehearing Conference, 3 (Aug. 27, 1998), 
reprinted in J.A. 65, 67.  Accordingly, the Center's deadline 
for submitting contentions remained September 11, 1998.  
The Center, however, filed no contentions on September 11.  
Instead, it filed a Petition for Review with the Commission 
appealing the Board's denial of its request for an extension.  
The Center argued that the Board was wrong to deny it an 
extension of time, and that the deadline for contentions was 
itself improper.  Under the current schedule, the Center 
argued, it "should have had ...  until September 30, 1998 to 
make the required filings."  Petition for Review, 6-7 (Sept. 
11, 1998).

     The Commission acquiesced.  While it stood by the Board's 
application of the "unavoidable and extreme circumstances" 
test, the Commission nonetheless granted the Center until 
September 30, 1998, to file its contentions.  See In re Balti-
more Gas & Elec. Co., Memorandum and Order, CLI-98-19 
(Sept. 17, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 71.  The next day, the 
Center filed a motion asking the Board to delay the prehear-
ing conference, or, in the alternative, provide for a one-day 
extension to accommodate a Jewish holiday.  See Petitioner's 
Motion to Vacate Pre-Hearing Conference or in Alternative 
for an Extension of Time (Sept. 18, 1998).  The Board denied 
the request to delay the prehearing conference, but granted 
the one-day extension, making the Center's contentions due 
October 1, 1998.  See In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co., 
ASLBP No. 98-749-01-LR, Memorandum and Order, Sched-
uling Matters and Electronic Hearing Database (Sept. 21, 
1998), reprinted in J.A. 74.

     The Center missed the extended October 1, 1998 deadline.  
No contentions were filed on that date.  Rather, the Center 
filed a "Status Report," a "Motion to Vacate and Re-Schedule 
the Pre-Hearing Conference," and a "Motion Requesting to 
be Informed of Communication Between the NRC Staff and 
Applicant."  The Center also filed an answer to questions 
raised about its standing.  The Status Report listed the 
experts hired by the Center and the areas of concern that 
they would cover.  In the Motion to Vacate, the Center noted 
that the Commission's staff had submitted "Requests for 
Additional Information" ("RAIs") to BG&E and that BG&E 
was not required to submit its responses to the RAIs until 
November 21, 1998.  The Center argued that it would be 
prejudicial and unfair to the Center to require it to submit its 
contentions before BG&E had submitted its responses to the 
RAIs.  Thus, the Center argued, "the pre-hearing conference 
should be postponed until no sooner than 115 days after 
[BG&E] submits its response to the RAI."  Petitioner's Mo-
tion to Vacate and Re-Schedule the Pre-Hearing Conference, 
6 (Oct. 1, 1998).  The Motion Requesting to be Informed of 
Communication Between the NRC Staff and Applicant asked 
that the Center be included on the agency's service list for 
written communications and given notification of status con-
ferences regarding the BG&E application.

     It was not until October 13, 1998, when the Center finally 
filed two purported contentions.  Subsequently, on October 
16, 1998, the Board dismissed the Center's petition to inter-
vene.  The Board held that the Center had "failed to estab-
lish cause" for an extension, failed to file any contentions 
before the prescribed deadline, and failed to show that the 
contentions filed on October 13 met the late-filed contention 
standards.  In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co., ASLBP No. 
98-749-01-LR, Memorandum and Order, Denying Interven-
tion Petition/Hearing Request and Dismissing Proceeding, 
19-20 (Oct. 16, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 315, 333-34.  The 
Center then sought review by the NRC.

     The Commission upheld the Board's dismissal, rejecting 
the Center's argument that it was denied extensions of time 
to which it was entitled under the "good cause" standard.  

Although the NRC defended the "unavoidable and extreme 
circumstances" test, it found no need to apply it.  Rather, the 
Commission held that the Center's "complete failure to pro-
vide specific information about its concerns precluded any 
finding that 'good cause,' in a meaningful sense, justified [the 
Center's] requested extensions of time prior to [October 1st]."  
In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co., Memorandum and Order, 
CLI-98-25, 10-11 (Dec. 23, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 336, 345-
46.  The Commission also upheld the Board's decision to 
reject contentions filed by the Center on October 13, both 
because the Center failed to meet the late-filed contention 
standards, and also because the purported contentions were 
wholly inadequate.  This appeal followed.

                          II.  Analysis

     The Center has voiced many objections in protesting the 
NRC's actions in this case.  Almost all of the objections are 
plainly meritless.  One objection, however, warrants our at-
tention.  That one objection rests on the Center's claim that 
the NRC erred in adopting and applying an "unavoidable and 
extreme circumstances" test, in lieu of a "good cause" test, to 
assess requests for extensions of time in which to file conten-
tions in the Calvert Cliffs nuclear power plant license renewal 
proceeding.  We reject this claim, because the Commission 
was fully justified in adopting the disputed test and, also, 
because the Center suffered no prejudice in the Commission's 
application of the new standard.

A.   NRC's Authority to Change an Adjudicatory Rule

     The Center contends that the Commission erred in apply-
ing the "unavoidable and extreme circumstances" test to its 
requests for extensions of time.  The correct standard, ar-
gues the Center, is the "good cause" test articulated in the 
Commission's regulations.  The Commission argues that the 
"unavoidable and extreme circumstances" test simply gives 
content to "good cause."  Moreover, the NRC adds, the 
adoption of the new standard resulted in no breach of law, 
because the "Commission implemented it with a case-specific 
adjudicatory order."  Supp. Br. for Respondents at 9.  The 

Commission has the better of this argument.  We are in 
complete accord with the Seventh Circuit's position that the 
NRC possesses the authority "to change its procedures on a 
case-by-case basis with timely notice to the parties involved."  
City of West Chicago v. NRC, 701 F.2d 632, 647 (7th Cir. 
1983) (citing NLRB v. Bell Aerospace Co., 416 U.S. 267, 294 
(1974)).  There is no claim here that the Center lacked timely 
notice of the new "unavoidable and extreme circumstances" 
standard.  The Commission announced its intention to adopt 
the standard in a policy statement published on August 5, 
1998.  Although the policy statement, alone, was not binding, 
it nonetheless informed the Center and other interested 
parties of the impending change.  See Panhandle Eastern 
Pipe Line Co. v. FERC, 198 F.3d 266, 269 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 
("Th[e] advance-notice function of policy statements yields 
significant informational benefits, because policy statements 
give the public a chance to contemplate an agency's views 
before those views are applied to particular factual circum-
stances.").  More importantly, the Center received express 
notice that the new standard would be applied in the Calvert 
Cliffs proceeding when the Commission adopted the standard 
in its referral order to the Licensing Board.  Indeed, the 
Center responded to this notice when it objected to the 
referral order, and to the "unavoidable and extreme circum-
stances" test specifically, in its August 21, 1998 Motion to 
Vacate.  See Petition's [sic] Motion to Vacate Order 
CLI-98-14, 7 (Aug. 21, 1998).

     In short, the Center's argument that the Commission 
lacked authority to change an adjudicatory rule is simply 
wrong.

B.   The "Unavoidable and Extreme Circumstances" Stan-
     dard is a "Procedural" Rule that Was Properly Adopted 
     Without Notice-and-Comment Rulemaking

     We also hold that the disputed "unavoidable and extreme 
circumstances" standard embodies a procedural rule.  Rules 
that "prescribe[ ] a timetable for asserting substantive rights" 
are procedural.  Lamoille Valley R.R. Co. v. ICC, 711 F.2d 
295, 328 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  And unless such rules "foreclose 

effective opportunity to make one's case on the merits," they 
need not be promulgated pursuant to notice-and-comment 
rulemaking.  Id.

     The disputed agency action in this case merely altered a 
standard for the enforcement of filing deadlines;  it did not 
purport to regulate or limit the Center's substantive rights.  
In other words, the new rule was procedural, not substantive.  
See JEM Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 22 F.3d 320, 327-28 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) (holding that a rule governing the content and 
timing of case filings is "procedural," even when it arguably 
"encodes the substantive value judgment that applications 
containing minor errors should be sacrificed to promote effi-
cient application processing").  As the court noted in JEM, 
"agency housekeeping rules often embody a judgment about 
what mechanics and processes are most efficient."  Id. at 328.  
This does not convert a procedural rule into a substantive 
one.

     The NRC has expressed a clear and reasonable goal of 
expediting nuclear power plant license renewal proceedings, 
both to accommodate the large number of cases to be heard 
and to ensure fair processes for applicants and would-be 
intervenors alike.  The adoption of the "unavoidable and 
extreme circumstances" standard did not foreclose partic-
ipation by third parties seeking to intervene in the Calvert 
Cliffs proceeding;  rather, to facilitate expedited case process-
ing, the new rule merely required parties who failed to meet 
otherwise reasonable deadlines to demonstrate compelling 
reasons before they could obtain any extensions of time 
beyond prescribed deadlines.

     The Center argues that, under Lamoille Valley, the NRC 
could not adopt the "unavoidable and extreme circumstances" 
standard except through notice-and-comment rulemaking, be-
cause the new rule, in conjunction with the other rules on 
intervention, "create[d] a regime which renders it impossible 
for the public to set forth substantive contentions."  Petition-
er's Supp. Br. at 10-11 (citing Lamoille Valley, 711 F.2d at 
328).  This is a specious claim.  The Commission's determina-
tion to expedite license renewal proceedings resulted in tight 

schedules.  However, would-be intervenors were not denied 
an effective opportunity to be heard.  BG&E's application 
was publicly available for five months prior to the time when 
the Center was required to submit contentions.  Even using 
the Center's preferred starting date, i.e., July 8, 1998 (when 
the NRC published a notice outlining the rights of third 
parties to seek a hearing in the Calvert Cliffs proceeding), the 
Center still had 85 days to prepare its contentions.  This was 
a sufficient amount of time, especially considering that the 
default period for submitting contentions is only 75 days.  See 
Rules of Practice, 43 Fed. Reg. 17,798, 17,799 (1978) (estab-
lishing that a pre-hearing conference is normally set 90 days 
after the initial hearing notice and noting that contentions are 
normally to be submitted 15 days prior to the prehearing 
conference, thus allowing 75 days between the initial hearing 
notice and the default deadline for contentions).

     Thus, given that the prescribed deadline for filing conten-
tions did not itself foreclose effective opportunity to be heard, 
a fortiori, the Commission's decision to tighten the standard 
for granting extensions of time did not, as the Center claims, 
"create a regime which render[ed] it impossible for the public 
to set forth substantive contentions."

C.   NRC's Adoption of a New Procedural Standard Easily 
     Survives "Arbitrary and Capricious" Review

     The only remaining question at issue is whether the NRC's 
adoption of the new procedural standard in the Calvert Cliffs 
proceeding was "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, 
or otherwise not in accordance with the law."  5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A).  It was not.  A change to procedures in an 
adjudicatory order is not arbitrary or capricious when it 
merely refines an existing procedural standard and when no 
affected party has detrimentally relied on the old standard.  
See, e.g., Bell Aerospace, 416 U.S. at 294-95;  Ruangswang v. 
INS, 591 F.2d 39, 44-45 (9th Cir. 1978).

     NRC's adoption of a new procedural standard did not 
significantly or unreasonably change the regime pursuant to 
which requests for extensions of time are judged, because the 
"unavoidable and extreme circumstances" standard is not off 

the moorings of "good cause."  See City of Orrville v. FERC, 
147 F.3d 979, 988 n. 11 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (noting that the 
Commission was within its discretion to use adjudication to 
refine its regulation's "good cause" standard to require a 
showing of "extraordinary circumstances");  In re Bjella, 806 
F.2d 211, 216 (10th Cir. 1986) (en banc) ("There is no signifi-
cant distinction between a showing of good cause and a 
showing of unusual or extreme circumstances.").

     Moreover, the Center has shown no detrimental reliance in 
this case.  The Center was bound to follow prescribed dead-
lines for the submission of required contentions.  They had 
no basis upon which to assume that those deadlines automati-
cally would be waived upon request pursuant to the old good 
cause standard.  Indeed, the Center has offered nothing to 
indicate that, in preparing their contentions, they acted to 
their detriment on the assumption that their requests for 
extension of time would be favorably considered pursuant to 
the old good cause test.  Quite frankly, such an argument 
would be silly.

     In short, the Commission did not abuse its discretion in 
adopting the "unavoidable and extreme circumstances" test in 
the Calvert Cliffs adjudicatory proceeding.  The Center 
makes a weak argument that the Commission's new procedur-
al rule was arbitrary and capricious, because the agency 
offered no adequate explanation for the changed policy.  See 
Petitioner's Supp. Reply Br. at 3.  We disagree.  As previ-
ously noted, the Commission's policy statement that immedi-
ately preceded the adoption of the adjudicatory order in the 
Calvert Cliffs proceeding fully explained the need for expedit-
ed case processing.  63 Fed. Reg. at 41,873-74.  Given the 
wide latitude an agency has in designing its own proceedings, 
see Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, 435 U.S. 519, 524-25 (1978), the 
NRC's decision to expedite case processing in license renewal 
proceedings to accommodate an impending heavy docket was 
well within the realm of the agency's discretion.  The policy 
statement, which was expressly cited in the Commission's 
referral order to the Licensing Board, adequately supported 
the Commission's adoption of the "unavoidable and extreme 

circumstances" test.  The agency action easily survives arbi-
trary and capricious review.

D.   The Center Has Shown No Prejudicial Error

     In the end analysis, this case appears to be much ado about 
nothing.  The Center has complained strenuously about the 
NRC's adoption of a new standard under which the agency 
will assess requests for extensions of time in which a petition-
er must file contentions.  But the Center has offered abso-
lutely nothing to show how the promulgation of the new rule, 
even if, arguendo, in error, resulted in prejudice or other 
cognizable harm to them.  See 5 U.S.C. s 706 ("[D]ue account 
shall be taken of the rule of prejudicial error.");  see also 
Fried v. Hinson, 78 F.3d 688, 690-91 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (dis-
missing petitioner's claim for lack of a showing that he had 
been prejudiced by the agency's adoption of modified proce-
dures).  We can find no prejudicial error in this case.

     The Center's first request for an extension of time was filed 
with the Licensing Board on August 21, 1998.  See Petition-
er's Motion for Enlargement of Time (Aug. 21, 1998).  The 
Board denied the request, applying the "unavoidable and 
extreme circumstances" test.  The Center petitioned the 
Commission for review, claiming that, under the current 
schedule, it was entitled until September 30, 1998 "to make 
the required filings." See Petition for Review, 6-7 (Sept. 11, 
1998).  The Commission overturned the Board's decision, 
granted the petition for review, and allowed the Center an 
extension of time until September 30, 1998 in which to file 
contentions.  Subsequently, the Center requested "a one day 
extension of the September 30, 1998 filing date" to accommo-
date a Jewish holiday observed by Petitioner's attorneys.  
Petitioner's Motion to Vacate Pre-Hearing Conference or in 
Alternative for an Extension of Time, 2 (Sept. 18, 1999).  This 
request was also granted.  See In re Baltimore Gas & Elec. 
Co., ASLBP No. 98-749-01-LR, Memorandum and Order, 
Scheduling Matters and Electronic Hearing Database (Sept. 
21, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 74.  The Center missed the 
extended deadline, failing once again to file contentions within 
the prescribed time limit.

     On October 1, rather than file the required contentions, the 
Center filed four different documents, none of which was 
labeled as a request for an extension.  The Center argues 
that its October 1 "Motion to Vacate and Re-Schedule the 
Pre-Hearing Conference" should be construed as a request 
for an extension.  Even if the so-called Motion to Vacate 
could be viewed as a request for a further extension of time in 
which to submit contentions, the Center's position would still 
fail.  The principal problem here is that the motion was not a 
supported request for an extended deadline.  Rather, it pre-
sented an argument that the Center should not be required to 
submit contentions before BG&E had submitted responses to 
staff RAIs.  At oral argument, counsel for the Center candid-
ly conceded that, as propounded in the Motion to Vacate, "the 
RAI's were our peg."  See Tr. of Oral Argument March 3, 
2000 at 49.  This "peg," however, provided absolutely no 
support for a request for a further extension of time.  It is 
clear that, under prevailing law, the Center had no right to 
the RAIs.  See Union of Concerned Scientists v. NRC, 920 
F.2d 50, 55-56 (D.C. Cir. 1990).  In fact, at oral argument, 
counsel conceded that the Center "did not have a right to 
discovery or the RAIs."  See Tr. of Oral Argument March 3, 
2000 at 49.  This being the case, it can hardly be claimed that 
the Center could condition the filing of contentions on receipt 
of RAIs and answers thereto.

     At oral argument, counsel for the Center cited the Commis-
sion's Rules of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceed-
ings--Procedural Changes in the Hearing Process, 54 Fed. 
Reg. 33,168 (Aug. 11, 1989), in an effort to bolster the claim 
that the Center had a right to view RAI material before 
submitting contentions. Under the cited provision, "an inter-
vention petitioner has an ironclad obligation to examine the 
publicly available documentary material pertaining to the 
[nuclear power] facility in question with sufficient care to 
enable the petitioner to uncover any information that could 
serve as the foundation for a specific contention."  Id. at 
33,170.  In other words, a potential intervenor must review 
the NRC Public Document Room for any materials that 
might be relevant to formulating contentions.  See Tr. of Oral 

Argument March 3, 2000 at 49-50.  According to the Center, 
in order to satisfy this rule, a potential intervenor must have 
access to the RAIs (which are kept in the Public Document 
Room) before it can be required to file contentions.  The 
Public Document Room argument comes much too late.  The 
argument was never presented to the Commission and it was 
not raised in any of the many briefs that have been submitted 
to the court in this case.  The claim is, in a word, untimely.  
See United Transp. Union v. Surface Transp. Bd., 114 F.3d 
1242, 1244 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  Cronin v. FAA, 73 F.3d 1126, 
1134 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     Even if we were to view the Public Document Room 
argument as one that naturally flows from the Center's other 
claims on RAIs, and thus properly within the compass of the 
petition for review before this court, we would nevertheless 
reject the argument as patently specious.  The cited regula-
tion merely says that an intervention petitioner is obliged "to 
examine the publicly available documentary material."  Obvi-
ously, if a document has not been filed in the Public Docu-
ment Room, or if it is filed too late to be considered by an 
intervention petitioner, then the petitioner cannot be held 
responsible for reviewing it.  Nothing in the rule suggests 
otherwise.  Therefore, we must surmise that the Center's 
belated Public Document Room argument is nothing more 
than an attempt to avoid the clear policy that denies would-be 
intervenors any entitlement to RAIs as a condition precedent 
to filing contentions.

     There can be no doubt that, on the record before us, the 
Center suffered no prejudicial error when the Commission 
adopted the new "unavoidable and extreme circumstances" 
standard in the Calvert Cliffs proceeding.  The Center sought 
and received from the NRC two extensions of time in which 
to file contentions.  When they failed to meet the extended 
deadlines, their motion to intervene was properly denied.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the reasons given above, the petition for review is 
denied.

                                                            