                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 26, 2002      Decided May 3, 2002 

                           No. 01-1052

         National Petrochemical & Refiners Association, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                            Respondent

       International Truck and Engine Corporation, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
          01-1092, 01-1093, 01-1094, 01-1130, 01-1132, 
                    01-1134, 01-1404, 01-1414

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     Theodore L. Garrett argued the cause for petitioner Cum-
mins Inc.  With him on the briefs was Andrew J. Heimert.

     Julie R. Domike argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner Volvo Truck Corporation.

     Michael F. McBride argued the cause for petitioner Na-
tional Petrochemical & Refiners Association, et al.  With him 
on the brief were Maurice H. McBride, Bruce W. Neely, 
John W. Lawrence, John S. Hahn, Julie Anna Potts, Janice 
K. Raburn, David T. Deal, Thomas Sayre Llewellyn and Chet 
M. Thompson.

     William A. Anderson, II, argued the cause for petitioners 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and Association of 
International Automobile Manufacturers, Inc.  With him on 
the briefs were Julie C. Becker, Ellen L. Shapiro, Charles H. 
Lockwood and Susan A. MacIntyre.

     Jed R. Mandel and Timothy A. French were on the briefs 
for Engine Manufacturer petitioners.

     Eric G. Hostetler, Kent E. Hanson and Norman L. Rave, 
Jr., Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice, argued the causes 
for respondents.  With them on the briefs were Kenneth C. 
Amaditz, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, John T. 
Hannon, Michael J. Horowitz and Steven E. Silverman, 
Attorneys, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

     Howard I. Fox and John D. Walke were on the brief for 
intervenors American Lung Association, et al.

     Janice K. Raburn, David T. Deal, Thomas Sayre Llewel-
lyn, Michael F. McBride, Bruce W. Neely, John W. Lawrence 
and Maurice H. McBride were on the brief for intervenor 
American Petroleum Institute, et al.

     Hope M. Babcock, Richard Blumenthal, Attorney General, 
State of Connecticut, Kimberly Massicotte, Assistant Attor-
ney General, M. Jane Brady, Attorney General, State of 
Delaware, Kevin Maloney, Assistant Attorney General, J. 
Joseph Curran, Jr., Attorney General, State of Maryland, 
Kathy M. Kinsey, Assistant Attorney General, Thomas F. 
Reilly, Attorney General, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 

Kirsten H. Engel, Assistant Attorney General, Philip T. 
McLaughlin, Attorney General, State of New Hampshire, 
Maureen D. Smith, Assistant Attorney General, Eliot Spit-
zer, Attorney General, State of New York, Peter H. Lehner, 
Assistant Attorney General, Robert A. Reiley, M. Dukes 
Pepper, Jr., Sheldon Whitehouse, Attorney General, State of 
Rhode Island, Tricia K. Jedele, Assistant Attorney General, 
Barbara Beth Baird and Jeri G. Voge were on the brief for 
intervenors State and Territorial Air Pollution Program Ad-
ministrators, et al. and amicus curiae South Coast Air Quality 
Management District.  Jennifer L. Wazenski, Assistant At-
torney General, State of Maryland, entered an appearance.

     Laurence H. Levine, Robert M. Sussman, Julia A. Hatch-
er, William A. Anderson, II, Susan A. MacIntyre, Julie C. 
Becker and Ellen L. Shapiro were on the brief for intervenors 
International Truck and Engine Corporation, et al.

     Before:  Sentelle and Tatel, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed PER CURIAM.

     PER CURIAM:1  We have here a set of challenges to an 
EPA rule affecting diesel fuel and engines.  The rule requires 
drastic reductions in exhaust emissions starting in 2007 (for 
some emissions 95% lower than current standards).  To aid in 
the achievement of the new emission standards, the rule also 
requires a 97% reduction in the sulfur level in diesel fuel.  
Numerous parties, including engine manufacturers (including 
Cummins Inc.), automobile makers, and fuel refiners, chal-
lenged the rule on various grounds, while others, including 
environmental groups and states, defended it.  We deny the 
petitions.

I.   The Regulations

     Diesel engines emit nitrous oxides ("NOx"), non-methane 
hydrocarbons, and particulate matter ("PM"), all of which are 

__________
     1 Parts I and II of the opinion are by Senior Judge Williams;  
part III is by Judge Sentelle;  and parts IV and V are by Judge 
Tatel.

harmful to the environment and human health (as no party 
disputes).  Fulfilling its duty under the Clean Air Act to set 
emission standards that "reflect the greatest degree of emis-
sion reduction achievable" through cost-effective technology, 
42 U.S.C. s 7521(a)(3), the EPA decided on dramatic reduc-
tions of diesel engine emission standards, issuing a final rule 
on January 18, 2001:  Control of Air Pollution from New 
Motor Vehicles:  Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards 
and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements, 66 
Fed. Reg. 5002 (2001) (hereinafter "2007 Rule").

     The 2007 Rule sets the following standards for diesel 
engines:  0.01 grams per brake-horsepower-hour (g/bhp-hr) 
for PM, 0.20 g/bhp-hr for NOx, and 0.14 g/bhp-hr for non-
methane hydrocarbons.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5005;  40 C.F.R. 
s 86.007-11(a)(1), (3).  For PM and NOx, the new standards 
are "90 percent and 95 percent below current standard levels, 
respectively."  66 Fed. Reg. at 5002.  Engine emissions are 
to be measured by the Federal Test Procedure, see 40 C.F.R. 
s 86.1301-90 et seq., as well as two other test procedures that 
are not at issue in this case.

     The standard for PM takes full effect in 2007.  66 Fed. 
Reg. at 5005.  The standards for NOx and non-methane 
hydrocarbons, however, will be phased in as follows:  50% of a 
manufacturer's sales for 2007, 2008 and 2009 engines and 
100% of sales for 2010 and following.  Id.;  40 C.F.R. 
s 86.007-11(g).  During the phase-in period, manufacturers 
will be allowed to participate in an averaging, banking, and 
trading ("ABT") program.  This program allows the genera-
tion of credits from engines that beat the standards;  the 
credits can then be applied to engines that may not be able to 
meet the 2007 standards right away.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5109-
11;  40 C.F.R. s 86.007-15.  A crucial distinction is made 
here:  Averaging across service classes (e.g., between light 
heavy-duty engines and heavy heavy-duty engines) is allowed, 
but not banking or trading.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5110.

     The 2007 Rule also eliminates a preexisting exception--
available only for turbocharged heavy-duty diesel engines--
for emissions from engine crankcases.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5040;  

40 C.F.R. s 86.007-11(c).  As a result, any crankcase emis-
sions not eliminated count against a vehicle's emission limit.

     High pollutant levels in fuel make it impossible or at least 
far more difficult to achieve low emissions.  Thus, under its 
authority to regulate any fuel components that significantly 
impair "the performance of any emission control device or 
system," 42 U.S.C. s 7545(c)(1)(B), the EPA also decided to 
require "a 97 percent reduction in the sulfur content of diesel 
fuel."  66 Fed. Reg. at 5002.  As of 2006, the maximum sulfur 
content of diesel fuel will be reduced from 500 ppm to 15 
ppm.  (Under a 15 ppm cap, the EPA predicts that the 
average sulfur level in diesel will actually be 7 ppm.  Re-
sponse to Comments at 3-50.)  Under its "Temporary Com-
pliance Option," the EPA actually requires that only 80% of 
fuel from any given refinery meet the 15 ppm cap in years 
2006-08.  Any overachieving refiner will generate credits, 
which it can then use to average with another refinery owned 
by that refiner, bank for future years, or sell to another 
refiner.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5065.

II.  The Emissions Standards

     We review the 2007 Rule under the arbitrary and capri-
cious standard of 42 U.S.C. s 7607(d), which is indistinguish-
able from the Administrative Procedure Act equivalent.  See 
Ethyl Corp. v. EPA, 51 F.3d 1053, 1064 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  
Small Refiner Lead Phase-Down Task Force v. EPA, 705 
F.2d 506, 519 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  Deference is particularly 
great where EPA's decision is based on complex scientific or 
technical analysis.  Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 251 F.3d 
1026, 1035 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

A.   Background on Emissions Control Technology

     Diesel exhaust emissions can be controlled through the use 
of catalytic emission control devices in the vehicle's exhaust 
system.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5007.  These resemble the familiar 
catalytic converters found on ordinary automobiles.  Id.  
Current control devices for diesel engines work less well than 
they do for gasoline engines, because of diesels' "oxygen-rich 
and relatively cool ... exhaust environment."  Id. at 5009.  

PM emissions are also more difficult to control in diesel 
engines because of the soot formed during diesel combustion.  
Id.  Compounding the difficulties is the fact that "historical 
diesel NOx control approaches tend to increase PM and vice 
versa, but both are harmful pollutants that need to be con-
trolled."  Id.

     Thus, in order to achieve drastic--and simultaneous--re-
ductions in PM, NOx, and non-methane hydrocarbons, engine 
manufacturers will need technical innovations in emission 
controls.  The EPA predicts that two relatively new technolo-
gies will aid in achieving the 2007 reductions:  the catalyzed 
diesel particulate filter ("particulate filter") and the NOx 
adsorber.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5036.  In the following para-
graphs, we explain briefly--and to the best of our under-
standing--how each technology works on the targeted emis-
sions.

     Particulate matter is made up of three things:  Unburned 
carbon particles (or soot), unburned hydrocarbons (also called 
the "soluble organic fraction"), and sulfates (resulting from 
the oxidation of sulfur in the engine's exhaust).  66 Fed. Reg. 
at 5047.  The majority of diesel PM is soot.  Catalyzed 
particulate filters work by passing the exhaust through a 
ceramic or metallic filter that captures soot and other PM.

     Particulate filters eventually become plugged up with par-
ticulate matter, at which point the collected particles (mostly 
carbon) have to be burned off (or oxidized).  Id.  The 
burning-off process is called "regeneration," and the result 
(from oxidizing carbon) is of course carbon dioxide.  Id.  The 
EPA was convinced that precious metal catalysts would make 
regeneration possible at the low temperatures typical of 
diesel engines, and that such catalysts could thus be used on a 
continuous basis throughout the life of the trap.  Id.;  see also 
Regulatory Impact Analysis ("RIA") III-6.

     NOx adsorbers do their work by storing NOx during the 
normal oxygen-rich conditions of diesel engine operation.  
RIA III-18.  Over time, the adsorber becomes full of the 
stored NOx, thus requiring regeneration.  During regenera-
tion, the excess NOx is burned off;  technically, it is reduced 

to N2 by an interaction with carbon monoxide across a 
catalyst system that typically contains platinum and rhodium;  
the less-harmful gases that result are N2 and CO2.  Id.  Like 
NOx, sulfur from the fuel accumulates over time by bonding 
to the NOx adsorber's catalysts, and must be burned off 
during a "desulfation" process (more on that below).  The 
EPA suggests the use of dual-bed NOx adsorbers (for a 
diagram, see RIA III-23), which involve splitting of the 
exhaust stream into two pipes, each of which has an adsorber 
bed.  The benefit of such an arrangement is that regenera-
tion and/or desulfation can be conducted in one bed while 
nearly all the exhaust stream is directed to the bed that is 
still in adsorbtion mode, thus maintaining a consistent level of 
performance.  RIA III-22 to III-25.

     Crankcase emissions are emitted from the vehicle's crank-
case, having gotten there by leaking from the combustion 
chamber through the piston rings.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5040.  
The EPA's elimination of the previous exception for such 
emissions is a "performance requirement," leaving the solu-
tion entirely up to manufacturers.  Id.  The EPA predicts 
that manufacturers will either filter crankcase gases and 
route them back into the engine intake, or route the gases 
into the exhaust stream (upstream of any emissions control 
devices).  RIA III-78-79.  Another option would be to vent 
crankcase gases directly to the atmosphere;  this is an unlike-
ly choice, because the combined emissions from exhaust and 
crankcase together would have to fall within the exhaust 
emissions standards.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5040.

B.   Cummins's Challenges

     1.   Feasibility of NOx and PM Standards
          
     Cummins argues that the EPA acted arbitrarily and capri-
ciously in concluding that engine manufacturers will be able 
to develop emissions-control systems satisfying the new rule.  
According to Cummins, the EPA failed to make "reasonable 
extrapolations," Cummins's Opening Brief at 5 (quoting Nat-
ural Resources Defense Council v. Thomas, 805 F.2d 410, 432 
(D.C. Cir. 1986)), or to "provide a reasoned explanation for 
believing that its projection is reliable," id. (quoting National 

Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 655 F.2d 318, 328 
(D.C. Cir. 1981)).

     In reviewing these issues, we note that EPA was "not 
obliged to provide detailed solutions to every engineering 
problem," but had only to "identify the major steps" for 
improvement and "give plausible reasons for its belief that 
the industry will be able to solve those problems in the time 
remaining."  Husqvarna AB v. EPA, 254 F.3d 195, 201 (D.C. 
Cir. 2001) (quoting NRDC, 655 F.2d at 333).  Since the EPA 
is authorized to adopt "technology-forcing" regulations, see 
NRDC, 655 F.2d at 333;  Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.2d 298, 
364 (D.C. Cir. 1981), a petitioner's evidence that current 
technology is inadequate is not enough to show that the EPA 
was arbitrary in predicting future success.

     a.   Availability of Adequate NOx Adsorbers
          
     In support of its assessment that manufacturers can feasi-
bly meet the 2007 standards using NOx adsorbers, the EPA 
pointed to the successful results achieved already in various 
test programs.  For example, the National Vehicle and Fuel 
Emission Laboratory ("NVFEL") program reached the fol-
lowing conclusion:  "This test program has shown that NOx 
adsorbers and [particulate filters] are capable of greater than 
90% emission reductions ... after running approximately 200 
hours on 5 ppm sulfur equivalent fuel, without a desulfation 
event.  With reasonably expected desulfation, the expected 
NOx reduction efficiency would be higher."  EPA, 2007 Diesel 
Emission Test Program, Initial Test Report at 31, IV-A-29 
(Dec. 11, 2000) (hereinafter "NVFEL Study");  see also RIA 
III-35 to III-48 (discussing the NVFEL test program).  The 
Department of Energy's Diesel Emission Control Sulfur Ef-
fects ("DECSE") program produced several reports finding 
"NOx conversion efficiencies exceeding 90 percent...."  RIA 
III-35.  And ironically, Cummins's own researchers (cited by 
the EPA's Regulatory Impact Analysis) reported using a NOx 
adsorber that cut NOx emissions by 98% on the Federal Test 
Procedure, to a level of 0.055 g/bhp-hr (slightly more than a 
quarter of the 0.20 g/bhp-hr standard adopted for 2007).  

Byron Bunker, Memo to File II-E-25, Handout 6 (Sept. 18, 
2000) (Joint Appendix "J.A." III 1947);  see also RIA III-34.

     Other industry commenters agreed that NOx adsorber 
technology could be developed and available by 2007.  See, 
e.g., Letter of Manufacturers of Emission Controls Associa-
tion (April 5, 2000), II-G-60;  Testimony of Johnson Matthey 
(June 22, 2000), IV-F-100;  Testimony of the Engelhard 
Corp. (June 27, 2000), IV-F-188;  Letter of Apyron Technolo-
gies, Inc. (Aug. 10, 2000), IV-D-227;  Letter of the Engelhard 
Corp. (Oct. 3, 2000), IV-G-38;  Letter of Johnson Matthey 
(Oct. 19, 2000), IV-G-55.  Of course it is no surprise that NOx 
adsorber manufacturers would support a regulation creating 
a potential for sales of their products.  See, e.g., George J. 
Stigler, The Economic Theory of Regulation, 2 Bell J. Econ. 
& Management Sci. 3 (1971).  But such a manufacturer would 
risk a considerable loss of reputation if its technology could 
not fulfill a mandate that it had persuaded EPA to adopt.  So 
the submissions add something to the more direct experimen-
tal evidence.

     Cummins, however, asserts that no NOx control system will 
be capable of meeting the EPA's 2007 standards.  It presents 
three reasons to support this conclusion;  ultimately, we are 
convinced by none.

                             *  *  *

     First, Cummins argues that though the EPA standards in 
effect require NOx adsorbers to operate at 90% efficiency, 
rapid degeneration will prevent them from lasting for any-
where near the useful life of a heavy heavy-duty diesel 
engine.  According to Cummins, the EPA's tests showing the 
requisite 90% efficiency were short-term rather than for 
extended periods.

     Cummins fails, however, to give a full picture of the EPA's 
research.  Whereas Cummins claims that a certain EPA test 
was only short-term, it actually involved a NOx adsorber 
system that had already accumulated "190 hours of opera-
tion," the equivalent of "more than 13,000 miles of driving."  
RIA III-48.  Moreover, the test did not include any desulfa-

tion events (see below), which likely reduced performance;  
even so, the NOx adsorber was almost able to meet the 2007 
standard.  Id. (Table III.A-4).  Cummins also cites a test 
mentioned at 66 Fed. Reg. 5049 as showing that degradation 
happens after 600 miles.  But that test used 150 ppm diesel 
fuel--10 times the maximum level allowed by the 2007 Rule 
(and 20 times what EPA believes the 15 ppm cap will yield in 
practice).  Cummins also complains that the DECSE study 
cited by the EPA showed that 90% efficiency declined to 75% 
after only 40 hours--and that was using 3 ppm sulfur fuel to 
boot.  Cummins's Opening Brief at 8 (citing RIA III-66 & 
Fig. III.A-15).  Overall, NOx adsorber performance degraded 
by 2% per hour of operation, with higher degradation when 
higher sulfur fuel was used.  Id. (citing RIA III-67).  But the 
EPA never denied that degradation is currently something of 
a challenge;  what matters is whether (as discussed below in 
regard to desulfation) the EPA was arbitrary or capricious in 
predicting that degradation could eventually be controlled.

                             *  *  *

     In a closely-related argument, Cummins urges that the 
desulfation process is an intractable obstacle to long-lasting 
NOx adsorbers.  As we've said, the NOx adsorber works 
primarily by adsorbing NOx on catalysts.  66 Fed. Reg. at 
5059.  Sulfur, however, bonds to the catalysts as well, clog-
ging up the catalyst sites and degrading performance.  Id.  
To prevent degradation, NOx adsorbers must periodically be 
subject to "desulfation," a process that removes sulfur.  De-
sulfation, however, requires that exhaust temperatures be 
increased--and this in turn poses a risk of so-called "sinter-
ing," in which the catalysts are melted.  Id. at 5060.  Sinter-
ing, unsurprisingly, degrades the device's future NOx adsor-
bance.  Id.

     The result, according to Cummins, is a technical "catch-22" 
that pulls manufacturers in "conflicting directions."  On one 
hand, desulfation should happen often and at high tempera-
tures to prevent clogging by sulfur;  on the other hand, 
frequent, high-temperature desulfation itself degrades NOx 

adsorbance.  As Cummins sees it, the EPA presents no 
reason to think that this technical obstacle will be overcome, 
other than "unsupported predictions of government and 
private-sector observers, who assert in conclusory fashion 
that technology that overcomes these inherent problems will 
develop in due time."  Cummins's argument turns on its 
heavy discounting of the studies relied on by EPA.

     Cummins says that the Ford Study (Mark A. Dearth et al., 
Sulfur Interaction with Lean NOx Traps (Oct. 1998) J.A. III 
2187)) is not strictly relevant because it was performed using 
a "pulsator," a device that burns synthetic gases and injects 
pollutants to test catalyst performance.  Cummins seems to 
regard it as self-evident that the use of a pulsator leads to 
inaccurate or inapplicable results.  In making this assumption 
it overestimates our technical sophistication.  The EPA ar-
gues in response that the pulsator experiment does shed light 
on the ability of NOx adsorbers to withstand desulfation.  As 
Cummins gives no articulable reason to doubt this conclusion, 
we cannot fault the EPA for having relied on the study.

     As for Cummins's objection that further Ford experiments 
found significant degradation, the EPA observes that these 
further experiments were conducted at temperatures of 900 
to 1000 degrees Celsius (see Ford Study, J.A. III 2192-93), 
whereas a "heavy-duty diesel engine in contrast rarely has 
exhaust gas temperatures in excess of 500ø C."  RIA III-68.  
Given the adverse effect of excessive heat, this seems a 
pertinent response.

     Cummins complains that the DECSE study showed that 
while desulfation did improve adsorber performance (com-
pared to a sulfur-clogged state), it did not return the adsor-
ber's performance to prior levels.  Cummins's Opening Brief 
at 10 (citing RIA III-66 & fig. III.A-15, J.A. IV 2480).  
Moreover, the DECSE study showed that even without the 
presence of sulfur, the desulfation-phase temperatures caused 
a "continued decline in the catalyst's desulfated performance."  
Id. (citing RIA III-67 & fig. III.A-16).

     The EPA, for its part, admits that the equipment used for 
the DECSE test was not optimized for durability, but notes 
that the EPA already pointed out several engineering steps 
that would help adsorbers "to better withstand potential 
thermal sintering from desulfation."  For example, the EPA 
cited technical solutions used in light-duty vehicles, such as 
"modifications to the catalyst supports and surface structures 
that stabilize the precious metals at high temperatures," and 
"strengthening of crystalline lattice structures."  RIA III-68;  
see also Respondent's Brief at 23;  66 Fed. Reg. at 5060.  
Other steps identified by EPA include careful control of 
maximum temperatures during desulfation, and lowering the 
air-to-fuel ratios.  RIA III-69.

                             *  *  *

     Finally Cummins argues that compliance with the Federal 
Test Procedure will be impossible because of reduced perfor-
mance during the so-called "cold start" section of that test.  
The Federal Test Procedure has two main sections--a "cold 
start" period of 20 minutes, and then a "hot start" period of 
another 20 minutes.  40 C.F.R. s 86.1330-84(a);  RIA III-49.  
Separate tests are needed because the catalysts in NOx 
adsorbers are ineffective at lower temperatures;  according to 
EPA data, NOx adsorber efficiency does not reach 90% until 
the temperature is above 275 degrees Celsius.  RIA III-32.

     The NVFEL tests did not include the cold-start portion of 
the Federal Test Procedure.  See RIA III-49.  This was 
because the "adsorber system was not optimized for cold 
start performance," see NVFEL at 24 (J.A. III 2114)--
though why such optimization was left undone, we do not 
know.

     Nevertheless, the EPA relied on averaging, pointing out 
that a "manufacturer could achieve the composite FTP stan-
dard with considerably less than 90 percent reduction over 
the cold-start test, provided the hot-start test achieves great-
er than 90 percent reduction."  RIA III-51, J.A. IV 2465.  
The weighting system of the Federal Test Procedure helps 
the EPA's arithmetic on this--the hot-start cycle counts as 

6/7 of the final result, leaving a mere 1/7 to the cold cycle.  
See 40 C.F.R. s 86.1342-90(a);  RIA III-49.  Thus modest 
overachievement in the hot cycle can offset considerable 
underachievement in the cold.  Cummins notes, however, that 
if the cold-start cycle on a particular engine were only 50% 
efficient, then the hot-start cycle would have to achieve 96.7% 
efficiency.  And if performance during the cold-start period 
dropped below 30%, then it would be mathematically impossi-
ble to meet the standard (because the hot-start period would 
have to be more than 100% efficient).

     EPA responds that this argument was never raised before 
now, and is thus barred.  See 42 U.S.C. s 7607(d)(7)(B);  
Respondent's Brief 25-26 (citing Appalachian Power Co. v. 
EPA, 249 F.3d 1032, 1055 (D.C. Cir. 2001)).  But Cummins 
answers that it raised the issue with "reasonable specificity," 
as required by the statute.  Its comments argued that NOx 
adsorbers did not work "over the entire range of engine 
operating conditions," and that adsorbers work "at only iso-
lated steady-state condition [sic] within a narrow temperature 
range."  While neither of these comments specifically men-
tions the cold-start portion of the Federal Test Procedure, 
they do raise the underlying issue of poor performance at 
certain temperatures.  Since the word "reasonable" should 
not be "read out of the statute in favor of a hair-splitting 
approach," Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 135 F.3d 791, 817 
(D.C. Cir. 1998), Cummins's objections seem close enough to 
have put the EPA on notice that it had to defend the 
performance of NOx adsorbers at all relevant temperatures 
and conditions.

     On to the merits:  EPA says that Cummins wrongly depicts 
the "cold start" test period as if the engine and exhaust 
system were cold throughout the period.  But in fact the 
emission control system warms up throughout the "cold start" 
period.  EPA cites--by way of analogy--tests done on gaso-
line engines that found that catalyst temperatures of 450 
degrees could be reached in a mere 30 seconds after a cold 
start.  Joseph McDonald & Lee Jones, Demonstration of 
Tier 2 Emission Levels for Heavy Light-Duty Trucks, at 25, 
IV-G-131 (J.A. III 2176).  If similar steps were taken for 

diesel engines, then the portion of the Federal Test Proce-
dure that would be conducted in a genuinely "cold state" 
would make up a trivial percentage of the weighted score for 
the test.

     Moreover, the RIA discussed a number of ways by which 
cold start performance could be improved.  RIA III-49-51.  
Cummins has not shown that EPA was arbitrary in believing 
that, collectively, they would provide an adequate solution.

     In sum we find no basis for reversing EPA's prediction of 
the future development of adequate NOx adsorbers.

     b.   Availability of NOx Sensors
          
     Cummins asserts that the new standards for 2007 will 
require NOx sensors that are not and will not be available.  
Cummins points out that regeneration (essential for burning 
off the accumulated NOx from the NOx adsorber) has to be 
triggered by a NOx sensor that measures the rising levels of 
NOx in exhaust gas (as rising levels indicate degenerating 
performance of the adsorber).  But, says Cummins, such 
sensors "do not exist."  Cummins believes the studies relied 
on by EPA fail to support its belief in the future availability 
of such sensors.

     EPA relied in part on the "Kato" study (Nobuhide Kato et 
al., Long Term Stable NOx Sensor with Integrated In-
Connector Control Electronics, SAE 1999-01-0202, J.A. VI 
3913) as demonstrating that current NOx sensors are "capable 
of detecting NOx emissions in the 100 ppm range."  Response 
to Comments 7-22.  Cummins notes that the paper shows 
data only from the 70 ppm to 400 ppm range (Cummins's 
Reply Brief at 6, citing J.A. VI 3916), and argues that it is 
impermissible to extrapolate the results to the 15 ppm range 
(as does EPA, see Respondent's Brief at 29) because errors 
that are relatively minor at a high level would be fatal at a 
low one.  If this were EPA's sole basis, and if EPA were 
required to show present availability of proper sensors, this 
might be a winning argument.  Neither is true.

     EPA also relies on the NVFEL test program, which suc-
cessfully used NOx sensors.  Response to Comments 7-22.  

Cummins argues that during this test program regeneration 
was controlled manually, see NVFEL Study at 15 (J.A. III 
2105), so that the test failed to prove that sensors could 
control regeneration in real-life situations.  The EPA, by 
contrast, seems to imply that NOx sensors were used to 
trigger every regeneration event.  In fact, neither side is 
precisely correct.  For the NVFEL tests, the engineers first 
performed a process they called "steady state optimization," 
the function of which is to figure out the conditions for 
regeneration that will minimize emissions and fuel economy 
impact.  NVFEL Study at 14, 16.  (J.A. III 2104, 2106.)  The 
optimization methods used, including the ones in which manu-
al operation played a role (described at NVFEL Study 15), 
involved the use of a NOx sensor to determine the best time 
for regeneration.  But for the actual tests of emissions, the 
engineers used a "time-based regeneration schedule," 
NVFEL Study at 24, so that "regenerations occurred at 
predetermined engine conditions during the transient cycle."  
Id.  So, while it may be literally true (as Cummins says) that 
the ultimate test results do not directly prove that a NOx 
sensor could independently trigger regeneration as needed, 
the test offers indirect proof, as NOx sensors were essential in 
optimizing the system so that the NOx adsorber could reduce 
emissions by greater than 90 percent.  NVFEL Study at 21, 
Figure 5.3.  Cummins thus fails to show arbitrariness in the 
EPA's prediction that adequate NOx sensors will be available.

     More generally, the EPA claims that adequate NOx sensors 
have already been developed.  Respondent's Brief 28 (citing 
RIA III-56;  Sherwood Memo to Docket, IV-B-10 (J.A. II 
1097-98)).  Contrary to Cummins's implication, the latter 
document concludes that a NOx sensor can successfully "be 
used to control both NOx regeneration of a NOx adsorber 
system, and diagnosis of the NOx adsorber system."

     Again, Cummins has not shown that the EPA acted arbi-
trarily or capriciously.

     c.   Feasibility of the Crankcase Standard
          
     Here Cummins argues that it is not feasible to eliminate 
the prior exception that allowed crankcase emissions from 

heavy-duty engines.  As discussed above, the EPA envisions 
that eliminating crankcase emissions will require manufactur-
ers either to (1) use a crankcase filtration system, with "blow-
by" gas routed to the engine's air-intake system, or (2) route 
the emissions into the exhaust system upstream of the emis-
sions control equipment.  RIA III-78-79.

     According to Cummins, however, the filtration systems are 
only 80% effective, id., leaving 20% of crankcase emissions to 
go back and foul the intake system.  See 66 Fed. Reg. at 
5040/3 (attributing prior exception for crankcase emissions 
from turbocharged heavy-duty diesels to concern over such 
fouling).  The EPA notes, however, that such filtration sys-
tems are already required in Europe (see 66 Fed. Reg. 5040), 
and have been used on a Mercedes heavy-duty diesel engine 
in the United States since 1999 (see Response to Comments 
3-88).  (Cummins's Reply Brief's citation of DaimlerChrys-
ler's discussion of "filter plugging" is not inconsistent with 
Mercedes's practice, as the DaimlerChrysler remark was 
directed to particulate filters, not crankcase systems.  See 
J.A. III 1717-18.)  Cummins presents no evidence that these 
systems have caused material fouling of turbochargers.

     Cummins also complains that the EPA made no findings 
whatever about the durability of crankcase filtration systems;  
this is of concern because the systems would be required to 
last 50,000 miles or 1,500 hours, see 40 C.F.R. s 86.007-25.  
But the issue was not raised until now and is therefore 
waived.  See 42 U.S.C. s 7607(d)(7)(B);  cf. 40 C.F.R. 
s 86.094-25(b)(7) (allowing manufacturers to seek approval to 
replace emissions systems at intervals shorter than 50,000 
miles).

     Because the rule can stand so long as there was one 
solution as to which EPA's prediction was not arbitrary, we 
shall not proceed to evaluate the second option--venting 
crankcase emissions into the exhaust system.

     d.   The Effects of Sulfur
          
     One last bit on feasibility:  Cummins argues (in one para-
graph) that even with fuel sulfur reduced as low as 15 ppm, 

sulfur can still cause PM emissions that are up to 60% of the 
2007 limit.  Standing alone, the point seems meaningless (as 
60% is less than 100%).  Cummins seeks to render it mean-
ingful by also arguing that EPA failed to consider potential 
increases in PM resulting from crankcase emissions and cold-
start problems.  But as EPA points out, Cummins failed to 
raise these in the rulemaking, so they are waived pursuant to 
42 U.S.C. s 7607(d)(7)(B).

     2.   Accuracy of Measuring Equipment
          
     Cummins's second main argument is that there will be no 
testing equipment accurate enough to measure the extremely 
low emissions required by the new regulation.  Cummins 
claims that the equipment currently available is plagued by 
too much variability and inaccuracy.  Assuming this to be 
true (and some such errors are inevitable), it would not 
provide a basis to upset the rule.  As we said in Amoco Oil 
Co. v. EPA, 501 F.2d 722 (D.C. Cir. 1974):

     The possibility of statistical measurement error ... 
     merely deprives the agency of the power to find a 
     violation of the standards, in enforcement proceedings, 
     where the measured departure from them is within the 
     boundaries of probable measurement error.  Further-
     more, if the test methods eventually adopted raise a 
     greater potential for error than is practical or necessary, 
     a reviewing court may order revisions.
     
Id. at 743.  Accordingly, issues about the reliability of testing 
methods can be addressed at a later stage.

     3.   Possible Misfueling in Canada and Mexico
          
     Cummins's last main argument is that the rule unlawfully 
exposes manufacturers to the risk of recalls resulting from 
the "poisoning of catalysts from fueling of vehicles in Mexico 
and Canada."  But the risk, if not simply nil, is so remote as 
to render the claim unripe.  If the alleged poisoning occurs 
(because many trucks operate in both the U.S. and Canada 
and Mexico, and on the assumption that one or both neigh-
boring countries will fail to mandate 15 ppm diesel fuel), 

Cummins would apparently have a good defense to a recall 
action.  The recall-authorizing statute provides that a recall 
can be ordered only if "a substantial number of any class or 
category of vehicles or engines, although properly main-
tained and used, do not conform to [the emission standards]."  
(42 U.S.C. s 7541(c)(1)) (emphasis added).  On Cummins's 
scenario, the border-crossing trucks would not have fulfilled 
the proper maintenance condition.  Indeed, EPA explicitly 
abjured any right to demand recalls for exceedences caused 
by "the use of high-sulfur (>500 ppm) fuel in Alaska during 
the period of the temporary sulfur exemption" that it had 
granted in reference to Alaska.  66 Fed. Reg. 5086/2.

III. Diesel Fuel Sulfur Standard

     Under 42 U.S.C. s 7545(c)(1), EPA is empowered to regu-
late fuel content if the Administrator either determines that 
(A) "any emission product of such fuel ... causes, or contrib-
utes, to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to 
endanger the public health or welfare," or (B) "emission 
products of such fuel ... will impair to a significant degree 
the performance of any emission control device or system 
which is in general use, or which ... would be in general use 
were such regulation to be promulgated."  42 U.S.C. 
s 7545(c)(1)(A) & (B).  We first consider whether EPA's 15 
ppm sulfur rule is justified as protecting public health or 
welfare under s 7545(c)(1)(A).  Determining it is not, we 
consider whether EPA's decision to regulate diesel fuel in 
order to prevent impairment of sulfur-sensitive emission con-
trol devices was arbitrary, capricious, or otherwise contrary 
to law.  We conclude it was not.  Finally, we consider and 
reject the remaining challenges to the 15 ppm sulfur rule 
brought by petitioners National Petrochemical & Refiners 
Association, et al. ("NPRA"), and deny their petition for 
review.

A.   Basis for the Diesel Fuel Standard

     At the outset, EPA argues that the ultra-low diesel fuel 
standard of 15 ppm sulfur is justified as a regulation to 
protect public health or welfare under 42 U.S.C. 
s 7545(c)(1)(A), as well as to prevent impairment of sulfur-

sensitive control technology under s 7545(c)(1)(B).  Because 
NPRA only challenges EPA's determination under 
s 7545(c)(1)(B) (specifically, the availability of sulfur-sensitive 
control technology), EPA contends that we must dismiss the 
petition for review.  However, we agree with NPRA that 
EPA has not justified the 15 ppm sulfur requirement under 
the "public health or welfare" rubric of s 7545(c)(1)(A).  Al-
though it is possible EPA could have justified the 15 ppm 
sulfur limit based on effects on public health and welfare, 
here it has not done so.  EPA makes no findings that justify 
a choice of a 15 ppm limitation (rather than some other 
concentration) on the bases of health and welfare.

     EPA's justifications for a 15 ppm sulfur rule in this pro-
ceeding belie its post-hoc assertion that it was regulating 
pursuant to its authority under s 7545(c)(1)(A).  Although the 
Agency cited general health and environmental effects of 
diesel exhaust, as well as sulfur dioxide formation, e.g. 66 
Fed. Reg. 5002, 5021-23 (2001), it explicitly declared that 
"[w]e are requiring significant reductions in diesel fuel sulfur 
to enable certain emission control devices to function proper-
ly."  Id. at 5034 (emphasis added).  Indeed, EPA justified the 
15 ppm standard (as opposed to some other concentration) as 
necessary for effective operation of the NOx adsorber and PM 
trap.  See id. at 5053;  id. at 5047.  In the section of the final 
rule entitled "Need for Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel," 66 Fed. Reg. 
at 5056, EPA did not mention health or environmental con-
cerns.  Rather, relying on the three factors of "efficiency, 
reliability, and fuel economy," EPA concluded that "diesel 
fuel sulfur levels of 15 ppm will be required in order to make 
feasible the heavy-duty vehicle emission standards."  Id.  
EPA referred to control technologies being "directly affected 
by sulfur in diesel fuel," and concluded that "[b]ased on the 
strong negative impact of sulfur on emission control efficien-
cies for all of the technologies evaluated, we believe that 15 
ppm represents an upper threshold of acceptable diesel fuel 
sulfur levels."  Id.  Further, according to EPA, its analysis 
"makes clear that diesel fuel sulfur levels will need to be 
under 15 ppm in order to ensure robust operation of the 
technologies under the variety of operating conditions antici-

pated to be experienced in the field."  Id.  EPA made no 
commensurate findings that the 15 ppm sulfur concentration 
is needed to protect public health or welfare.

     Similarly in the section entitled "Our Program for Control-
ling Highway Diesel Sulfur," EPA stated:  "With today's 
action, we are requiring substantial reductions in highway 
diesel fuel sulfur levels nationwide, because sulfur significant-
ly inhibits the ability of the diesel emission control devices to 
function which are necessary to meet the emission standards 
finalized today."  Id. at 5063 (emphasis added).  It could 
hardly be clearer--EPA is regulating sulfur because of its 
effects on emission-control devices, and not for health and 
welfare reasons.  Therefore, the 15 ppm sulfur rule either 
rises or falls with EPA's justification under 42 U.S.C. 
s 7545(c)(1)(B).

B.   Sulfur-Sensitive Control Technology

     NPRA argues that EPA's 15 ppm sulfur requirement is 
arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law because EPA has 
failed to show that the emission-control technology requiring 
ultra-low sulfur fuel is in or near general use. Specifically 
NPRA contends that NOx adsorption technology requiring 15 
ppm sulfur diesel fuel will not be "in general use" even if this 
fuel standard is adopted.  Further, NPRA argues that the 
PM control technology does not require ultra-low sulfur fuel.  
As discussed in Part II.B, supra, EPA has reasonably deter-
mined that NOx adsorption technology will be available.  The 
record contains ample support for EPA's conclusion that NOx 
adsorbers will be available by 2007 if fuel sulfur is regulated.  
Although some research remains to be done to solve the 
problem of catalyst sintering (deterioration caused by desulfa-
tion--high temperature operation to remove sulfur building 
up on the catalyst), petitioners have identified no theoretical 
barriers to the development of NOx adsorbers.  "In the 
absence of theoretical objections to the technology, the agen-
cy need only identify the major steps necessary for develop-
ment of the device, and give plausible reasons for its belief 
that the industry will be able to solve those problems in the 
time remaining."  NRDC, 655 F.2d at 333.  Here EPA notes 

that NOx adsorbers are used in gas turbine systems and 
natural gas fired powerplants.  EPA claims that the "differ-
ences between these current applications of the NOx adsorber 
technology and the future use of NOx adsorbers to control 
NOx emission from diesel engines lies only in the need to 
adapt the diesel engine operation to the NOx adsorber perfor-
mance."  It is only necessary that a desulfation cycle be 
developed--and EPA cites evidence that such research is 
under way.  EPA has evidence that application of this tech-
nology is feasible, appears to have set forth an engineering 
path rather than mere optimism, and has given a reasoned 
explanation why it believes this path can be followed.  See 66 
Fed. Reg. at 5052.  That is sufficient:  "EPA is not obliged to 
provide detailed solutions to every engineering problem posed 
in the perfection of the [technology]."  NRDC v. Thomas, 805 
F.2d 410, 434 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (quoting NRDC, 655 F.2d at 
333).

     Petitioners' claim that our decision in Amoco Oil Co. v. 
EPA, 501 F.2d 722 (D.C. Cir. 1974), prohibits EPA from 
relying on technology that is still in the testing stage as the 
basis of fuel regulation under 42 U.S.C. s 7545(c)(1)(B) is 
without merit.  In Amoco, it was the petitioner who sought to 
upset EPA's judgment of non-feasibility and require the 
Administrator to consider technology alternatives to the cata-
lytic converter that were in the testing stage.  This Court 
merely found that EPA was not required to evaluate such 
technologies, when in EPA's reasoned judgment such technol-
ogies would not be "in general use" but the catalytic convert-
er would be in such use.  See Amoco, 501 F.2d at 738-39.  In 
the present context, however, it is EPA that believes NOx 
adsorption technology will be available. Where, as here, 
EPA's decision is based on complex scientific or technical 
analysis, it is entitled to "great deference."  Appalachian 
Power Co. v. EPA, 251 F.3d 1026, 1035 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
(citation omitted).  If anything, Amoco supports EPA's posi-
tion.  In Amoco, EPA had required emissions reductions that 
necessitated the use of catalytic converters.  501 F.2d at 726.  
Similarly, EPA is now requiring reductions that necessitate 
the use of NOx adsorbers.  66 Fed. Reg. at 5005-06.  In 

Amoco, EPA had found that no other emission reduction 
system would be in general use by the effective date of the 
rule.  501 F.2d at 738.  In the present case, EPA found that 
NOx adsorbers (and only NOx adsorbers) will be "in general 
use."  66 Fed. Reg. at 5049-53.  In sum, because EPA's 
determination that NOx adsorption technology will be avail-
able is reasonable, EPA has met the statutory prerequisite to 
regulating the sulfur content of diesel fuel under 42 U.S.C. 
s 7545(c)(1)(B).

     NPRA also contends that the decision to regulate under 
s 7545(c)(1)(B) was arbitrary and capricious because EPA 
overlooked sulfur-resistant technology, namely Selective Cat-
alytic Reduction ("SCR").  Petitioners argue that EPA treat-
ed NOx adsorption technology and SCR technology inconsis-
tently--having optimism for the former and disfavoring the 
latter.  That may be.  Nonetheless as noted above, EPA is 
entitled to deference in its evaluation of technologies, and in 
any event EPA identified several practical obstacles to the 
widespread implementation of SCR technology.  In particu-
lar, SCR systems require refilling with urea on a regular 
basis (3-6 gallons for every 100 gallons of fuel) in order to 
operate and are subject to abuse.  See 66 Fed. Reg. at 5053.  
Failure to replenish the urea does not cause a loss in driving 
performance (so truckers may have little incentive to spend 
resources on urea) but does reduce emissions reductions.  
See id.  Furthermore, there is currently no system in place 
to distribute urea to truck stops or other retail outlets for 
dispensing into vehicles, and the evidence before EPA would 
support a determination that these problems would not be 
solved by model year 2007.  See 66 Fed. Reg. at 5053.  Given 
these concerns, EPA reasonably determined that SCR was 
not a viable means of achieving NOx emissions reductions, 
and that sulfur-sensitive technology, and thus ultra-low sulfur 
diesel, would be required.

     EPA's determination that NOx adsorption technology is 
viable and necessary justifies the 15 ppm sulfur diesel fuel 
standard;  therefore, we need not consider whether the diesel 
fuel standard is necessary for the operation of PM control 
technology.

C.   Other Challenges to the Diesel Fuel Standard

     NPRA raises several other objections to the diesel fuel 
standard, most of which may be dismissed summarily.  First, 
petitioners contend that the phase-in (or temporary compli-
ance option, as EPA prefers) renders the 15 ppm standard 
arbitrary and capricious.  Although we find that petitioners 
have standing (because of the alleged harm to distributors in 
carrying the extra grade of fuel), we find no merit to the 
claim that the phase-in undermines the fuel standard and 
reject the claim that the decision to phase-in ultra-low sulfur 
diesel is arbitrary and capricious.  Similarly, although we find 
petitioners to have standing to challenge the selection of 
ASTM Method 6438 as the primary test method, we find 
nothing arbitrary or capricious in EPA's selection of this test 
method.  Third, petitioners' argument that EPA failed to 
comply with the Regulatory Flexibility Act is devoid of merit. 
Finally, that brings us to NPRA's allegation that the decision 
to require 15 ppm sulfur content will result in a shortfall in 
diesel fuel. Although we ultimately reject this claim, it re-
quires more elaborate consideration.

     42 U.S.C. s 7521(a)(3)(A)(i) mandates that EPA "giv[e] 
appropriate consideration to cost, energy, and safety factors" 
associated with technology needed for the emissions stan-
dards it sets--which also includes the cost of fuel compatible 
with that technology.  Similarly, 42 U.S.C. s 7545(c)(2)(B) 
requires that EPA consider "available scientific and economic 
data."  If EPA promulgated a regulation that would in fact 
result in a diesel fuel shortage or energy crisis, it would be 
acting arbitrarily and capriciously--failing to give "appropri-
ate consideration to cost [and] energy" in setting emissions 
standards under s 7521(a)(1), and failing to consider the 
"economic data" in regulating diesel itself under s 7545(c)(1).  
42 U.S.C. ss 7521(a)(3)(A)(i), 7545(c)(2)(B).  Therefore, if 
EPA's assessment of diesel fuel availability under its regula-
tion of diesel fuel is unreasonable, then it has not properly 
considered all of the relevant factors and its fuel regulation 
should be vacated and remanded as arbitrary and capricious.

     Petitioners argue that EPA's estimating technique for as-
sessing highway fuel loss due to cross-contamination in the 
pipeline system is inadequate.  They contend that when ultra-
low sulfur diesel fuel and non-highway diesel fuel are trans-
ported in tandem, the former will be contaminated by the 
sulfur in the latter at the interface volume.  This contaminat-
ed fuel cannot be used as highway fuel, as it would damage 
the emission control devices.  EPA assumed that this loss 
would be only twice the current loss from transport of 500 
ppm sulfur diesel fuel and non-highway diesel fuel.  EPA's 
fundamental assumption was that the interface volume would 
not change.  However, as petitioners argue, this fundamental 
assumption may be incorrect.

     Petitioners point out that "EPA considered only pipeline 
diameter and length in calculating today's losses, but not the 
different sulfur concentrations in the various products in 
pipelines or the relative margin for error given the very low 
allowed sulfur level."  For example, "[i]t would take less than 
0.5 percent of 3000-ppm sulfur containing product to contami-
nate [ultra low sulfur diesel] ... to a level above EPA's 
maximum of 15 ppm."  Petitioners note that "the size of the 
interface volume pipeline operators will presume is affected 
by adjoining products is likely to grow dramatically with 
[ultra low sulfur diesel]," but that EPA has assumed the 
interface volume will remain constant.  Additionally, EPA 
may further have underestimated the contamination loss by 
failing to consider diffusion from residue on the walls of the 
lines carrying the fuel.  EPA, Regulatory Impact Analysis:  
Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards and Highway 
Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements IV-90 (Dec. 2000).

     Even assuming EPA made missteps in calculating cross-
contamination, the burden is on petitioners to demonstrate 
that EPA's ultimate conclusions are unreasonable. Cross-
contamination is only a sub-issue of the critical question of 
adequacy of projected supply.  Petitioners have failed to 
show that EPA's overall determination that there will not be 
a diesel shortfall is unreasonable.  EPA contends that there 
are adequate economic incentives to ensure that refiners will 
not abandon the highway diesel market, and that several 

refineries would have incentive to enter the diesel market.  
Although EPA's effort at estimating losses due to cross-
contamination may be flawed, petitioner fails to show that 
cross-contamination will result in a shortfall.  Therefore, 
while perhaps EPA could have been more thorough, we deny 
the petitioners' challenge.

     In sum, we deny all of the challenges brought by NPRA to 
the 15 ppm sulfur diesel fuel standard.

IV.  Mack Truck Petition

     Petitioner Mack Truck challenges EPA's changes to its 
Averaging, Banking and Trading ("ABT") program.  This 
program allows engine manufacturers who produce engines 
cleaner than those required by the regulations to generate 
"credits" that they may then use to offset higher emitting 
engines ("averaging"), save for future use ("banking"), or sell 
to other manufacturers ("trading").  See 40 C.F.R. 
s 86.004-15.  Traditionally, EPA has prohibited engine man-
ufacturers from applying credits generated by light heavy-
duty or medium heavy-duty engines to heavy heavy-duty 
engines.  See 40 C.F.R. s 86.004-15(d), (e), (f)(3).  The new 
rule allows such cross-subclass averaging, but only during the 
2007-09 phase-in period.  See 2007 Rule, 66 Fed. Reg. at 
5164 (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. s 86.007-15(m)(10)).  Fur-
thermore, when manufacturers use credits from one diesel 
engine class in calculating the emissions of another diesel 
engine class, credits are discounted by 20%.  Id. at 5163 (to 
be codified at 40 C.F.R. s 86.007-15(m)(3), (4)).  Cross-
subclass banking and trading remain prohibited.  Id. at 5164 
(to be codified at 40 C.F.R. s 86.007-15(m)(10)).

     Mack's complaint about these new provisions stems from 
the fact that it makes only heavy heavy-duty engines.  Ac-
cording to Mack, because manufacturers cannot make a com-
pliant heavy heavy-duty engine without sacrificing some fuel 
efficiency and because Mack's customers are extremely sensi-
tive to cost increases generated by decreased fuel economy, 
the new rule will likely force Mack to purchase emissions 
credits from manufacturers of the same engine class.  Antici-
pating these harmful consequences, Mack urges us to find the 

revised ABT program's allowance of cross-subclass averaging 
unlawful because EPA failed:  (1) to give interested parties 
notice and opportunity to comment in violation of 42 U.S.C. 
s 7607(d)(6)(C);  (2) to summarize in the record conversations 
had with Mack's competitors in violation of 42 U.S.C. 
s 7607(d)(6)(C);  and (3) to give a reasoned explanation of its 
new program, cf. Motor Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm 
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 52 (1983) (requiring agency 
to give reasoned explanation for decision).  EPA contests 
these claims, but also argues that, in any case, Mack lacks 
prudential standing to challenge the allowance for cross-
subclass averaging.  We begin with this threshold issue.

     To demonstrate prudential standing, Mack must show that 
"the interest it seeks to protect 'is arguably within the zone of 
interests to be protected or regulated by the statute ... in 
question.' "  Cement Kiln Recycling Coalition v. EPA, 255 
F.3d 855, 870 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (quoting Ass'n of Data Process-
ing Serv. Orgs. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 153 (1970)) (alteration 
in original).  This "test is not meant to be especially demand-
ing."  Clarke v. Secs. Indus. Ass'n, 479 U.S. 388, 399 (1987).  
Indeed, a petitioner "is outside the statute's 'zone of interests' 
only 'if [petitioner's] interests are so marginally related to or 
inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it 
cannot reasonably be assumed that Congress intended to 
permit the suit.' "  Motor & Equip. Mfrs. Ass'n v. Nichols, 
142 F.3d 449, 458 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (quoting Clarke, 479 U.S. at 
399).  In determining whether a petitioner falls within the 
"zone of interests" to be protected by a statute, "we do not 
look at the specific provision said to have been violated in 
complete isolation[,]" but rather in combination with other 
provisions to which it bears an " 'integral relationship.' "  
Fed'n for Am. Immigration Reform, Inc. v. Reno, 93 F.3d 
897, 903 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (quoting Air Courier Conference v. 
Am. Postal Workers Union, 498 U.S. 517, 530 (1991)).

     With these principles in mind, we turn to the facts of this 
case.  According to Mack, "the structure of the CAA engine 
certification program" demonstrates that Congress intended 
EPA to consider anticompetitive injury.  Mack Truck's Reply 
Br. at 2.  Mack points to the provisions of the statute that 

require manufacturers to pay nonconformance penalties 
("NCPs") if they produce noncompliant engines.  See 42 
U.S.C. s 7525(g)(3)(E).  These NCP provisions mandate that 
"penalties ... remove any competitive disadvantage to manu-
facturers whose engines or vehicles achieve the required 
degree of emission reduction."  Id.  Thus, Mack reasons, its 
interest in avoiding anticompetitive injury plainly falls within 
the zone of interests Congress sought to protect.

     Although EPA established the current ABT program pur-
suant to CAA section 202(a), id. s 7521(a), the general grant 
of authority to regulate pollutants that "cause[ ] or contrib-
ute[ ] to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to 
endanger public health or welfare," id. s 7521(a)(1), not pur-
suant to the NCP provisions, we agree with the general 
thrust of Mack's argument, as it appears to us that the two 
provisions enjoy an "integral relationship."  EPA itself has 
observed the obvious, namely, that "averaging, banking and 
trading ... provide another way besides payment of NCPs 
for engines to meet emission standards."  Certification Pro-
grams for Banking and Trading of Oxides of Nitrogen and 
Particulate Emission Credits for Heavy-Duty Engines, 54 
Fed. Reg. 22,652, 22,666 (May 25, 1989).  Thus, EPA devel-
oped the ABT program to be compatible with the NCP 
provisions.  See id. at 22,658 (noting EPA's concern that a 
manufacturer might " 'game' the programs by requesting 
[cheaper] NCPs for engine families that could be meeting the 
emission standard by averaging");  id. at 22,680 (suggesting 
"credits for banking and trading should not be generated by 
either single engine families or any engine families within an 
averaging set where NCPs are used").  Moreover, the allow-
ance for trading "accomplish[es] one of the express goals of 
the NCP provision--[the] remov[al of] any competitive disad-
vantage from complying manufacturers--since the price of 
credits ... reflect[s] the economic cost of obtaining the 
standard technologically."  Id. at 22,666.  In light of the 
"integral relationship" between section 202(a) and the NCP 
provisions, which explicitly refer to anticompetitive effects, we 
think it at least "arguable" that Congress intended EPA to 

take into account anticompetitive impacts should it establish 
an ABT program.

     Having found that Mack has prudential standing, we can 
easily dispose of its procedural challenges to the ABT pro-
gram.  Setting a high bar for such challenges, the Clean Air 
Act requires the challenger to demonstrate a "substantial 
likelihood" that the rule would have been "significantly 
changed" absent the alleged error.  42 U.S.C. s 7607(d)(8).  
EPA argues that because Mack not only had actual notice of 
the proposal to allow cross-subclass averaging but, in fact, 
submitted comments, it cannot possibly meet this standard.  
Mack disagrees, explaining that it heard of the proposal only 
through a "casual conversation" with a competitor rather than 
directly from the agency.  Mack Truck's Reply Br. at 5.  
Though Mack is correct that in all the actual notice cases 
EPA cites, the notice came from the agency, we think this not 
essential.  In National Mining Ass'n v. Mine Safety & 
Health Administration, the agency contended that comments 
of another commenter gave petitioner notice.  116 F.3d 520, 
532 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  Rather than rejecting the agency's 
actual notice defense out of hand because the notice had not 
been given directly by the agency, we asked whether the 
petitioner was "aware[ ]" that the agency was actually "con-
sidering adopting what the commenter has suggested" "de-
spite [the agency's] failure to alert the public."  Id.

     Here, despite Mack's contention that it was merely "spec-
ulat[ing] on rumor" when it submitted comments, Mack 
Truck's Opening Br. at 7, the record indicates that the 
company was "aware" that EPA was considering abolishing 
the prohibition on cross-subclass averaging.  To begin with, 
in support of the proposition that Mack heard of the change 
only through a "casual conversation" with a competitor, the 
company cites its own petition for reconsideration, which in 
turn cites an attached declaration that nowhere addresses the 
issue of how Mack learned of the proposal.  See Klein Decl.;  
see also Fed. R. App. P. 28(a)(6) (requiring that briefs contain 
citations to the "parts of the record" relied upon).  Moreover, 
the extensive comments that Mack submitted on December 
15th give no indication that the company had any doubt about 

what EPA was proposing.  In fact, in its comments, Mack 
expressly states that "[i]n discussions with the Engine Manu-
facturers Association, [EPA] has indicated its intention to 
include in [the 2007 Rule] provisions that would allow for 
averaging, trading and banking of emissions across subclasses 
of heavy-duty diesel engines."  Cmts. of Mack Truck at 1.

     Mack next argues that even if adequate, the notice was not 
"fair" because it gave the company less than three weeks to 
respond to the proposal, resulting in "hurried[ ]" and ill-
prepared comments.  Mack Truck's Reply Br. at 5.  But even 
with more time, Mack made basically the same arguments in 
its petition for reconsideration that it made in its initial 
comments;  therefore, we think it quite unlikely that the rule 
would have been "significantly changed" had Mack received 
earlier notice.  In any event, we have upheld regulations 
where the notice provided even less time for comments.  See 
Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA., 135 F.3d at 814 (finding a 
two-and-a-half week notice period sufficient);  NRDC v. 
Thomas, 838 F.2d 1224, 1243 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (finding actual 
notice two weeks before promulgation of a rule sufficient).

     Equally without merit is Mack's next procedural claim:  
that EPA failed to include in the administrative record discus-
sions held with Mack's competitors, as required by the Clean 
Air Act's docketing provision, 42 U.S.C. s 7607(d)(6)(C).  
Mack has neither alleged that EPA relied on any critical 
"information or data," id., obtained from the disputed conver-
sations nor provided any other reasons to think that there is a 
"substantial likelihood" that EPA would have "significantly 
changed" the rule had it received the full content of the 
conversations.  In any event, Mack not only received actual 
notice of the proposed changes, but it submitted comments, 
which EPA considered.

     Challenging the substance of the ABT program, Mack 
contends that the agency failed to provide a reasoned expla-
nation for its "sudden reversal of its previous, long-standing 

position against cross-class averaging."  Mack Truck's Open-
ing Br. at 10.  As EPA points out, however, a provision that 
temporarily allows cross-subclass averaging from 2007 
through 2009, but retains the prohibition against banking and 
trading, can hardly be considered a wholesale reversal of a 
general policy against cross-subclass averaging, banking, and 
trading.  Respondent's Br. at 60.  In any event, EPA fully 
explained its decision, noting that the revised ABT program 
adds flexibility during the transition to the new emissions 
standards.  Any adverse environmental effects, EPA ob-
served, would be eliminated by the temporary nature of the 
cross-subclass averaging and by the 20% discount applied to 
credit use.  Responding to the claim of anti-competitive ef-
fects, EPA explained that although it "tries to avoid introduc-
ing competitive ... disadvantages when it establishes new 
emissions control programs, it is not a result [EPA] can 
ensure;  nor is that the primary goal for EPA under the 
statute."  EPA Resp. to Mack Truck's Req. for Recons. at 12.

V.   Petition of Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers/Associ-
     ation of International Automobile Manufacturers

     Petitioners Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and As-
sociation of International Automobile Manufacturers (collec-
tively, "Alliance") challenge as arbitrary and capricious the 
2007 Rule's failure to require ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel "in 
time to enable ... [light-duty diesel vehicles] to comply" with 
emissions standards promulgated by EPA in a previous rule-
making, the so-called "Tier 2 Rule."  Alliance's Opening Br. 
at 2.  In addition to defending the merits of the 2007 Rule, 
EPA argues that Alliance's petition is actually a challenge to 
the Tier 2 Rule and as such time-barred by 42 U.S.C. 
s 7607(b)(1), which requires all petitions for review to be 
brought within sixty days of promulgation.  We agree with 
the latter argument.

     Promulgated on February 10, 2000, the Tier 2 Rule estab-
lished new emission standards for light-duty vehicles (basi-
cally passenger cars and pickup trucks).  Control of Air Pol-
lution from New Motor Vehicles:  Tier 2 Motor Vehicle 

Emissions Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control Require-
ments, 65 Fed. Reg. 6698 (Feb. 10, 2000) (to be codified at 40 
C.F.R. pts. 80, 85 and 86).  The Tier 2 Rule makes no 
distinction between traditional gasoline engines and light-
duty diesel vehicles, Id. at 6698, which presently comprise 
only one percent of the total light-duty fleet.  Like the 2007 
Rule, the Tier 2 Rule attempts to create regulatory flexibility 
by gradually phasing in the applicable emissions standards, 
beginning in the 2004 model year.  See Tier 2 Rule, 65 Fed. 
Reg. at 6701-02.

     The Tier 2 Rule set emission standards without establish-
ing diesel sulfur limits, and the 2007 Rule altered none of 
these standards.  The Alliance, moreover, concedes that it 
raised the low sulfur fuel issue in comments to the Tier 2 
proposal.  Alliance's Reply Br. at 2.  EPA considered those 
comments and concluded that "the interim standards [were] 
feasible for diesel [vehicles] without further reductions in 
diesel fuel sulfur."  Tier 2 Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 6729.  With 
regard to the ability of light-duty diesel vehicles to meet the 
final standards (triggered in 2007), EPA felt that ultra-low 
sulfur diesel fuel would likely be required but concluded that 
"[g]iven the significant potential costs of such fuel changes 
and the small percentage of [light-duty vehicles] using diesel 
fuel[,] ... it [was] inappropriate to make such changes in the 
context of a rule regulating light-duty vehicles and engines."  
EPA Resp. to Tier 2 Cmts. at 2-12.  If the Alliance believed 
the emissions standards contained in the Tier 2 Rule were 
infeasible without ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel, it should have 
petitioned for review of that rule.

     Calling the 2007 Rule a "supporting regulation," Alliance 
argues that a challenge to the Tier 2 Rule would have been a 
"waste of judicial resources," pointing out that we have in the 
past "upheld an otherwise valid ... regulation whose validity 
hinged upon an adequate supporting regulation that the 
Court nevertheless found wanting."  Alliance Reply Br. at 2.  
The case Alliance cites for this proposition, Automotive Parts 
Rebuilders Ass'n v. EPA, 720 F.2d 142 (D.C. Cir. 1983), 
however, is easily distinguishable.  There, we upheld EPA's 
promulgation of "emissions performance warranty regula-

tions," id. at 148, even though in an entirely different case, we 
had remanded to EPA the reimbursement scheme by which 
vehicle manufacturers sought reimbursement from part man-
ufacturers, id. at 161 n. 80 (citing Specialty Equip. Mkt. Ass'n 
v. Ruckelshaus, 720 F.2d 124 (D.C. Cir. 1983)).  In upholding 
the warranty regulations, we specifically conditioned our ap-
proval on EPA developing an adequate reimbursement 
scheme.  Id.  In that case, it would indeed have been a waste 
of judicial resources to void the warranty regulations solely 
because of defects in a reimbursement scheme that we had 
already remanded.  In contrast, the Alliance has conserved 
no judicial resources by waiting to challenge a failure to 
require ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel now rather than at the 
time of the Tier 2 Rule's promulgation.

     Nor can Alliance rely on the "reopening" doctrine under 
which a review period "starts fresh ... if an agency reopens 
[an] issue by holding out [an] unchanged section as a pro-
posed regulation, offering an explanation for its language, 
soliciting comments on its substance, and responding to the 
comments in promulgating the regulation in its final form."  
Am. Iron and Steel Inst. v. EPA, 886 F.2d 390, 397 (D.C. Cir. 
1989).  As EPA points out, although some automakers did 
submit comments advocating that ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel 
be made available earlier, EPA responded:  "Our feasibility 
analyses as presented in the Tier 2 Rule ... remain our 
policy regarding light-duty diesel vehicles.  We have not 
reexamined or reopened the issues regarding the Tier 2 
standards."  EPA Resp. to Cmts. at 9-2.

VI.  Conclusion

     The petitions for review are denied.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                  