                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 5, 2001   Decided December 28, 2001 

                           No. 00-1466

                         Teledesic LLC, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

           Fixed Wireless Communications Coalition and 
                  WinStar Communications, Inc., 
                           Intervenors

                      Petition for Review of an Order of the Federal 
                           Communications Commission

     Mark A. Grannis argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Scott Blake Harris and Timothy J. 
Simeone.

     C. Grey Pash, Jr., Counsel, Federal Communications 
Commission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on 
the brief were Daniel M. Armstrong, Associate General 

Counsel, John M. Nannes, Acting Assistant Attorney Gener-
al, United States Department of Justice, Robert B. Nicholson, 
and Adam D. Hirsh, Attorneys.  John E. Ingle, Deputy 
Associate General Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, Thomas E. Chandler, and James M. Carr, Counsel, 
and Christopher J. Sprigman, Attorney, United States De-
partment of Justice, entered appearances.

     Joseph M. Sandri, Jr., Barry J. Ohlson, Leonard R. Raish, 
and Liliana E. Ward were on the brief for intervenors.

     Before:  Edwards and Randolph, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Teledesic LLC ("Teledesic") peti-
tions for review of the Federal Communications Commission's 
("FCC" or "Commission") Report and Order governing the 
reallocation of a band of radio spectrum previously shared by 
satellite and traditional terrestrial spectrum users.  See In re 
Redesignation of the 17.7-19.7 GHz Frequency Band, Report 
and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. 13,430 (2000) ("Report and Order").  
The Report and Order set forth rules allocating one part of 
the band to satellite users and another part to terrestrial 
users.  Teledesic, a company that plans to build a global 
telecommunications network using satellite technology, ob-
jects to the new rules requiring satellite operators to pay the 
relocation costs incurred by terrestrial operators during the 
initial reallocation period.

     Just before oral argument in this case, the FCC revised the 
new rules so as to accede to the demands of Teledesic with 
respect to two issues.  Teledesic's challenges on these two 
issues are therefore moot.  With respect to the remaining 
issues, we find no merit in Teledesic's challenges.  The new 
rules are founded on the FCC's goals of protecting existing 
terrestrial spectrum users while facilitating the growth of 
new, comprehensive satellite networks.  The agency's goals 
and the regulatory means used to implement them are both 
permissible and reasonable.

     Accordingly, we hereby dismiss the moot challenges and 
otherwise deny Teledesic's petition for review.

                          I. Background

     Among its many responsibilities, the FCC is charged with 
regulating and overseeing radio spectrum.  See 47 U.S.C. 
ss 151 (Supp. V 1999) (creating the FCC for the purpose of 
regulating commerce in communication by wire and radio), 
303 (1994 & Supp. V 1999) (authorizing the Commission, inter 
alia, to assign station frequencies, issue regulations to avoid 
interference between stations, study new uses for radio, and 
encourage broader and more effective use of radio in the 
public interest).  This responsibility has become more chal-
lenging in recent years due to the growth of new telecommu-
nications technologies.  This case concerns the FCC's efforts 
to reallocate one portion of the spectrum to accommodate an 
ascendant and promising technology:  satellite telecommuni-
cations networks.

     Prior to the Commission's Report and Order, the band of 
spectrum from 17.7 to 19.7 (known as the "18 GHz band") was 
allocated to two broad groups of telecommunications users.  
Terrestrial fixed services (also known as "FS") operate by 
connecting one fixed location with one or more other fixed 
locations.  See 47 C.F.R. s 2.1(c) (2000).  They serve many 
functions, including remote monitoring of gas and petroleum 
pipelines, public safety communications, railroad communica-
tions, public utilities, and high speed Internet access.  See Br. 
for Respondents at 3;  Br. for Intervenors at 1-2.  The FCC 
estimates that approximately 179,000 terrestrial FS links 
operate in the 18 GHz band, and this number will grow as 
services move up from more congested lower bands.  Report 
and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 13,436 p 11.

     FS users share the 18 GHz band on a co-primary basis with 
fixed satellite services (or FSS), which connect fixed locations 
by satellite.  See 47 C.F.R. s 2.1(c).  These services utilize 
many earth stations that communicate with one or more 
space stations.  Satellite technology has the potential to 
provide global Internet access, two-way digital communica-
tions, video conferencing, telemedicine, and residential voice 
and data communications services.  In re Redesignation of 
the 17.7-19.7 GHz Frequency Band, Notice of Proposed Rule-
making, 13 F.C.C.R. 19,923, 19,929 p 9 (1998) ("NPRM").  

The FCC expects these services to expand dramatically in the 
next decade.  Id. Currently, the FCC reports that no non-
governmental satellite earth stations operate in the 18 GHz 
band, but Teledesic has been granted a license, and a number 
of other companies have also applied for licenses.  Br. for 
Respondent at 3 n.1.  Teledesic plans to deploy a large 
number of earth stations to support a global Internet tele-
communications network.  See Br. for Petitioner, Corporate 
Disclosure Statement at 1.

     Establishing so many satellite stations would be difficult 
under the co-primary system, because the FS stations cur-
rently occupying the band can cause harmful interference to 
the new satellite systems if the two are located too close 
together on the spectrum.  See In re Redesignation of the 
17.7-19.7 GHz Frequency Band, Comments of Teledesic LLC, 
IB Docket No. 98-172 (Nov. 19, 1998), at 3-4 ("Teledesic 
Comments"), reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 150-51.  
Under the co-primary system, all users must coordinate with 
one another to prevent such interference.  See 47 C.F.R. 
ss 25.203 (setting forth coordination procedures for selection 
of sites and frequencies), 101.103(d) (setting forth frequency 
coordination procedures).  By 1998, satellite companies had 
advised the Commission about the "ubiquitous" nature of the 
networks they planned to construct.  NPRM, 13 F.C.C.R. at 
19,933 p 18.  They urged the Commission to adopt "blanket 
licensing" for satellite systems, in which a large number of 
stations would be authorized at once without the licensee 
having to specify each station's individual location.  Id.  The 
companies also advised the FCC that it would be difficult to 
construct ubiquitous satellite networks if the satellites had to 
share band space on a co-primary basis with terrestrial users.  
Id.

     The Commission responded with a Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking proposing changes designed to make more effi-
cient use of the 18 GHz band in light of the impending 
widespread deployment of satellite earth stations.  Id. at 
19,925 p 1.  The Commission found that satellite operators 
planned to deploy "potentially millions of small antenna earth 
stations," and expressed concern about "the feasibility of 

sharing between terrestrial fixed service and ubiquitously 
deployed FSS earth stations."  Id. It agreed with the satellite 
companies that blanket licensing would probably be necessary 
to keep up with the large numbers of satellite earth stations 
in the works.  Id. at 19,933 p 19.  In light of these concerns, 
the Commission proposed segmenting the band into subsec-
tions dedicated to satellite and terrestrial stations respective-
ly.  Id.

     Under the proposed plan, FS services would lose their co-
primary status in portions of the band, but the Commission 
proposed to grandfather FS services already operating in 
those sections.  Id. at 19,941-42 p 40.  One reason for this 
proposal was that, while there were not yet any commercial 
satellite systems operating in the band, there were thousands 
of existing FS operators there, and the FCC wished to 
protect the investment in those services.  Id.  Another rea-
son was the Commission's tentative conclusion that satellite 
operators would be able to design their networks to avoid 
reception of harmful interference from existing FS users.  Id.

     The FCC further concluded that some existing terrestrial 
facilities would probably have to be relocated from one fre-
quency to another, and it solicited comments about the best 
way to accomplish this relocation.  Id. at 19,942 p 41.  The 
Commission noted that it had addressed the same question in 
earlier proceedings, and it asked commenters to discuss 
whether the principles adopted in the earlier proceedings 
should apply here.  Id. at 19,942-43 p 41 & nn.65-66 (citing 
the "Emerging Technologies" proceedings:  In re Redevelop-
ment of Spectrum to Encourage Innovation in the Use of 
New Telecommunications Technologies, First Report and 
Order and Third Notice of Proposed Rule Making, 7 
F.C.C.R. 6886 (1992);  Second Report and Order, 8 F.C.C.R. 
6495 (1993);  Third Report and Order and Memorandum 
Opinion and Order, 8 F.C.C.R. 6589 (1993);  Memorandum 
Opinion and Order, 9 F.C.C.R. 1943 (1994);  Second Memo-
randum Opinion and Order, 9 F.C.C.R. 7797 (1994), as well 
as the "Mobile Satellite Service at 2 GHz" allocation proceed-
ing:  In re Amendment of Section 2.106 of the Commission's 
Rules to Allocate Spectrum at 2 GHz for Use by the Mobile-

Satellite Service, First Report and Order and Further Notice 
of Proposed Rule Making, 12 F.C.C.R. 7388, 7396-7404, 7414-
21 (1997)).

     The Commission received comments from interested par-
ties, including Teledesic and FS users.  The latter group 
included the Fixed Wireless Communications Coalition and 
Winstar Communications, Inc., the intervenors before this 
court, which represent the interests of FS users.  In general, 
Teledesic "strongly support[ed]" the proposal to segment the 
18 GHz band, but expressed concern about the delay that 
would be caused by grandfathering existing FS users.  Tele-
desic Comments at ii, reprinted in J.A. 146.  Teledesic asked 
the FCC to adopt "blanket licensing" of satellite earth sta-
tions.  Id. at 8-11, reprinted in J.A. 155-58.  It urged the 
FCC not to require satellite users to pay to relocate FS 
stations to "comparable facilities," as had been required in the 
Emerging Technologies rules, and requested that the FCC 
adopt principles of "cost mitigation."  Id. at 15-21, reprinted 
in J.A. 162-68.

     The FCC issued its Report and Order on June 22, 2000.  
The Report and Order reflect the FCC's conclusion that 
separating terrestrial users from satellite stations will serve 
the public interest.  Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 13,431-
32 p 2.  The Report and Order articulate a policy of protect-
ing existing FS operations "to the maximum extent possible," 
while providing for the growth of both satellite and terrestrial 
services.  Id.  To facilitate this policy, the Report and Order 
designate, broadly, one subset of the band in which FS users 
will be primary, and another, larger subset for satellite users.  
See id. at 13,432 p 4, 13,443-56 pp 28-54.  The Report and 
Order also authorize blanket licensing for certain satellite 
earth stations.  Id. at 13,470-75 pp 85-95.

     Rather than permanently grandfathering existing FS users, 
the Report and Order allow FS stations in the portion of the 
band that will be reallocated for satellite use to retain co-
primary status for 10 years.  Satellite operators wishing to 
evict terrestrial users must first negotiate with them.  This 
negotiation period begins with the adoption of the Report and 

Order and lasts for two years in most cases, and for three 
years for terrestrial public safety services.  47 C.F.R. 
s 101.85(c).  A terrestrial user contacted by a satellite user 
may not refuse to negotiate and all parties are required to 
negotiate in good faith.  Id. s 101.89(b).  In deciding whether 
the parties have negotiated in good faith, the FCC will 
consider factors including whether the satellite has made a 
bona fide offer of relocation and whether, if the terrestrial 
user demanded a premium, the premium was proportionate to 
the cost of providing comparable facilities.  Id.  "Comparable 
facilities" are defined by the regulations in terms of "through-
put" or capacity, reliability, and operating costs.  Id. 
s 101.89(d).  For example, if digital facilities are replaced 
with digital facilities, the satellite service must provide the 
terrestrial user with equivalent data loading bits per second.  
Id. s 101.89(d)(1).  Satellite users must also compensate FS 
licensees for any "increased recurring costs associated with 
the replacement facilities" for five years after relocation.  Id. 
s 101.89(d)(3).

     If no agreement is reached during the negotiation period, 
then 47 C.F.R. s 101.91 allows the satellite service to displace 
the FS user involuntarily.  If involuntary displacement occurs 
during the 10-year transition period, however, the satellite 
user must pay all costs of moving the terrestrial user to 
replacement facilities, complete all activities necessary for 
implementing the relocation, build the new system, and test 
the new system.  47 C.F.R. s 101.91(a).  The replacement 
facilities must be at least equivalent, in terms of throughput, 
reliability, and operating costs, as the facilities from which the 
FS user is evicted.  Id. s 101.91(b).  At the end of the 10-
year transition period, satellite operators will be able to evict 
terrestrial incumbents without having to pay their relocation 
costs.  47 C.F.R. s 101.95(a).  The initial, unrevised Report 
and Order exempted a small subset of the band (19.26-19.3 
GHz) from the sunset provisions.  Report and Order, 15 
F.C.C.R. at 13,464 p 69;  47 C.F.R. s 101.95.  The initial, 
unrevised Report and Order also provided that low-power 
stations could continue to operate on a primary basis.  Report 
and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 13,457 p 56.

     Teledesic petitioned for review, challenging the relocation 
rules and the Commission's failure to adopt its alternative 
proposals.  Teledesic also challenged the exception for low-
power stations and the exemption of stations in the 19.26-19.3 
GHz band from the sunset provisions.  The FCC moved to 
hold the case in abeyance, because some parties to the 
proceeding before the Commission had petitioned for recon-
sideration of the Report and Order.  Teledesic was not 
among the parties seeking reconsideration.  A panel of this 
court denied the FCC's motion to hold these proceedings in 
abeyance, see Teledesic LLC v. FCC, No. 00-1466 (D.C. Cir. 
Jan. 31, 2001) (Order), and oral argument was scheduled for 
November 5, 2001.

     Less than a week before oral argument, the Commission 
issued a Reconsideration Order.  See In re Redesignation of 
the 17.7-19.7 GHz Frequency Band, First Order on Reconsid-
eration, IB Docket No. 98-172 (Nov. 1, 2001) ("Reconsidera-
tion Order").  In the Reconsideration Order, the FCC ad-
dressed, sua sponte, some of the concerns Teledesic had 
raised in its petition and briefs to this court.  Specifically, the 
Commission decided that low-power stations should be sub-
ject to the same relocation regime as all other FS stations.  
Id. at 16-20 pp 32-41.  The Commission also decided not to 
exempt stations in the 19.26-19.3 subset from the sunset 
provisions.  Id. at 12-14 pp 23-25.  The Commission stated 
that it had authority to address sua sponte the issues that 
Teledesic had chosen to raise before this court, regardless of 
whether any petitions pending before the Commission had 
raised those issues.  Id. at 11 p 20 & n.66 (citing Cent. Fla. 
Enters., Inc. v. FCC, 598 F.2d 37, 48 n.51 (D.C. Cir. 1978)).

                          II. Discussion

A.   The Order under Review is Final.

     Before turning to the merits of Teledesic's challenges, we 
consider whether the Report and Order are final and reviewa-
ble by this court.  This court has jurisdiction to review final 
orders of the FCC made reviewable under 47 U.S.C. s 402(a).  
28 U.S.C. s 2342(1) (1994).  Section 402(a) governs proceed-

ings to set aside or annul FCC orders except those specifical-
ly listed as being appealable under s 402(b), relating to 
particular applications.  Teledesic's petition falls under 
s 402(a), and is therefore reviewable.

     Teledesic was within its rights to seek review in this court 
without first petitioning for reconsideration by the FCC.  See 
47 U.S.C. s 405(a) (1994) (providing that the filing of a 
petition for reconsideration shall not be a condition precedent 
to judicial review of an FCC order unless the party seeking 
review was not a party to the initial proceedings or relies on 
questions of law or fact on which the Commission has not had 
an opportunity to pass).  Teledesic was a party to the initial 
proceeding before the Commission, and the Commission ad-
dressed Teledesic's arguments regarding the relocation rules.  
Therefore, Teledesic had standing to seek judicial review of 
the Report and Order.

     The fact that parties other than Teledesic petitioned the 
FCC for reconsideration of the Report and Order does not 
deprive the court of jurisdiction over Teledesic's petition.  See 
Wrather-Alvarez Broad., Inc. v. FCC, 248 F.2d 646, 649 (D.C. 
Cir. 1957) (noting that because parties to FCC proceedings 
"have their choice whether to seek relief from Commission 
action from the Commission itself or from the court ... it 
may happen ... that one party will choose one tribunal and 
another party the other").  In such cases, we often hold a 
petition for review in abeyance pending the FCC's further 
proceedings, see id., but this practice is not an iron-clad rule, 
see, e.g., MCI Telecomms. Corp. v. FCC, 143 F.3d 606, 608 
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (determining that prudential considerations 
militated in favor of resolving the petitions for review even 
though parties other than the petitioners had filed petitions 
for reconsideration before the FCC).  It is likewise true that 
it does not matter whether petitions are filed to challenge 
portions of the Reconsideration Order.  Any such challenges 
do not bear on our resolution of Teledesic's challenges to the 
disputed Report and Order, because the Reconsideration 
Order is not subject to review in this case.  What is important 
here is that the Report and Order were final and appealable 
as to Teledesic.

     The court decided not to hold in abeyance Teledesic's 
petition for review of the Report and Order, even though 
other parties had petitioned the Commission for reconsidera-
tion.  And our jurisdiction over Teledesic's petition was not 
lost when the Commission elected to issue its Reconsidera-
tion Order mere days before oral argument.  The FCC 
claims that, under Central Florida Enterprises, Inc. v. FCC, 
598 F.2d 37, 48 n.51 (D.C. Cir. 1978), the agency had authori-
ty to address sua sponte in its Reconsideration Order several 
of the issues that were pending before this court.  In other 
words, the FCC contends that it had the discretion to recon-
sider certain of the issues raised by Teledesic and then issue 
a Reconsideration Order even though Teledesic had not filed 
a petition for reconsideration and had opted instead to seek 
judicial review.  We need not decide this question.

     Notwithstanding the Reconsideration Order, the Commis-
sion's Report and Order of June 22, 2000, are the only 
matters under review in this proceeding.  Thus, in addressing 
Teledesic's claims, we rely only on the agency's positions set 
forth in the Report and Order, not on the Commission's 
subsequent elaborations in the Reconsideration Order.  We 
note, however, that, apart from the FCC's decision to accede 
to Teledesic's demands on two issues, the Reconsideration 
Order merely expands upon the rationales for the relocation 
rules contained in the original Report and Order.

     Although this petition for review involves only the June 22, 
2000 Report and Order, we cannot ignore the fact that two of 
Teledesic's challenges have evaporated in light of the Com-
mission's change of policy as expressed in its Reconsideration 
Order.  See Reconsideration Order at 12-14 pp 23-25 (making 
terrestrial stations in the 19.26-19.3 GHz subset of the band 
subject to the sunset date), 16-20 pp 32-41 (making low-power 
terrestrial stations in the 18 GHz band subject to the reloca-
tion rules).  At oral argument, the Commission gave official 
notice to the court via the Reconsideration Order that the 
rules regarding (1) the 19.26-19.3 GHz subset of the band and 
(2) low-power terrestrial stations were no longer in effect.  
Counsel for Teledesic assured the court that the Reconsidera-
tion Order had fully addressed Teledesic's concerns on these 

matters.  Neither side sought to pursue the issues.  It is 
therefore clear that the issues concerning low-power stations 
and the 19.26-19.3 GHz subset are moot.  Accordingly, we 
turn to Teledesic's remaining challenges.

B.   The FCC's Relocation Rules are Reasonable.

     1. Standard of Review

     We must uphold the FCC's actions unless they are arbi-
trary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise unlaw-
ful.  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A) (1994).  Pursuant to this standard, 
we look to determine whether the Commission has "articu-
late[d] a satisfactory explanation for its action including a 
'rational connection between the facts found and the choice 
made.' "  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. 
Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington 
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  
The court must ensure that the agency has given reasoned 
consideration to all of the relevant facts and issues.  Greater 
Boston Television Corp. v. FCC, 444 F.2d 841, 851 (D.C. Cir. 
1970).

     While agreeing on these basic principles, the parties none-
theless dispute the degree of deference that is warranted.  
The Commission argues that review must be especially limit-
ed because the Report and Order concern matters within its 
area of expertise that involve predictions "at the frontiers of 
science."  Br. for Respondents at 15 (quoting Balt. Gas & 
Elec. Co. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 462 U.S. 87, 103 
(1983)).  It further argues that the spectrum reallocation 
rules at issue are just the sort of technical rules within its 
area of expertise that traditionally have merited a heightened 
degree of deference.  Id. at 16 (citing Aeronautical Radio, 
Inc. v. FCC, 928 F.2d 428, 443-45 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (upholding 
an FCC decision on allocation because it was a predictive 
judgment of the type historically left to agency discretion);  
Nat'l Ass'n of Broadcasters v. FCC, 740 F.2d 1190, 1209-14 
(D.C. Cir. 1984) (upholding an FCC decision on FS relocation 
given that the Commission acted against an evolving techno-
logical and factual background)).  Teledesic counters that it 
objects not to the Commission's scientific predictions, but to 

its system of compensating displaced terrestrial operators.  
Teledesic argues that the FCC's economic compensation 
scheme is not entitled to the same deference as an order 
dealing with purely technical matters.

     In our view, the parties' dispute involves a fundamental 
disagreement over the policy goals underlying spectrum real-
location.  The problem presented by the 18 GHz band is not 
merely one of economics.  The Commission correctly con-
ceives of its role in prophetic and managerial terms:  it must 
predict the effect and growth rate of technological newcomers 
on the spectrum, while striking a balance between protecting 
valuable existing uses and making room for these sweeping 
new technologies.  Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 13,431-
33 pp 1-2, 4-5.  In striking this balance, the Commission has 
relied on its judgments about the importance of old, terrestri-
al services, as well as the potential value to society of new, 
emerging satellite systems.  Its decisions about how best to 
strike this balance thus involve both technology and econom-
ics.  The Commission is therefore entitled to the deference 
traditionally accorded decisions regarding spectrum manage-
ment.  See Telocator Network of Am. v. FCC, 691 F.2d 525, 
538 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (finding that when it is fostering innova-
tive methods of exploiting the spectrum, the Commission 
"functions as a policymaker and, inevitably, a seer - roles in 
which it will be accorded the greatest deference by a review-
ing court").

     2. The Challenges to the FCC's Relocation Rules

     Teledesic argues that the rules governing the relocation of 
terrestrial services are arbitrary and capricious because they 
force satellite operators to confer windfalls on terrestrial 
services by paying for and building "comparable facilities."  
It claims that, because many terrestrial operators currently 
use aging equipment, satellite operators will end up subsidiz-
ing the terrestrial operators' upgrades to new equipment.  
Teledesic characterizes this result as one of systematic over-
compensation.  Br. for Petitioner at 27.  In its comments to 
the Commission, Teledesic urged the agency to require that 
satellite operators compensate displaced FS users only for 

the unamortized "book value" of their old equipment.  It now 
accuses the Commission of rejecting this proposal without 
articulating a satisfactory reason for doing so.

     Teledesic's contentions fail because the Commission ade-
quately explained both the rationale underlying its chosen 
approach, as well as its reasons for rejecting Teledesic's 
proposed alternative.  First, as noted above, one of the 
Commission's goals was to protect existing terrestrial ser-
vices.  Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 13,431-32 p 2.  If the 
Commission only required FSS users to pay terrestrial users 
for the book value of their equipment, FS users that were 
unable to afford replacement equipment might be put out of 
business when displaced.  Second, in addressing Teledesic's 
proposal, the Commission reaffirmed its policy of placing the 
cost of involuntary relocation to comparable facilities on new 
entrants.  Id. at 13,468 p 78.  According to the FCC, the 
justification for this policy is that existing users must be able 
to obtain replacement equipment at no cost in order to 
continue to provide service with a minimum of disruption.  
Id.;  In re Amendment of Section 2.106 of the Commission's 
Rules to Allocate Spectrum at 2 GHz for Use by the Mobile-
Satellite Service, Second Report and Order and Second Mem-
orandum Opinion and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. 12,315, 12,352 
p 109 (2000) ("2 GHz MSS Relocation Order") (reiterating in 
a more recent decision that the Commission "consider[s] it 
essential that the process not disrupt the communications 
services provided by the existing ... operations") (citing the 
Emerging Technologies proceeding, In re Redevelopment of 
Spectrum to Encourage Innovation in the Use of New Tele-
communications Technologies, Third Report and Order and 
Memorandum Opinion and Order, 8 F.C.C.R. 6589, 6594 p 13 
(1993)).

     These policy goals are reasonable and do not, on their face, 
result in windfalls for incumbents.  The Commission's objec-
tive is simple:  ensure that incumbent terrestrial users will be 
able to continue operating even if they are forced by satellite 
users to relocate.  Teledesic expresses concern that the "com-
parable facilities" standard will result in incumbents replacing 
their aging facilities with unduly expensive, state-of-the-art 

equipment at the expense of satellite companies.  "Compara-
ble facilities," however, does not mean that terrestrial users 
will be able to insist on top-of-the-line replacement facilities.  
Rather, satellite operators will have to ensure that the re-
placement facilities are equivalent to the existing FS facilities 
with respect to throughput, reliability, and operating costs, as 
explained in the regulations.  See 47 C.F.R. ss 101.89(d), 
101.91(b).  If the satellite operator can meet the standard by 
retuning or repairing old equipment, it need not outfit the FS 
user with new equipment.  Even if new facilities are neces-
sary to meet the standard, this does not necessarily mean 
that FS users will be able to demand the newest and most 
expensive equipment if less new equipment will meet the 
standard.  The stated goal of the standard is not to provide 
free upgrades to terrestrial users, but rather to "ensure a 
seamless handoff" and a smooth transition to the new band 
segmentation regime.  Id. at s 101.91(c).

     The Commission's current approach to the relocation of 
incumbents is not new.  It was adopted first in the Emerging 
Technologies rules and, after the instant order was issued, in 
another relocation proceeding.  See 2 GHz MSS Relocation 
Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 12,351-52 pp 108-10.  Indeed, this court 
has approved aspects of a similar relocation scheme in the 
Emerging Technologies context.  See Ass'n of Pub.-Safety 
Communications Officials-Int'l, Inc. v. FCC, 76 F.3d 395, 
397, 400 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (upholding the elimination of an 
exemption for public safety incumbents from a relocation 
regime in which emerging technology licensees would pay all 
costs associated with relocating incumbents to comparable 
facilities).  Moreover, the Commission has adopted similar 
relocation schemes in other contexts.  See Small Bus. in 
Telecomms. v. FCC, 251 F.3d 1015, 1017, 1026 (D.C. Cir. 
2001) (denying in part and dismissing in part petition for 
review of relocation regime in which displaced incumbents 
would be given comparable facilities to ensure a seamless 
transition).

     Because the Commission's policy in this instance is consis-
tent with its overall approach to new technologies, it argues 
that it was not required to give as extensive a justification as 

it would have had it unveiled the policy for the first time here.  
We agree.  See Hall v. McLaughlin, 864 F.2d 868, 872 (D.C. 
Cir. 1989) (holding that where an agency is following estab-
lished policy, the need for a comprehensive statement of its 
rationale is less pressing).  Like the Emerging Technologies 
proceedings, this Report and Order involve new technologies 
displacing existing users and being forced to pay those exist-
ing users to relocate to comparable facilities.  In Emerging 
Technologies, the FCC acknowledged that incumbents that 
are forced to relocate involuntarily will not incur any costs as 
a result of the forced relocation, and may even benefit in 
some instances if their aging equipment is replaced with 
state-of-the-art technology.  Third Report and Order and 
Memorandum Opinion and Order, 8 F.C.C.R. 6589, 6595 p 16 
(1993).  The Commission viewed such a result as the legiti-
mate byproduct of a process whereby important terrestrial 
services are uprooted against their will to accommodate new-
er technologies.  The Commission's consistent policy has been 
to prevent new spectrum users from leaving displaced incum-
bents with a sum of money too small to allow them to resume 
their operations at a new location.  See 2 GHz MSS Reloca-
tion Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 12,352 p 109 (expressing the Com-
mission's view, dating from the Emerging Technologies pro-
ceeding, that existing operations should not be disrupted 
during the transition to emerging technologies).

     Teledesic objects to the FCC's reliance on Emerging Tech-
nologies, arguing that, because the Commission readily ac-
knowledged some differences between this case and Emerg-
ing Technologies, the Commission must start from scratch in 
this case.  There is only one notable difference between 
Emerging Technologies and this case:  Emerging Technolo-
gies involved an entirely new service displacing incumbent 
licensees, while, in this case, satellite and terrestrial users 
already coexisted in the 18 GHz band on a co-primary basis.  
Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. at 13,468 pp 79-80.  This is a 
difference without significance, however.  Teledesic and other 
companies plan to launch comprehensive new satellite sys-
tems involving millions of earth stations that will be licensed 
on a blanket basis.  To accommodate these new systems, 

existing terrestrial users must be displaced like the incum-
bents in Emerging Technologies. The compensatory and pres-
ervationist justifications for the "comparable facilities" re-
quirement therefore apply equally in this case, and it was 
legitimate for the Commission to explain its choices in part by 
reference to the earlier proceeding.

     Teledesic's contention that the Commission impermissibly 
failed to consider its "cost mitigation" proposals is similarly 
misplaced.  Teledesic accuses the FCC of failing to consider 
how to encourage reasonable cooperation by terrestrial in-
cumbents in the relocation process.  Br. for Petitioner at 34.  
One of Teledesic's proposals is that no compensation should 
be paid for equipment replaced after the Commission issued 
its NPRM, and the other is that FS licensees who renew 
their grandfathered licenses should receive less compensation 
than other FS licensees.  Teledesic Comments at 20-21, re-
printed at J.A. 167-68.  Teledesic's claim is not supported by 
the record, which reflects that the Commission was extremely 
concerned with providing incentives to incumbents to relo-
cate.  The Commission encouraged them to do so by issuing 
rules that initially reward relocation and then sunset after 10 
years.  Terrestrial operators who have not relocated by that 
point will be penalized, while those that negotiate a deal 
expeditiously with a satellite company will receive the benefit 
of the "comparable facilities" standard.  By contrast, Telede-
sic's proposals are aimed less at smoothing the way for 
reallocation than at minimizing its own costs, and they do not 
advance the FCC's goals of preserving terrestrial systems 
while ushering in new satellite networks.  Because Telede-
sic's proposals are patently inconsistent with the Commis-
sion's well-explained goals, the Commission was not required 
to analyze each of those suggestions in detail.

     3. Safeguards

     Teledesic raises a legitimate concern over the possibility 
that terrestrial operators may hold out during negotiations in 
an attempt to extract payments from satellite users over and 
above the costs of relocating.  The Commission anticipated 

this concern, however, and structured the new rules to pro-
tect against unreasonable bargaining by terrestrial operators.

     Teledesic objects in particular to the provision in 47 C.F.R. 
s 101.89, which requires satellite users to negotiate with FS 
users for two (and sometimes three) years, during which time 
FS operators may seek "premium[s]."  Teledesic's concern is 
that, by authorizing terrestrial operators to demand premi-
ums, the rules give them a green light to demand unreason-
able sums of money from the satellite companies, who have no 
choice but to accede or wait until the end of the two-year 
period.  In response, the Commission points out that Telede-
sic's view of the rule is badly distorted, for it ignores the 
limitations that the rule places on the bargaining behavior of 
incumbents.  The Commission is right.

     The cited rule explicitly requires both parties to negotiate 
in good faith during the negotiation period.  "Good faith" is 
measured, in part, by looking at whether the FS service has 
demanded a premium that is disproportionate to the cost of 
providing comparable facilities.  47 C.F.R. s 101.89(b)(2).  
Thus, rather than authorizing incumbents to demand inequi-
table windfalls, the rules explicitly forbid them from doing so.  
Moreover, an incumbent whose bargaining demands are chal-
lenged must justify its numbers against a regulatory stan-
dard.  In other words, the demands must be reasonably 
related to the actual cost of relocating to an equivalent facility 
as defined in the regulations.  This requirement prevents 
terrestrial users from attempting to gouge satellite companies 
that are required to negotiate with them.

     A second safeguard exists in the form of time limits on 
negotiations.  If a terrestrial operator holds out during the 
two to three year negotiation period, the satellite user may 
initiate involuntary relocation procedures pursuant to 47 
C.F.R. s 101.91.  An incumbent's incentive during the negoti-
ation period, therefore, is to negotiate as advantageous a deal 
as possible before facing forced relocation.  Once the negotia-
tion period is over, incumbents still have an incentive to 
relocate before the sunset provisions kick in.  After 10 years, 
incumbents will be forced to relocate without receiving any 

relocation payments.  Because of these temporal limits on 
incumbents' expectations of relocation payments, the value of 
their addresses on the spectrum goes down over time.  A 
satellite company will presumably be less willing to pay to 
relocate an incumbent the longer the latter holds out as the 
sunset date approaches.  These safeguards provide adequate 
protection against unreasonable negotiation tactics.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the reasons cited above, we hereby dismiss the moot 
challenges and otherwise deny Teledesic's petition for review 
as meritless.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                   