                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued March 22, 2001     Decided June 5, 2001 

                           No. 00-5175

               Truckers United for Safety, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

             Kenneth M. Mead, The Inspector General, 
                  Department of Transportation, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02793)

     Anthony J. McMahon argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellants.  Edward M. McClure entered an appearance.

     Eric M. Jaffe, Assistant United States Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellee.  With him on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, United States Attorney at the time the brief was filed, 
and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant United States Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams and Henderson, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  In keeping with its mission to 
enforce motor carrier safety regulations, the Office of Motor 
Carriers ("OMC") initiated compliance review investigations 
into appellants' record keeping practices.  As part of that 
effort, the Department of Transportation's Office of Inspector 
General ("DOT OIG") was engaged to use its purported 
search and seizure authority to obtain appellants' business 
records.  Under the legal framework in effect at the time of 
the underlying events, the Inspector General Act of 1978, 
Pub. L. No. 95-452, 92 Stat. 1101 (1978) ("Inspector General 
Act" or "Act"), the Inspector General ("IG") had no authority 
to engage in the kinds of criminal investigations at issue 
here-criminal investigations that are at the heart of an agen-
cy's general compliance enforcement responsibilities.  We 
therefore hold that appellants are entitled to the return of 
records and other property seized from them during the IG's 
ultra vires investigations and seizures.

     Following the IG's investigation of appellants, and subse-
quent to appellants' filing of the lawsuit in this case, Congress 
enacted the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999, 
Pub. L. No. 106-159, 113 Stat. 1748, 1773 (1999) ("MCSIA").  
The District Court found that the MCSIA granted the IG 
new authority to conduct investigations of motor carriers' 
fraudulent and criminal activities related to DOT's operations 
and programs.  Truckers United for Safety v. Mead, 86 
F. Supp.2d 1, 19 (D.D.C. 2000).  In reaching this conclusion, 
the District Court correctly rejected the IG's argument that 
the 1999 law merely clarified that his office always possessed 
the authority to conduct such investigations.  Id. at 19 n.7.  It 
is also undisputed that the MCSIA does not retroactively 
authorize IG investigations that were conducted prior to its 
enactment.  Therefore, the District Court erred in holding 
that, although the IG violated the Inspector General Act, he 
was nonetheless entitled to summary judgment because the 

actions taken by the IG in 1998 are authorized by the 1999 
law.

     Finally, appellants contend that, because there is a threat 
that the office of the IG will exceed its authority under the 
MCSIA, we should construe the new law narrowly and then 
grant an injunction preventing the IG from violating the 
statute in the future.  Although appellants are entitled to 
relief for unlawful actions taken pursuant to the Inspector 
General Act, there is no live dispute under the MCSIA.  
Accordingly, we vacate the District Court's decision insofar as 
it purports to construe the MCSIA, and we dismiss appel-
lants' claims resting on their construction of the MCSIA;  the 
issues focused on the meaning and future application of the 
MCSIA are not ripe for review.

                          I. Background

A.   Statutory Framework

     1.   Inspector General Act
          
     The Inspector General Act established the Office of Inspec-
tor General ("OIG") in order to facilitate "objective inquiries 
into bureaucratic waste ... and mismanagement."  NASA v. 
Fed. Labor Relations Auth., 527 U.S. 229, 240 (1999).  The 
IG's mandate focuses on systemic agency-wide issues. Con-
gress created the OIG to "provide leadership and coordina-
tion and recommend policies for activities designed ... to 
promote economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the adminis-
tration of, and ... to prevent and detect fraud and abuse in, 
such programs and operations."  5 U.S.C. App. 3 s 2(2).  
There are limits to the IG's powers, however.  Most promi-
nently, the Act specifically prohibits the OIG from assuming 
"program operating responsibilities."  5 U.S.C. App.  3 
s 9(a)(2).

     The general parameters of the Inspector General Act are 
fairly clear cut.  First, Congress consolidated pre-existing 
agency offices into the OIG, thereby transferring the various 
offices' investigative duties to the OIG.  In the case of the 
DOT, Congress mandated that the responsibilities of offices 
such as the "Office of Investigations and Security" and the 
"Office of Audit" be consolidated into the OIG.  5 U.S.C. App. 

3 s 9(a)(1)(k).  Second, the Act defines the IG's core role as 
preventing fraud and abuse, by conducting audits and investi-
gations relating to agency programs and operations.  5 
U.S.C. App. 3 ss 2(1), 4(a)(1), 6(a)(2).  Finally, Congress 
authorized agencies to make discretionary transfers of duties 
to the OIG.  However, discretionary transfers of authority 
only can be made if the duties are properly related to the 
functions of the IG, further the purpose of the Act, and do not 
constitute program operating responsibilities.  5 U.S.C. App. 
3 s 9(a)(2).

     Congress structured the OIG to promote independence and 
objectivity.  The Inspector General Act indicates that Inspec-
tors General will be appointed directly by the President and 
confirmed by the Senate.  5 U.S.C. App. 3 s 3(a).  An IG is 
under the general supervision of the head of the agency, but 
the head of the agency may not interfere with any IG 
investigation.  Id.  In a similar vein, Inspectors General 
report directly to Congress regarding their agencies.  Id. 
Furthermore, the OIG has investigatory means at its dispos-
al, such as subpoena power and access to regulated motor 
carriers' records to aid it in fulfilling its mission.  5 U.S.C. 
App. 3 ss 3(a), 6(a).  The OIG also may, in appropriate 
circumstances, conduct searches and seizures.  See 28 C.F.R. 
s 60.3.

     In 1999 Congress passed the MCSIA which further ad-
dresses the power of the DOT IG.  In particular, s 228 of the 
MCSIA states:

     (a) IN GENERAL.--The statutory authority of the In-
     spector General of the Department of Transportation 
     includes authority to conduct, pursuant to Federal crimi-
     nal statutes, investigations of allegations that a person or 
     entity has engaged in fraudulent or other criminal activi-
     ty relating to the programs and operations of the Depart-
     ment or its operating administrations.
     
     (b) REGULATED ENTITIES.--The authority to con-
     duct investigations referred to in subsection (a) extends 
     to any person or entity subject to the laws and regula-
     tions of the Department or its operating administrations, 
     
     whether or not they are recipients of funds from the 
     Department or its operating administrations.
     
s 228, 113 Stat. at 1773.  This statutory provision was not in 
effect when the IG investigated appellants.

     2.   Operations of the Department of Transportation
          
     Under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 
98-554, 98 Stat. 2829 (1984), the Secretary of the DOT has 
authority to issue regulations governing vehicle safety.  See, 
e.g., 49 U.S.C. s 31133(a).  The Secretary's authority includes 
the power to initiate an investigation, subpoena witnesses and 
records, and inspect motor carriers or documents belonging 
to motor carriers.  49 U.S.C. ss 502(a), 504(c)(1)-(2), 506(a).  
The IG has no responsibility in these areas of operation.

     The Secretary of Transportation has delegated this authori-
ty to the Federal Highway Administration ("FHA"), which in 
turn has issued federal motor carrier safety regulations.  See 
49 U.S.C. s 104;  49 C.F.R. ss 350.1-399.207.  Until January 
1, 2000, FHA's Office of Motor Carriers administered the 
regulation of interstate motor carriers.  However, pursuant 
to the MCSIA, responsibility for administering regulations 
governing interstate motor carriers was transferred to the 
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration ("FMCSA").

     The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 authorizes the FHA 
to enforce safety regulations and conduct compliance reviews.  
49 U.S.C. s 31115.  The FHA can itself bring a civil action or 
request that the Attorney General enforce a regulation or 
prosecute an alleged violator.  49 U.S.C. s 507 (b).  The Act 
prescribes both civil and criminal penalties for violations of 
the safety regulations.  49 U.S.C. s 521.  Although the FHA 
is authorized to oversee motor carrier compliance with safety 
regulations, the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 does not 
authorize the FHA to engage in searches and seizures.

     B.   Underlying Events
          
     During the period preceding the events at issue in this 
case, the DOT OIG and the OMC embarked on a joint project 
reviewing motor carrier operations.  See Joint OIG/OMC 
Review of Motor Carrier Operations, reprinted in J.A. 40.  

The "objective" of the joint project was "to combine the 
efforts of OIG and OMC staffs in a joint investigative review 
of specific motor carriers to create a greater deterrence to 
motor carrier violations of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations."  Id.  The effort targeted "all motor carrier 
operating areas subject to falsification and having a direct 
impact on safety," including drivers' hours of service, driver 
medical certificates and testing for drugs.  Id.  The docu-
ment describing the joint project specifically noted that the 
"focus of the review will not be on OMC operations."  Id.  
Under this project, according to appellees, the OMC engages 
in regulatory compliance reviews of motor carriers and refers 
egregious violators to the IG.  The IG pursues criminal 
investigation of the misconduct.

     Appellants, Florilli, Northland, Kistler, Lone Wolf, and 
K&C, individual trucking companies, each have been investi-
gated by the DOT IG.  The record on appeal describes events 
involving K & C and Lone Wolf, companies operating from 
the same location, to illustrate the role the IG played in 
investigating appellants.  On July 13, 1998 the OMC sent an 
investigator to K & C and Lone Wolf to conduct a compliance 
review.  Subpoena (July 14, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 66.  
Lone Wolf believed that the review had been triggered by a 
complaint filed by a disgruntled driver.  DOT asserted that 
the investigation was an attempt to uncover falsification of 
"hours of service" logs, that is, records of the number of 
consecutive hours drivers are on the road without a rest.  
The Company refused to cooperate with the compliance re-
view, although it agreed to comply with the investigation of 
the underlying complaint.  Letter from Lone Wolf Counsel, 
reprinted in J.A. 54.  On July 14, 1998 the OMC served a 
subpoena on the companies demanding that the companies 
produce all documents necessary to the investigation.  Sub-
poena (July 15, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 66.  The companies 
refused to comply.  On October 22, 1998 a special agent of 
the DOT IG, Eric Johnson, obtained a warrant to search the 
premises of the companies.  Search Warrant (Oct. 22, 1998), 
reprinted in J.A. 73.  On the following day, Johnson executed 
the search warrant and seized the relevant documents.  See 
Declarations, reprinted in J.A. 57, 58, 60, 62, 64, 65.

     C.   Procedural History
          
     Truckers United for Safety ("TUFS"), a nonprofit organiza-
tion of motor carriers, along with the individually named 
companies, filed suit in District Court alleging that the DOT 
IG lacked legal authority to engage in the contested compli-
ance review investigations.  Appellants sought preliminary 
injunction and declaratory relief because, they argued, the IG 
was not authorized to engage in DOT operations, specifically 
investigation of standard compliance with federal motor carri-
er safety regulations.  Appellants also sought the return of 
any seized materials that had not already been returned by 
the Government.  Appellee filed a motion for summary judg-
ment, asserting that TUFS lacked standing and that the DOT 
IG acted within its authority in authorizing the investigations.

     The District Court found that the Inspector General Act 
did not authorize the DOT IG to conduct investigations into 
motor carrier compliance.  Truckers United for Safety v. 
Mead, 86 F. Supp.2d at 19.  As a result the IG had no 
authority to search appellants' premises or seize their rec-
ords.  Id.  However, the District Court found that the 
MCSIA amended the Inspector General Act, and constituted 
a new grant of authority broad enough to encompass the kind 
of investigations at issue here.  Id.  Although the OIG did 
not have the authority to investigate appellants as part of a 
compliance review in 1998, the District Court explained that 
the MCSIA has given the IG authority to do so in the future.  
Id.  The District Court therefore concluded that the IG was 
entitled to summary judgment on the merits.  Id.  Because 
appellants' claims arise from an appeal of a summary judg-
ment ruling, we review the District Court's ruling de novo.  
See, e.g., Ctr. for Auto Safety v. NHTSA, 244 F.3d 144, 147 
(D.C. Cir. 2001).

                          II. DISCUSSION

     A.   Standing
          
     The IG has asserted, and the District Court agreed, that 
TUFS lacks standing to pursue claims on behalf of its mem-

bers, the individual trucking companies.  We find this argu-
ment to be plainly wrong.

     TUFS asserts no basis for organizational standing, see 
Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363, 378-79 (1982), 
Am. Trucking Ass'ns v. United States Dep't of Transp., 166 
F.3d 374, 386 (D.C. Cir. 1999), because it asserts no cogniza-
ble injury to the organization or its activities.  It is clear, 
however, that TUFS has asserted more than enough to 
satisfy the requirements of representational standing.  See, 
e.g., Hunt v. Washington State Apple Adver. Comm'n, 432 
U.S. 333, 342-43 (1977) (setting out the requirements for 
associations to have standing);  Am. Trucking, 166 F.3d at 
385;  Int'l Bhd. of Teamsters v. Pena, 17 F.3d 1478, 1482-83 
(1994).

     TUFS asserts, and the Government does not dispute, that 
the individual trucking companies are members of the associ-
ation.  TUFS further claims that the IG injured individual 
trucking companies by conducting unlawful investigations and 
seizing their records.  These claims, which are substantial 
and well documented, easily satisfy the injury/causation/re-
dressability requirements of Article III of the Constitution.  
See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 
(1992).  Furthermore, it is uncontested that TUFS' members 
have standing to sue in their own right;  the interests that 
TUFS seeks to protect are indisputably germane to the 
organization's purpose;  and neither the claims asserted nor 
the relief requested requires the participation in the lawsuit 
of each of the organization's individual members.  Hunt, 432 
U.S. at 343.  TUFS therefore has representational standing 
to sue on behalf of its members.

     B.   The Legality of the IG's Investigations and Seizures in 
          1998 Pursuant to the Inspector General Act
          
     The principal issue in this case is whether the IG had 
authority in 1998 to investigate motor carriers' compliance 
with safety regulations.  The District Court held that the 
legislative history and structure of the Inspector General Act 
make it plain that Congress did not intend to grant the IG 
authority to conduct investigations constituting an integral 

part of DOT programs.  The trial court also held that the 
Secretary of DOT could not transfer to the IG his authority 
to investigate motor carriers' compliance with federal motor 
carrier safety regulations.  The District Court therefore con-
cluded that the IG acted outside the scope of his authority in 
conducting investigations of motor carriers' compliance with 
the federal safety regulations.  We agree with this conclusion.

     The IG has authority to investigate the DOT's administra-
tion of programs and operations.  In carrying out its charge, 
"honest cooperation" between the IG and agency personnel 
can be expected.  NASA, 527 U.S. at 242.  The IG, however, 
is not authorized to conduct investigations as part of enforc-
ing motor carrier safety regulations--a role which is central 
to the basic operations of the agency.  See, e.g., Winters 
Ranch P'ship v. Viadaro, 123 F.3d 327 (5th Cir. 1997) (up-
holding IG's subpoena because it was part of an investigation 
to test the effectiveness of the agency's conduct of a program 
and not part of program operating responsibilities);  Burling-
ton N. R.R. Co. v. Office of Inspector General, 983 F.2d 631 
(5th Cir.1993) (refusing to enforce IG's subpoena because 
Inspectors General have no authority to engage in regulatory 
compliance investigations that are part of an agency's general 
functioning).

     The record in this case makes it clear that, when he 
investigated the plaintiffs and seized their records, the DOT 
IG was not engaged in an investigation relating to abuse and 
mismanagement in the administration of the DOT or an audit 
of agency enforcement procedures or policies.  Rather, the 
DOT IG merely lent his search and seizure authority to 
standard OMC enforcement investigations.  In other words, 
the DOT IG involved himself in a routine agency investigation 
that was designed to determine whether individual trucking 
companies were complying with federal motor carrier safety 
regulations.  This was beyond his authority.

     Under 5 U.S.C. App. 3 s 9(a)(1)(K), the Office of Investiga-
tions and Security, Office of Audit of the Department, the 
Offices of Investigations and Security, Federal Aviation Ad-
ministration, and External Audit Divisions, Federal Aviation 

Administration, the Investigations Division and the External 
Audit Division of the Office of Program Review and Investi-
gation, Federal Highway Administration, and the Office of 
Program Audits, Urban Mass Transportation Administration 
were consolidated as part of the OIG.  Congress did not, 
however, indicate that these investigative units were to con-
duct investigations into motor carrier compliance with safety 
regulations or that consolidation of these offices authorized 
the OIG to engage in criminal investigations of particular 
motor carriers, in contravention of the Inspector General Act.  
5 U.S.C. App. 3 s 9(a)(2).  The DOT IG was not authorized, 
pursuant to the Act's consolidation of duties, to search appel-
lants' premises and seize their records as part of a compliance 
review which was under the jurisdiction of the FHA.

     Finally, under 5 U.S.C. App. 3 s 9(a)(2), the Secretary of 
DOT may transfer additional powers and duties to the IG 
beyond those responsibilities specifically defined in the In-
spector General Act.  However, the Secretary's transfer of 
authority is explicitly limited to exclude matters that consti-
tute "program operating responsibilities."  Id.  As the Dis-
trict Court correctly found, there was no valid transfer of 
authority in this case.

     On the record at hand, there can be no doubt that the IG 
violated the Inspector General Act when he conducted the 
disputed investigations and seizures of appellants' records in 
1998.  The actions of the IG were ultra vires, causing injury 
to appellants for which they are entitled to relief.

     C.   Actions Arising Under the MCSIA
          
     The District Court found that, as of December 1999, after 
the occurrence of the investigations and seizures that are in 
dispute in this case, the IG was granted authority pursuant to 
the MCSIA "to conduct investigations of motor carri-
ers' fraudulent and criminal activities that are related to the 
DOT's operations and programs."  Truckers United for Safe-
ty v. Mead, 86 F. Supp.2d at 19.  The District Court's opinion 
thus appears to suggest that the enactment of the MCSIA 
mooted appellants' challenges to the IG's unlawful actions 
taken before its passage.  Id.  That holding is erroneous and 

it is hereby reversed.  The District Court also denied appel-
lants' request for declaratory and injunctive relief that would 
bar the IG from engaging in unlawful actions in the future 
pursuant to the MCSIA.  Because appellants' claims rest on a 
fear of injuries that have yet to arise under the MCSIA, we 
dismiss them as unripe.

     The IG argues that even though the MCSIA does not 
directly govern the 1998 investigations, the MCSIA provides 
evidence that, even in 1998 before the MCSIA was enacted, 
the OIG had authority to investigate appellants.  To substan-
tiate this position, the IG points to a comment in the Congres-
sional Record that s 228 "clarifies Congressional intent with 
respect to the authority of the IG, reaffirming the IG's ability 
and authority to continue to conduct criminal investigations of 
parties subject to DOT laws or regulations, whether or not 
such parties receive Federal funds from the Department."  
145 Cong. Rec.  H12874 (daily ed. Nov. 18, 1999);  145 Cong. 
Rec. S15211 (daily ed. Nov. 19, 1999).  This sparse piece of 
legislative history cannot carry the day for the IG.

     Prior to the passage of s 228, the statutory and legal 
framework defining the IG's authority focused on the IG's 
role as an independent and objective investigator of agency 
fraud and abuse.  These responsibilities contrasted with the 
responsibilities delegated to other offices in the DOT which 
were in charge of implementation and enforcement of the 
motor carrier safety regulations.  Within this institutional 
framework the IG was not authorized to engage in ordinary 
compliance reviews, even those potentially implicating crimi-
nal punishments.  The characterization of the MCSIA as 
"clarifying" in the Congressional Record does not undermine 
this finding.  The DOT's attempt to read s 228 as a retroac-
tive authority has no legitimate basis.

     A much harder question in this case concerns appellants' 
requests for a judicial declaration that s 228 of the MCSIA 
did not amend the Inspector General Act to authorize the IG 
to conduct investigations of the sort that are at issue in this 
case and an injunction barring such criminal investigations in 
the future.  In other words, appellants ask that we reverse 

the District Court's holding that s 228 of the MCSIA created 
new authority for the DOT IG.  Section 228--for example, 
the language sanctioning IG investigations of "fraudulent or 
other criminal activity"--is hardly free from ambiguity and it 
is far from clear that it expands the authority of the IG as the 
District Court found.  We need not reach these issues, how-
ever.  We agree that the District Court's decision construing 
the MCSIA cannot stand, but not for the reasons asserted by 
appellants.  Rather, we hereby vacate the District Court's 
decision insofar as it addresses the scope of the MCSIA, 
because the issues raised by appellants regarding the scope of 
s 228 are not ripe for review.

     The disputed actions taken by the IG in this case occurred 
in 1998 under the Inspector General Act.  The MCSIA had 
not yet been enacted, so there is no evidence before the court 
concerning investigations or seizures taken pursuant to the 
MCSIA.  Appellants claim that the IG's future conduct under 
the MCSIA may violate the law;  but, of course, this court has 
no way of knowing what the DOT IG may do in the future.  
The only matters of relevance that are before the court at 
this time are the text of s 228 of the MCSIA, the District 
Court's construction of the statutory provision, and the par-
ties' differing opinions as to what the new law means.  This is 
not enough to justify an opinion from this court on the 
meaning of s 228, because such an opinion would be purely 
"advisory" and thus beyond this court's authority under Arti-
cle III of the Constitution.  Cf. Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 
U.S. 95 (1983) (Speculative claims about possible future 
harms do not afford a basis for equitable relief.).

     There will be no ripe case fit for judicial review until the 
Government acts to apply the statute "in a concrete factual 
setting."  Truckers United for Safety v. Fed. Highway Ad-
min., 139 F.3d 934, 937 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing Abbott Labs. v. 
Gardner, 387 U.S. 136 (1967), rev'd on other grounds, Califa-
no v. Sanders, 430 U.S. 99 (1977)).  It is possible that, since 
passage of the MCSIA, the DOT IG has, in practice, properly 
exercised its authority.  Without any particular action by the 

IG before us for review, the question of future relief is not fit 
for determination.

     In assessing whether a case is ripe for review, we must 
consider not only the "fitness of the issues" for judicial 
review, but also whether a delay in judicial consideration of 
the issues will cause undue "hardship" to appellants.  See 
City of Houston v. Dep't of Hous. & Urban Dev., 24 F.3d 
1421, 1431-32 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  The closest appellants come 
to raising a claim of hardship is in asserting that the investi-
gations of Florilli, Kistler, K & C and Lone Wolf are "con-
tinuing," implying that appellants persist in being harmed as 
a result of the underlying events.  However, this harm re-
sults from searches and seizures authorized by the IG in 1998, 
not actions initiated by the IG following the enactment of the 
MCSIA.

     The main hardship that may result to appellants from 
delayed review of the IG's proper role under the MCSIA is 
the need to file another suit.  However, the burden of pursu-
ing future litigation is not enough, by itself, to demonstrate 
hardship justifying premature judicial decision-making.  See 
id. at 1432.

                         III. Conclusion

     Because the DOT IG acted without lawful authority in 
investigating appellants and seizing their records pursuant to 
the Inspector General Act, the Government is hereby ordered 
to return all materials seized during the ultra vires searches 
of appellants' premises.  We also hereby vacate the District 
Court's decision regarding the scope of s 228 of the MCSIA 
and dismiss appellants' claims resting on their construction of 
the MCSIA;  the issues focused on the meaning and future 
application of s 228 are not ripe for review.

                                        