                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued March 18, 2002      Decided June 28, 2002 

                           No. 01-1153

                 Costa de Oro Television, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                          CoxCom, Inc., 
                            Intervenor

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Barry A. Friedman argued the cause for the petitioner.

     Joel Marcus, Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-
sion, argued the cause for the respondents.  Jane E. Mago, 
General Counsel, Daniel M. Armstrong, Associate General 

Counsel, Federal Communications Commission, and Cather-
ine G. O'Sullivan and Andrea Limmer, Attorneys, United 
States Department of Justice, were on brief.

     Peter H. Feinberg and Scott Dailard were on brief for the 
intervenor.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  This case in-
volves a dispute over the procedures the Federal Communica-
tions Commission (FCC or Commission) uses to determine 
local television market designations pursuant to the cable 
television mandatory carriage rules.  In particular, Costa de 
Oro Television, Inc. (Costa) petitions for review of two FCC 
orders that sustain earlier market modification rulings but, at 
the same time, change the market definition mechanism.  
Costa also seeks review of the FCC decision promoting the 
use of certain data (the Longley-Rice signal strength predic-
tion methodology maps) in market modification proceedings.  
Because we conclude that the Commission "articulated a 
rational explanation" for its decisions, Eagle-Picher Indus., 
Inc. v. EPA, 759 F.2d 905, 921 (D.C. Cir. 1985), we deny 
Costa's petition.

                          I. Background

A.   Statutory and Regulatory Background

     Concerned that local television broadcast stations were no 
longer able to compete with the growing cable industry,1 the 
Congress passed the Cable Television Consumer Protection 
and Competition Act of 1992 (Cable Act), 47 U.S.C. ss 521 et 
seq.  The Cable Act includes "must-carry" provisions that 
require "[e]ach cable operator" to carry the signals of a 
specific number of "local commercial television stations."  47 

__________
     1 See Congressional Findings and Policy:  Cable Television Con-
sumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 
s 2(a), 106 Stat. 1460 (1992), reprinted in 47 U.S.C.A. s 521 note.

U.S.C. s 534(a).2  A "local commercial television station" is 
defined as "any full power television broadcast station ... 
that, with respect to a particular cable system, is within the 
same television market as the cable system."  47 U.S.C. 
s 534(h)(1)(A).  A local commercial television station that 
exercises its statutory must-carry right is entitled to cable 
carriage in its local market but it does not receive compensa-
tion therefor from the cable operator.  The Cable Act also 
gives a broadcaster the option of cable carriage under a 
retransmission consent provision that permits the broadcaster 
and the cable operator to negotiate cable carriage arrange-
ments and the broadcast station to receive compensation in 
return.  Id. s 325(b).  Every three years, the broadcaster is 
required to make an election between the must-carry and the 
retransmission consent options.  See id. s 325(b)(3)(B).  The 
first three-year cycle began in June 1993.  47 C.F.R. 
s 76.64(f)(1).  A broadcast station's "market" is "determined 
by the Commission by regulation or order using, where 
available, commercial publications which delineate television 
markets based on viewing patterns."  47 U.S.C. 
s 534(h)(1)(C)(i).  In 1992, the year the Cable Act was enact-
ed, the Commission's rules, now codified at 47 C.F.R. 
s 76.55(e)(2), defined a station's market by reference to the 
Area of Dominant Influence (ADI) data produced by Arbi-
tron, an audience research organization.  Id. s 76.55(e)(1).  
The ADI describes a particular geographic television market 
based on measured viewing patterns.  See Report and Order 
and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Definition of 
Markets for Purposes of the Cable Television Broadcast 

__________
     2 These provisions are found in section 4 of the Cable Act, adding 
new sections 614 and 615 to the Communications Act of 1934 
(Communications Act), 47 U.S.C. ss 151 et seq.  In upholding the 
constitutionality of the must-carry provisions, the United States 
Supreme Court noted, "Congress sought to preserve the existing 
structure of the Nation's broadcast television medium while permit-
ting the concomitant expansion and development of cable television, 
and, in particular, to ensure that broadcast television remains 
available as a source of video programming for those without cable."  
Turner Broad. Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 512 U.S. 622, 652 (1994).

Signal Carriage Rules, 11 FCC Rcd 6201, 6203 p 4 (1996), 
(First Order).  In general, every American county is assigned 
to a discrete market according to those local-market stations 
with a preponderance of total viewing hours in the county.  
Id.

     In December 1995, shortly after the first three-year elec-
tion cycle ended, Arbitron discontinued its television ratings 
business and ceased publishing updated ADI data.  In re-
sponse and after notice and comment rulemaking, the FCC 
determined to continue to use the ADI market list for the 
1996 election and to substitute Nielsen Media Research's 
television ratings service beginning with the 1999 election.  
See First Order, 11 FCC Rcd at 6206-07 p 14.  Nielsen uses a 
market designation called the "designated market area" 
(DMA).  Both the ADI and the DMA use audience survey 
information from cable and noncable households to determine 
the assignment of counties to local television markets based 
on local stations' respective viewer shares.  Id. at 6207-08 
p 16.  Nonetheless, because of differences in methodology as 
well as sampling and statistical variation, the switch to the 
DMA-based market resulted in the reassignment of some 
counties.  Id.  Differences between the 1991-1992 ADI mar-
ket list and the 1995-1996 DMA market list manifested a 
change in 126 markets with approximately 79 markets gaining 
counties and 83 markets losing counties.  Id. at 6208-09 p 18.

     While a broadcast station's market is generally based on 
the ADI (now DMA) data, section 614(h) directs the Commis-
sion to consider an individual request for a change in market 
designation.  The FCC may "with respect to a particular 
television broadcast station, include additional communities 
within its television market or exclude communities from such 
station's television market to better effectuate the purposes of 
this section."  47 U.S.C. s 534(h)(1)(C)(i).  In considering 
such requests, the Commission "shall afford particular atten-
tion to the value of localism" by taking into account the 
following factors, among others:

          (I) whether the station, or other stations located in the 
     same area, have been historically carried on the cable 
     system or systems within such community;
     
          (II) whether the television station provides coverage 
     or other local service to such community;
     
          (III) whether any other television station that is eligi-
     ble to be carried by a cable system in such community in 
     fulfillment of the requirements of this section provides 
     new coverage of issues of concern to such community or 
     provides carriage or coverage of sporting and other 
     events of interest to the community;
     
          (IV) evidence of viewing patterns in cable and nonca-
     ble households within the areas served by the cable 
     system or systems in such community.
     
Id. s 534(h)(1)(C)(ii)(I)-(IV).  Typically, a request is made 
either by a broadcast station wanting to be included as part of 
a cable system in a market outside its DMA designation or by 
a cable operator attempting to exclude a broadcast station 
from the cable operator's market.  The Cable Act's legislative 
history recites as a rationale of the 614(h) market modifica-
tion procedure that:

     where the presumption in favor of ADI [now DMA] 
     carriage would result in cable subscribers losing access 
     to local stations because they are outside the ADI in 
     which a local cable system operates, the FCC may make 
     an adjustment to include or exclude particular communi-
     ties from a television station's market consistent with 
     Congress' objective to ensure that television stations be 
     carried in the areas which they serve and which form 
     their economic market.
     
H.R. Rep. No. 102-628, at 97 (1992).  During the period 
Arbitron's ADI market areas were in use, the Commission 
ruled on numerous market modification requests filed pursu-
ant to section 614(h).  See, e.g., In re Complaints of Costa de 
Oro Television, Inc., 10 FCC Rcd 9468 (1995), aff'd on 
recons., 12 FCC Rcd 22, 464 (1997), pet. for review denied, 
Costa de Oro Television, Inc. v. FCC, 172 F.3d 919 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).  The interplay between the FCC's earlier market 
modification decisions under the ADI regime and its move to 
a DMA-based market definition is the focus of Costa's appeal.

B.   History of Costa's License

     Costa is the licensee of television station KJLA3 located in 
Ventura, California.  Ventura is in Ventura County.  Al-
though Arbitron included Ventura County in the ADI market 
for greater Los Angeles, it assigned KJLA to the Santa 
Barbara-Santa Maria-San Luis Obispo ADI market.  Niel-
son, however, has always placed KJLA in the Los Angeles 
DMA.  The change in market designation results in a corre-
sponding change in KJLA's must carry right because a 
broadcast station generally has a right to carriage within its 
"market" only.  While the Commission ordered carriage of 
KJLA throughout the Los Angeles market once the station 
was assigned to that DMA, it continued to exclude certain 
communities that were the subject of earlier 614(h) market 
modification rulings.  See Costa de Oro Television, Inc., 15 
FCC Rcd 15,069 (2000);  Costa de Oro Television, Inc., 15 
FCC Rcd 12,637 (2000).

     As part of the ADI-to-DMA change, the Commission con-
sidered, and sought comment on, the continuing validity of its 
earlier 614(h) market modification rulings made using ADI 
data.  Costa requested the Commission to reconsider de novo 
any prior section 614(h) ruling based on ADI data if, as in 
KJLA's case, the ADI-to-DMA change resulted in the reas-
signment of a station to a new market.  In the Second Report 
and Order on Definition of Markets for Purposes of the Cable 
Television Broadcast Signal Carriage Rates, 14 FCC Rcd 
8366 (1999), (Second Order), the Commission rejected Costa's 
request.  It also decided to continue using ADI data to 
process any market modification request filed before the 
effective date of the change to DMA, that is, before January 
1, 2000.  In its Second Order, however, the FCC noted that, 
"[i]n cases in which the conversion to DMAs will have a direct 
consequence, we will take the future DMA assignment into 

__________
     3 The station was formerly known by the call letters KSTV-TV.  
The call letters were changed to KJLA(TV) on July 20, 1998.  See 
Call Sign Report No. 336, located at http://www.fcc.gov/Burea 
us/Mass_Media/Public_Notices/Call_Sign_Changes/pnmm8110.txt.

account."  Second Order p 42.  With respect to prior market 
modification rulings, then, "where the Commission has previ-
ously decided to delete a community from a station's ADI 
market, that deletion will remain in effect after the conver-
sion to DMAs."  Second Order p 43.  Costa petitioned for 
reconsideration and the FCC denied the petition, stating that 
"we continue to believe that the reasoned determinations 
reached in market modification proceedings should not be 
upset as a result of the conversion to the DMA standard."  
Order on Reconsideration on Definition of Markets for Pur-
poses of the Cable Television Broadcast Signal Carriage 
Rules, 16 FCC Rcd 5022 (2001), (Reconsideration Order) 
p 17.

     In the First Order, the Commission sought comment on 
measures to expedite the modification process by establishing 
more "focused and standardized evidentiary specifications." 
First Order, 11 FCC Rcd at 6225.  It subsequently issued a 
list of information required to be included in each modifica-
tion request.  Second Order, 14 FCC Rcd at 8385-86 p 44.  
Significant here, the Second Order also encouraged a petition-
er to provide "a more specific technical coverage showing, 
through the submission of service contour prediction maps 
that take terrain into account, particularly maps using the 
Longley-Rice prediction methodology."  Id. at 8388 p 50.  
Costa's petition for reconsideration challenged the use of the 
Longley-Rice method as contrary to the intent of the Cable 
Act because it allegedly imposed an unreasonable financial 
burden by reintroducing the "UHF handicap."  See Costa's 
Pet. for Recons. at 7;  see also Reconsideration Order, 16 
FCC Rcd at 5026 p 11 n.28 ("UHF handicap" refers to "the 
difficulty that UHF stations had in accessing all of their 
potential audience over the air because of the inferior signal 
propagation characteristic of the UHF band").  Without 
questioning the accuracy of the Longley-Rice maps, Costa's 
concern was that a cable company using Longley-Rice had 
"yet another quiver in [its] bow with which to avoid must-
carry obligations."  Id.  In the Reconsideration Order, the 
Commission emphasized with regard to Longley-Rice that "it 
is frequently important in the market modification process to 

find as precisely as possible the contours formed by a sta-
tion's signal."  Reconsideration Order, 16 FCC Rcd at 5027 
p 13-14.

     Costa petitions for review of portions of both the Second 
Order and the Reconsideration Order.

                           II. Analysis

     We review the Commission's orders "under the deferential 
standard mandated by section 706 of the Administrative 
Procedure Act, which provides that a court must uphold the 
Commission's decision unless 'arbitrary, capricious, an abuse 
of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with the law.' "  
Achernar Broad Co. v. FCC, 62 F.3d 1441, 1445 (D.C. Cir. 
1995) (quoting 5 U.S.C. s 706).  In this task, we do not 
substitute our judgment for that of the agency but rather 
look to see whether its decision is based on a "consideration 
of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear 
error of judgment."  Damsky v. FCC, 199 F.3d 527, 533 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000) (citations omitted);  see Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n 
v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 42-44 (1983).  
Applying this standard, we conclude that the Commission did 
not act arbitrarily in deciding not to reconsider its prior 
market modification rulings.

     Costa argues that with respect to a station that, like KJLA, 
has changed markets, any prior market modification ruling 
made under the ADI standard is obsolete.  The FCC re-
sponds that market modification decisions turn on fact-
specific assessments of the four section 614(h) factors, see 
supra pp. 4-5, irrespective of the initial ADI or DMA market 
designation, and, therefore, a change in market assignment 
does not change the Commission's assessment of a station's 
"true market."  Nonetheless, Costa asserts, initial market 
designations "exert broad influence over market modification 
proceedings by determining the presumption of carriage and 
the allocation of burden of proof," see Reply Br. at 5.  Be-
cause the prior market modification rulings could not have 
considered a station's DMA market designation and conse-

quent "carriage" presumption, Costa urges, the FCC acted 
arbitrarily in not reconsidering them.

     Both sides agree that generally a broadcast station has a 
presumptive must-carry right in the ADI/DMA market in 
which it is located.  Costa, however, overstates the continued 
importance of the initial designation once a broadcaster or 
cable operator requests a section 614(h) market modification 
ruling.  Based on the statute's plain language, the FCC 
modifies a market with "particular attention to the value of 
localism" by applying the factors listed in section 
614(h)(1)(C)(ii) to the specific circumstances of the station 
and community.  In contrast, a station's ADI/DMA market 
designation is merely the initial empirical assessment of the 
station's market.  In its Implementation of the Cable Televi-
sion Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the 
Commission stated:

     Section 614(h)(1)(C) of the 1992 Act permits the Commis-
     sion to add to or subtract communities from a station's 
     television market to better reflect the marketplace condi-
     tions following a written request.  The Commission also 
     may determine that particular communities are part of 
     more than one television market.  The procedures recog-
     nize that ADI markets may not always accurately reflect 
     the area in which a particular television station should be 
     entitled to cable carriage, and will help ensure that 
     disruption to subscribers over the broadcast signals they 
     receive is minimized.
     
8 FCC Rcd 2965, 2976 p 42 (1993).  In response to a section 
614(h) request, the Commission assesses the initial ADI (now 
DMA) market assignment using the statutory factors, includ-
ing whether the station provides coverage or other local 
service to the community.  To be sure, because a broadcast 
station enjoys a presumption of carriage in the ADI or DMA 
in which it is located, the initial market designation may 
dictate which party has the burden of seeking modification.  
For example, a cable operator in the Los Angeles market 
must make a section 614(h) request indicating that Costa does 
not serve the community (within the Los Angeles market) in 

order to exclude Costa from the cable system's channel lineup 
for that community.  Once the cable operator comes forward, 
the FCC must evaluate whether the "value of localism" 
(within the meaning of section 614(h)) is met by permitting 
the cable operator to exclude Costa from that community 
notwithstanding Costa's DMA assignment to the Los Angeles 
market.4  There is no evidence that any prior market modifi-
cation ruling was based solely on the initial market designa-
tion nor can Costa demonstrate that the cable operator must 
shoulder anything more than the burden of production.  Be-
cause the ADI modification rulings turned on the statutory 
factors rather than on KJLA's Santa Barbara or Los Angeles 
initial market designation, we conclude that the Commission 
acted reasonably in rejecting Costa's invitation to revisit the 
same factors.

     Moreover, even if the initial market designation does "color 
the entire tenor of the modification process" in some respect, 
Costa Br. at 14, the Commission, beginning with its First 
Order, has pledged to consider a station's current DMA 
assignment as part of any future section 614(h) proceeding.  
See Second Order, 14 FCC Rcd at 8384 p 42 ("In cases in 
which the conversion to DMAs will have a direct consequence, 
we will take the future DMA assignment into account, as we 
have done since the First Order was released.").  To the 
extent Costa disputes whether the FCC will adequately weigh 
its current DMA assignment in a future modification ruling, 
that ruling will be subject to review by this Court at the 
appropriate time with the benefit of the facts of record.5  

__________
     4 The Los Angeles market is geographically large, stretching 
approximately 300 miles north to south and 250 miles east to west.  
FCC Br. at 7 (citing Media One of Los Angeles, Inc., 15 FCC Rcd 
at 19,393).  Ventura County, where KJLA's transmitters are locat-
ed, lies in the northwestern part of the market separated from most 
of the market by several moutain ranges.

     5 Costa points to a prior market modification ruling to demon-
strate the importance of the initial market designation.  See In re 
Petition of Costa de Oro Television, Inc. for Modification of 
Market, 13 FCC Rcd 4360 (1998).  There, the FCC stated that it 
generally uses an "extra measure of caution" when a "station from 

Furthermore, the Commission's desire "to avoid disturbing 
settled expectations," Reconsideration Order, 16 FCC Rcd 
5028 p 17, further convinces this court that the Commission's 
decision to let the prior modification rulings stand does not 
constitute a "clear error of judgment."  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. 
Ass'n, 463 U.S. at 43 (citations omitted).

     Finally, Costa's challenge to the Commission's decision to 
encourage use of Longley-Rice maps misses the mark.  At 
oral argument, Costa appeared to maintain that the Commis-
sion must rely on Grade B contour maps (even if Longley-
Rice maps more accurately assess a station's signal) simply 
because a cable operator may use Longley-Rice maps to 
exclude broadcast stations.  A Grade B contour map shows 
the area in which 50 per cent of television sets receive a 
viewable signal via antenna 50 per cent of the time.  See 47 
C.F.R. s 73.684 (1997).  The Grade B contour map, however, 
indicates only "the approximate extent of coverage over aver-
age terrain in the absence of interference from other televi-
sion stations."  See id. s 73.683(a) (2002);  see also ACLU v. 
FCC, 823 F.2d 1554, 1560-61 n.8 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (Grade B 
contour "is based on general engineering principles, and does 
not take into account site-specific factors that could affect the 
actual broadcast signal strength in a community").  In con-
trast, the Longley-Rice model "provides a more accurate 
representation of a station's technical coverage area because 
it takes into account such factors as mountains and valleys 
that are not specifically reflected in a traditional Grade B 
contour analysis."  Second Order, 14 FCC Rcd at 8388 p 52.  
In determining whether a television station in fact provides 
"coverage or other local service" to a community, the 
Longley-Rice model enables the Commission to assess this 
section 614(h) factor with the best available evidence.  The 
Commission has plainly provided "more than [the] modicum 

__________
one market is proposing to obtain mandatory carriage rights in the 
core of another market."  Id. at 4374 p 29.  It then concluded, 
however, that "this concern" has "less significance here than it 
might in other cases," id., acknowledging the fact that Costa's 
prospective DMA assignment to the Los Angeles market would 
moot the issue.

of reasoned analysis" required to affirm its decision to pro-
mote the use of Longley-Rice maps in market modification 
proceedings.  Hispanic Info. & Telecomms. Network, Inc. v. 
FCC, 865 F.3d 1289, 1297-98 (D.C. Cir. 1989).  Moreover, the 
Commission's conclusion that Longley-Rice maps are more 
accurate than Grade B contours is "precisely the type of 
technical issue on which we defer to the Commission's exper-
tise."  Keller Communications v. FCC, 130 F.3d 1073, 1077 
(D.C. Cir. 1997) (citing MCI Cellular Tel. Co. v. FCC, 738 
F.2d 1322, 1333 (D.C.Cir.1984)).  Regarding Costa's concern 
that in some instances the Grade B contour maps may give 
more accurate assessments of a station's coverage, we find 
the Commission's response in its Reconsideration Order suffi-
cient:  "The Second Report and Order encourages parties to 
provide maps using the Longley-Rice methodology.  They 
are not required to do so.  Parties may submit traditional 
Grade B contour maps in addition to, or instead of, Longley-
Rice maps and may explain why they believe Grade B analy-
sis is more relevant."  Reconsideration Order, 16 FCC Rcd 
at 5027 p 50 (emphasis added).

     For the foregoing reasons, Costa's petition for review is

                                                                 Denied.

                                                