                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                            ---------

                      Filed August 14, 2001

                        Division No. 94-2

               In re:  Alphonso Michael (Mike) Espy

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels

           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                            ---------

                    Motion for the Public Release of Final Report

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     It is ORDERED, ADJUDGED and DECREED that the 
Motion of the Independent Counsel to release the final report 
is granted.

     The effects of this order to release shall be stayed for ten 
days or until such time as the Supreme Court shall act upon 
an application for stay, whichever shall last occur.  The 
purpose of this decretal paragraph is to permit any party 
desiring to do so to seek a stay from the Supreme Court.  If 
no such stay is sought within the period granted by this 
paragraph, then this stay shall be lifted.  To achieve these 

ends, it is ordered that counsel for any party seeking a stay 
from the Supreme Court shall notify the Clerk of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit 
of that fact upon the filing of application for such stay, and 
shall further notify the Clerk promptly upon learning of the 
disposition of such application.

                                        `    Per Curiam

                                             For the Court: 
                                             Mark J. Langer, Clerk

                                   by

                                             Marilyn R. Sargent 
                                             Chief Deputy Clerk

                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
                            ---------

                      Filed August 14, 2001

                        Division No. 94-2

               In re:  Alphonso Michael (Mike) Espy

                   Division for the Purpose of 
                 Appointing Independent Counsels

           Ethics in Government Act of 1978, As Amended

                            ---------

                    Motion for the Public Release of Final Report

     Before:  Sentelle, Presiding, Fay and Cudahy, Senior 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Presiding Judge Sentelle.

     Concurring opinion filed by Senior Circuit Judge Cudahy.

     Sentelle, Presiding Judge:  This matter comes before us 
on the Motion of the Independent Counsel ("IC") appointed 
by the Court for the investigation of matters relating to 
former Secretary of Agriculture Alphonso Michael Espy to 
authorize public release of the final report of his investigation.  
The IC has prepared the report pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
s 594(h) which requires that "[a]n independent counsel shall 
... (B) before the termination of the independent counsel's 
office under section 596(b), file a final report with the division 
of the court, setting forth fully and completely a description 
of the work of the independent counsel, including the disposi-
tion of all cases brought."

     He addresses his motion to the Court pursuant to 
s 594(h)(2) which authorizes the Court to "release to the 
Congress, the public, or any appropriate person, such por-
tions of the report made under this subsection as the division 
of the court considers appropriate."

     As we have noted before, the reporting requirement is a 
unique feature of the now-lapsed statute creating the unique 
office of independent counsel.  See In re North, 16 F.3d 1234, 
1239 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div. 1994) (per curiam) (noting that "no 
precedent ... clearly guides our hand" in dealing with ques-
tions arising from the reporting requirement).  The issuance 
of a document issued by a prosecutor, not of itself under the 
aegis of either the court or the grand jury, yet potentially 
harmful to the reputation of persons investigated is certainly 
troubling, and we have found it troubling in our prior pro-
ceedings under this statute.  See generally id. at 16 F.3d 
1234.  Especially is this so given that such a report often, as 
in this case, contains grand jury material governed by the 
confidentiality provisions of Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e).

                        Rule 6(e) Problems

     Rule 6(e) declares that "an attorney for the government 
... shall not disclose matters occurring before the Grand 
Jury, except as otherwise provided for in these rules."  Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 6(e)(2).  The independent counsel is an attorney 
for the government and his release of grand jury material is 
covered by Rule 6(e).  In re North, 16 F.3d at 1242.  Thus, 
insofar as the report carries with it grand jury material, that 
material may not be released to the public "except as other-
wise provided for in" the Federal Rules of Criminal Proce-
dure.  In the past, we have found the relevant authority in 
Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e)(3)(C):  "Disclosure otherwise prohibited 
by this rule of matters occurring before the grand jury may 
also be made--(i) when so directed by a court preliminary to 
or in connection with a judicial proceeding."  That exception 
to the grand jury secrecy rule empowers courts to authorize 
release of otherwise secret material governed by Rule 6(e), in 
judicial proceedings.  We have held that the Court's function 
in the release of reports is a judicial proceeding, In re North, 
16 F.3d at 1244.  Therefore, this exception does apply to 
permit the release of material otherwise covered by the rule if 
we find such release to be otherwise lawful and appropriate.

     The second difficulty which we have confronted in the past 
is the assertion that only the court which empanels a grand 
jury has jurisdiction over the release of grand jury material.  
We have, however, authoritatively rejected that proposition, 
holding that 28 U.S.C. s 594(h)(2), which empowers this 
Special Division to " 'make such orders as are appropriate to 
protect the rights of any individual named in such (indepen-
dent counsel's) report ...,' " taken in the context, confers 
upon this Court the necessary jurisdiction, regardless of 
whether that jurisdiction would otherwise be exclusive with 
the empaneling court.  In re Sealed Motion, 880 F.2d 1367, 
1374-75 (D.C. Cir., Spec. Div. 1989) (per curiam) (quoting 28 
U.S.C. s 594(h)(2)).  Indeed, in Morrison v. Olson, the Su-
preme Court "compared the 'functions that the Special Divi-
sion is empowered to perform ... to functions that federal 
judges perform in other contexts, such as deciding whether to 
allow disclosure of matters occurring before the grand jury.' "  
Id. at 1374 (quoting Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 681 
(1988) (emphasis and ellipses supplied in In re Sealed Mo-
tion.)  While the Supreme Court's language is obviously not a 
holding, this strong dicta provided support for our holding in 
In re Sealed Motion that the Division does possess the 
necessary jurisdiction to make the Rule 6(e)(C) disclosure 
determination.

     We therefore remain satisfied that we have jurisdiction to 
enter the order prayed by the Independent Counsel.

                    Propriety of Disclosure

     In determining whether or not to order the disclosure of 
independent counsel reports, and specifically of grand jury 
materials contained therein, we adopted in In re North an 
analysis weighing four not necessarily exclusive factors:

     [1] whether the subjects of the investigations have al-
     ready been disclosed to the public;
     
     [2] whether the subjects do not object to the filings 
     being released to the public;
     
     [3] whether the filings contain information which is 
     already publicly known;  and
     
     [4] whether the court filings consist of legal or factual 
     rulings in a case which should be publicly available to 
     understand the court's rules and precedents or to follow 
     the developments in a particular matter.
     
16 F.3d at 1237 (quoting Sen. Rep. No. 123, 100th Cong., 1st 
Sess. 21 (1987), reprinted in 1987 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2150, 2170).  
We apply those four parts today.

     We first ask "whether the subjects of the investigations 
have already been disclosed to the public."  The subjects of 
the investigation have already been officially disclosed in the 
course of criminal trials.  Therefore this factor weighs in 
favor of disclosure.

     We second ask "whether the subjects do not object to the 
filings being released to the public."  We have provided the 
same opportunity in this case for comment that we provided 
in In re North and in numerous other independent counsel 
investigations.  While we have received numerous comments, 
only one comment, filed on behalf of three related individuals, 
addresses the question of disclosure.  As in In re North "the 
vast majority of the persons named in the Report have not 
expressed an opinion one way or the other."  In In re North, 
we determined that "counting noses does not decide the 
question."  Id. at 1240.  Here, as in In re North, "[e]ven if 
only one person objected, and fairness compellingly directed 
withholding for his sake, we could withhold the Report...."  
Id.  In the prior case we found that on balance "this factor 
[weighed] against release, but only slightly."  Id.  In the 
matter before us, we have examined the single objection.  
While we find it not at all frivolous, we further note that the 
comment itself, while opposing publication, further requests 
that "at a minimum ... this letter be appended to the 
report."  The report as contemplated will include the filing of 
that letter.  On balance, we conclude that this factor weighs 
in favor of release, though only slightly. 

     The third factor, "whether the filings contain information 
which is already publicly known," weighs most strongly in 

favor of release.  In In re North we noted that "[n]ot only is 
the information widely known, it is widely known incorrectly."  
Id.  We therefore concluded that a more complete version of 
the information coupled with the opportunity for comment by 
the persons named created a strong impetus for release.  The 
same is true in the matter before us.  As the one objecting 
comment notes, "most of the story" about which the commen-
ter is concerned "was disclosed in a public forum, Secretary 
Espy's trial."  While the commenter goes on to note that the 
report of the Independent Counsel arguably misleads the 
reader about certain facts of the "story," the commenter's 
own document which is to be filed with the report rebuts or at 
least responds to the Independent Counsel's version.  There-
fore, we conclude that the public interest in full disclosure of 
that which has been partially or misleadingly disclosed al-
ready weighs in favor of the granting of publication. 

     The fourth factor "whether the court filings consist of legal 
or factual rulings in a case which should be publicly available 
to understand the court's rules and precedents or to follow 
the developments in a particular matter"--as in In re North 
is not of great weight on either side of the scale.  By no 
means does the report consist entirely or even marginally of 
such rulings.  If this factor weighs at all, it therefore weighs 
against disclosure, but it does not weigh very much.  As in In 
re North, "[i]f our answer had been 'yes,' that might be a 
factor tipping towards release.  Where the answer is 'no,' it 
affects the balance little one way or the other."  Id. at 1241.

     We therefore conclude as we did in In re North that the 
motion for publication of the Independent Counsel's report, 
inclusive of an appendix containing all comments filed by 
persons named in the report, is granted.  As in the prior case 
we are filing contemporaneously herewith an order staying 
publication for a period of ten days so that any party affected 
by this order may if any such party so wishes seek a further 
stay from the Supreme Court.

                                                            So ordered.

 

     Cudahy, Senior Circuit Judge, concurring.

     I concur fully in Judge Sentelle's opinion for the majority.  
I write separately only to offer a further comment on the 
difficult balance between fairness to the persons investigated 
and the public interest in full disclosure, which is touched 
upon by Judge Sentelle here and was explored more fully in 
the leading precedent, In re:  North, 16 F.3d 1234 (D.C. Cir. 
1994).  As the majority notes here, "The issuance of a docu-
ment issued by a prosecutor, not of itself under the aegis of 
either the court or the grand jury, yet potentially harmful to 
the reputation of persons investigated is certainly troubling, 
and we have found it troubling in our prior proceedings under 
this statute."  Ante, at 2.

     This investigation was perhaps unique in the annals of the 
independent counsels in that its principal subject, Secretary 
of Agriculture Michael Espy, was indicted on 39 counts by a 
grand jury and acquitted on all counts by a trial jury after a 
two-month trial.  It is certainly not my role to comment on 
those unique circumstances, although I will suggest that the 
final report does little to explain why matters turned out as 
they did.

     I perhaps bring an unusual perspective to the matters 
covered by this final report, since I presided for a number of 
years over a firm intensively regulated by the United States 
Department of Agriculture under the Meat Inspection Act.  
So I fully understand the sensitivity of relations between such 
firms and their managements and agents and officials of the 
Department of Agriculture.  This report at several points, in 
attempting to establish the importance of this investigation, 
cites Upton Sinclair's classic, The Jungle, whose purpose was 
to expose labor conditions in the meatpacking industry but 
which led instead to the passage of the Meat Inspection Act 
in 1907.

     The report, which with appendices is more than 400 pages 
long, also includes a defense of the independent counsel 
procedure against charges of excessive delay and cost and of 
having a distorted focus.  This is a bit of special pleading, 
which is likely to be viewed skeptically.  But it is fair 

comment.  The report also predictably deplores the injection 
of politics into appraisals of an independent counsel's work, 
though--considering that the subjects of theses investigations 
are at the highest levels of political power--one could hardly 
expect things to be sanitized against politics.

     Trying to strike some kind of appropriate balance between 
fairness to those investigated--whether convicted or acquit-
ted--or even indicted--and the public interest in disclosure of 
how things looked to the prosecutor at various stages of the 
investigations and the prosecutions may be almost impossible.  
But in the last analysis, in this as in many similar situations, 
public disclosure, with whatever safeguards can be put in 
place, seems the more prudent course.

              