                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued November 21, 2002    Decided January 10, 2003 

                           No. 01-5429

                 Boca Investerings Partnership, 
                        a Partnership and 
    American Home Products Corporation, Tax Matters Partner, 
                            Appellees

                                v.

                    United States of America, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00602)

     Mark V. Holmes, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellant.  With him on the briefs were 
Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, Richard Farber and 
Edward T. Perelmuter, Attorneys, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice.

     Christopher Kliefoth argued the cause for appellees.  With 
him on the brief were William L. Goldman and Diane L. 
Cafritz.  Melvin White entered an appearance.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  In 1990, American Home Prod-
ucts (AHP), sold a subsidiary, Boyle-Midway, for a capital 
gain of more than $605 million.  Just before the sale, Merrill 
Lynch approached AHP with an investment plan which would 
enable AHP to claim paper tax losses of a comparable 
amount, while generating only about $8 million in actual 
losses.  AHP was one of several Fortune 500 companies that 
Merrill approached with this idea, and this is the third case 
before us involving this particular type of scheme.  See Saba 
P'ship v. Comm'r, 273 F.3d 1135 (D.C. Cir. 2001);  ASA 
Investerings P'ship v. Comm'r, 201 F.3d 505 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  
Following Merrill Lynch's proposal, AHP formed Boca Inves-
terings Partnership with another AHP subsidiary and two 
foreign corporations.  After completing the transactions pro-
posed by Merrill Lynch, AHP filed tax returns which re-
flected the losses offsetting its capital gains for 1990-1993.  
After the Internal Revenue Service challenged these returns, 
AHP filed a complaint in the district court contesting the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue's proposed adjustments to 
its partnership returns, and on October 5, 2001, the district 
court issued an opinion rejecting the Commissioner's adjust-
ments, and entering judgment in favor of Boca.  See Boca 
Investerings P'ship v. United States, 167 F. Supp.2d 298 
(D.D.C. 2001).  We reverse the district court's decision as 
inconsistent with ASA Investerings, 201 F.3d 505.

Background

     We explored this Merrill Lynch-created tax shelter and the 
regulation on which it depends at significant length in our 
opinion in ASA Investerings, 201 F.3d at 506-08, and there-
fore will not belabor the details here.  The plan proposed by 
Merrill Lynch to AlliedSignal, the domestic corporation in-
volved in the ASA partnership, was virtually identical to the 

one Merrill proposed to AHP in the case before us now.  The 
plan requires the formation of a partnership between a 
United States corporation and a foreign corporation not sub-
ject to United States tax, combined with a series of invest-
ment transactions that exploit the terms of Temp. Treas. Reg. 
s 15A.453-1(c)(3)(I) (26 C.F.R.).  That regulation provides a 
tax accounting rule for contingent installment sales.  An 
installment sale is defined in the code as "a disposition of 
property where at least 1 payment is to be received after the 
close of the taxable year in which the disposition occurs."  
I.R.C. s 453(b)(1) (2001).  A contingent installment sale is 
one where the total purchase price is unknown at the time of 
the transaction.  Because the total price is unknown, the total 
gain on the sale is likewise unknown.  The regulation supplies 
a general rule of "ratable basis recovery" for situations where 
a seller at least knows the maximum period over which the 
purchase price will be paid.  The partnership formed between 
the domestic entities and the foreign entities takes advantage 
of this regulation by first buying, then immediately selling a 
debt instrument on an installment basis.

     As we noted in our opinion in Saba Partnership, which also 
considered this regulation and another virtually identical ser-
ies of transactions, "[a]lthough the transaction is basically a 
wash, generating hardly any economic gain or loss, Merrill 
Lynch's lawyers' interpretation of the relevant provisions 
allows the partnership to claim a massive tax gain, which is 
allocated to the foreign partner, and a massive tax loss, which 
the U.S. corporation keeps for itself."  273 F.3d at 1136.  
This sentence essentially describes the transactions in which 
AHP;  its subsidiary;  and its foreign partners, Syringa and 
Addiscombe, engaged after forming the Boca partnership.  
The massive loss AHP was able to claim for tax purposes was 
then used to offset the tax gain it realized from the sale of its 
subsidiary, Boyle-Midway.

     The facts in this case are substantially similar to those in 
ASA Investerings and Saba Partnership.  In 1990, Merrill 
Lynch representatives approached AHP, as it had also ap-
proached AlliedSignal and Brunswick, other Fortune 500 
companies, with the idea for this scheme to shelter large 

capital gains.  After meeting with the representatives, Thom-
as Nee, AHP's vice-president for taxes prepared a memoran-
dum for AHP's Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, John 
Stafford, entitled, "Tax Planning Re:  Sale of Boyle-Mid-
way."  This memo outlined the proposal as follows, in perti-
nent part.

     1) Formation of Partnership
     
     The partnership would be formed in a favorable tax 
     jurisdiction such as the Netherlands, Antilles under the 
     New York general partnership law.  The members of the 
     partnership would be AHPC, one of its domestic subsid-
     iaries (henceforth referred to as AHPC) and an unrelated 
     foreign financial institution (XYZ).  AHPC will contrib-
     ute cash of $110 million (representing a 10% ownership) 
     and XYZ will contribute $990 million.  Under the part-
     nership agreement, all the income, gain, expense and loss 
     of the partnership will be allocated among the members 
     in proportion to their capital accounts.  * * *
     
     2) Purchase of Corporate Bonds
     
     * * * [I]nvest $1.057 billion in [corporate bonds]* * *
     
     3) Installment Sale
     
     The Partnership will sell the Bonds to a financial institu-
     tion in exchange for $898.5 million in cash and $158.5 
     million at fair market value, five year LIBOR installment 
     notes.  * * *
     
     4) Increase of AHPC's Partnership Interest
     
     Following Step 3, AHPC will purchase a 45.5% interest 
     in the partnership from XYZ for $500 million in cash 
     bringing its total interest to 55.5% and XYZ's interest 
     down 44.5%.
     
     5) Contribution of Assets to Partnership
     
     AHPC will thereupon contribute assets with a fair mar-
     ket value of $200 million to the partnership further 
     increasing its partnership interest to 62%.  * * *
     
     6) Partial Redemption of Partnership Interest
     
     The partnership will distribute $159 million fair market 
     value installment note to AHPC and $96 million in cash 
     to XYZ.  * * *
     
     7) Sale of Installment Note
     
          * * * $159 million in cash resulting in a $723.2 million 
     in capital loss
     
              * * *     
The memo also noted that, "[w]e believe that the above 
transaction is technically sound.  We expect it would be 
vigorously attacked by the IRS. * * * Merrill Lynch is 
requesting a fee of $8 million.  Their contribution is signifi-
cant in that they identify XYZ, arrange for purchase of the 
Corporate Assets (Bonds) and locate a buyer for the install-
ment notes."

     AHP decided to accept Merrill Lynch's proposal and the 
transaction took form by precisely following the steps laid out 
in Nee's memo.  Boca Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d at 319.  
On April 19, 1990, the Boca partnership was formed between 
partners AHP;  another AHP subsidiary and two Netherlands 
Antilles special purpose corporations, Addiscombe and Syrin-
ga, with initial partner contributions mirroring those antici-
pated in the memo.  Id.  Merrill Lynch received a $7 million 
fee for structuring the transaction.  On May 1 and 2, 1990, 
Boca purchased $1.1 billion of private placement floating-rate 
notes (PPNs) from two Japanese banks and PepsiCo.  Boca 
Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d at 329-30.  A week after Boca 
made the purchases, Merrill Lynch began arranging for the 
sale of the PPNs.  During one week in late May, 1990, Boca 
sold over $1 billion of the PPNs for $880 million in cash, and 
indefinite debt instruments known as LIBOR (London Inter-
bank Offering Rate) notes.  Boca Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d 
at 333-34.  The district court found that this sale generated 
transaction costs of $13 million, which was ultimately borne 
by AHP, id. at 337, and that Boca received less than $7 
million in interest on its $1.1 billion investment in the PPNs, 
id. at 351.

     On its 1990 partnership tax return, Boca treated the sale as 
an installment sale under I.R.C. s 453(b).  Id. at 362.  Boca 

reported a short-term capital gain of over $721 million from 
the transaction, calculated by subtracting the ratably-
recovered basis from the $880 million in cash generated by 
the sale of the PPNs.  Id.  Ten percent of the gain was 
allocated to AHP and its domestic subsidiary, while the 
remaining ninety percent was allocated to the foreign part-
ners, who were not subject to U.S. tax on the gain.  Id.  
ABN, a Netherlands bank which controlled the two foreign 
partnerships, id. at 319, and was also involved in the Saba 
Partnership and ASA Investerings transactions, see Saba 
P'ship, 273 F.3d at 1138-40;  ASA Investerings, 201 F.3d at 
508-11, entered into interest-rate swaps with Addiscombe, 
Syringa and Merrill Lynch to hedge the interest-rate risk on 
the LIBOR notes.  Boca Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d at 360, 
361.

     On July 20, 1990, the parties agreed that AHP would 
purchase approximately 45% of Syringa's interest in Boca at a 
$2.5 million above-book-value premium. Boca Investerings, 
167 F. Supp.2d at 338.  This transaction left the foreign 
partners with approximately a 45% ownership interest in 
Boca.  Id. at 339.  In August 1990, Boca distributed $175 
million in cash to the foreign partners and nearly $220 million 
in LIBOR notes to the AHP partners.  Id. at 341.  In 
September and October 1990, Boca redeemed more of the 
foreign partners' interest, resulting in an 85% ownership 
interest for the AHP partners.  Id. at 343, 344.  In Novem-
ber 1990, the AHP partners sold the LIBOR notes Boca had 
distributed to them.  Id. at 344-45.  This disposition trig-
gered a paper loss of more than $770 million for AHP.  Id. at 
345.  This loss offset the capital gains of AHP from the sale 
of Boyle-Midway, and other gains from 1990 to 1993.  Id.  In 
December 1990, AHP redeemed Syringa's remaining interest 
in Boca for cash.  Id.  Finally, in September 1991, the foreign 
partners were bought out of Boca entirely, with the cash 
redemption of Addiscombe's remaining interest, which includ-
ed a premium of $2.2 million above book value.  Id. at 346-47.

     Following the government's audit of Boca's partnership tax 
returns for 1990-1993, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue 
proposed different adjustments based on different theories.  
Under one theory, the Commissioner found that the foreign 

entities had not entered into a valid partnership with AHP, 
and therefore recognized the Merrill Lynch transaction for 
tax purposes, but allocated all the gains and losses reported 
by Boca to AHP.  Under a second theory, that the transac-
tion was an economic sham, the Commissioner eliminated any 
gains and losses reported by Boca as resulting from the 
transaction.  AHP deposited with the Treasury the amount it 
determined would be due as a result of the proposed adjust-
ments and filed suit in district court contesting the Commis-
sioner's proposals.  The district court determined after a 
lengthy trial that the Commissioner erred in proposing the 
adjustments.  See Boca Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d at 388.  
The government's appeal is now before us.

     We review the findings of fact of the district court under 
the "clear error" standard.  ASA Investerings, 201 F.3d at 
511.  "A finding is 'clearly errroneous' when although there is 
evidence to support it, the reviewing court on the entire 
evidence is left with the definite and firm conviction that a 
mistake has been committed."  United States v. United 
States Gypsum Co., 333 U.S. 364, 395 (1948).  The district 
court, after a seventeen day trial, issued a well-documented 
and cross-referenced 180 page opinion which included 392 
separate findings of fact, as well as conclusions of law.

Analysis

     At the outset, we reject two of the government's assign-
ments of error without difficulty.  Although the district court 
reached a different conclusion than other courts had on 
previous occasions in cases with very similar facts, these 
findings of fact do not constitute clear error by the district 
court.  The mere similarity of facts in two cases with differ-
ent litigants and different evidence provides no basis for a 
finding of clear error on the part of either trial judge whose 
findings differ from the other.  This is particularly evident in 
a case such as this in which many of the district court's 
findings were based on the demeanor and believability of 
witnesses at trial.  See Boca Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d at 
303.  Nor did the district court err when it refused to admit 
into evidence materials which did not relate to the parties in 

this case and which the government argued should be admit-
ted principally because they were admitted as evidence in 
ASA Investerings.  However, our rejection of these assign-
ments of error does not mean we reject all assignments.  We 
reverse the judgment below because the district court erred 
as a matter of law when it did not properly apply the holding 
of ASA Investerings, requiring that a legitimate non-tax 
business necessity exist for the creation of the otherwise 
sham entity inserted into the partnership for tax avoidance 
reasons in order to meet the intent test of Commissioner v. 
Culbertson, 337 U.S. 733 (1949), as applied to this type of 
partnership transaction.

     The government argues that the district court erred in 
determining that this case was materially different from the 
case in ASA Investerings, in which we affirmed the Tax 
Court's ruling that a very similar partnership between Allied-
Signal and ABN Bank was a sham for purposes of the 
"business purpose doctrine."  We agree.  While the similarity 
of facts in the two cases does not, in itself, invalidate the 
district court's finding that Boca Investerings Partnership 
was not a sham partnership, the district court's misapplica-
tion of ASA Investerings's instructions for interpreting trans-
actions such as these does constitute reversible error.  As we 
noted in Saba Partnership, "ASA makes clear that 'the 
absence of a nontax business purpose is fatal' to the argument 
that the Commissioner should respect an entity for federal 
tax purposes."  273 F.3d at 1141 (quoting ASA Investerings, 
201 F.3d at 512).

     Boca claimed at oral argument and in a post-argument 
submission that the government failed to raise the require-
ment stated in ASA Investerings that a partnership have a 
non-tax need in order for it to be recognized for tax purposes.  
Accordingly, Boca argues that we should not consider this 
point on appeal, citing Flynn v. Commissioner, 269 F.3d 
1064, 1068-69 (D.C. Cir. 2001) ("generally an argument not 
made in the lower tribunal is deemed forfeited and will not be 
entertained absent exceptional circumstances.")  However, as 
the government rightly points out, its Memorandum of Points 
and  Authorities filed with the district court approximately 

three months before trial expressly argues "given the sub-
stantial costs incurred, AHP's use of this elaborate 'partner-
ship' cannot be justified by a non-tax business purpose.  The 
factual similarity to the ASA Investerings partnership case is 
obvious and undeniable."

     The business purpose doctrine applied in ASA Investerings 
establishes that while taxpayers are allowed to structure their 
business transactions in such a way as to minimize their tax, 
these transactions must have a legitimate non-tax avoidance 
business purpose to be recognized as legitimate for tax pur-
poses.  The reasoning behind this doctrine is readily applica-
ble to this case.  As we noted in ASA Investerings:

     A tax system of rather high rates gives a multitude of 
     clever individuals in the private sector powerful incen-
     tives to game the system.  Even the smartest drafters of 
     legislation and regulation cannot be expected to antici-
     pate every device.  The business purpose doctrine re-
     duces the incentive to engage in such essentially wasteful 
     activity, and in addition helps achieve reasonable equity 
     among taxpayers who are similarly situated--in every 
     respect except for differing investments in tax avoidance.
     
201 F.3d at 513.

     We then approved the Tax Court's approach to the Su-
preme Court's test set out in Culbertson which determined 
that the existence of a partnership would depend on whether, 
"considering all the facts ... the parties in good faith and 
acting with a business purpose intended to join together in 
the present conduct of the enterprise."  ASA Investerings, 
201 F.3d at 511 (quoting Culbertson, 337 U.S. at 742).  We 
stated that "the Tax Court was, we think, sound in its basic 
inquiry, trying to decide whether, all facts considered, the 
parties intended to join together as partners to conduct 
business activity for a purpose other than tax avoidance."  Id. 
at 513.  Finally, we affirmed the Tax Court's conclusion that 
AlliedSignal and ABN did not have "the requisite intent to 
join together for the purpose of carrying on a partnership."  
Id. at 511 (quoting 76 T.C.M. at 335).

     As the government argued, ASA Investerings set out fac-
tors which pointed to AlliedSignal's lack of a legitimate non-
tax business purpose for its transactions with the partnership.  
"[T]his evidence says nothing about AlliedSignal's use of the 
elaborate partnership--with a pair of partners concocted for 
the occasion.  There is no reason to believe that AlliedSignal 
could not have realized [AlliedSignal's assistant treasurer]'s 
interest rate play without the partnership at far, far lower 
transactions costs."  Id. at 516.  In the current case, the 
district court never made a finding of fact in regard to the 
necessity of AHP's acquisition of foreign partners in order to 
engage in the transactions.  No official testified that AHP 
needed a partnership with a foreign corporation to invest in 
LIBOR notes or PPNs.  AHP's participation in the partner-
ship defies common sense from an economic standpoint, since 
it could have purchased the PPNs and the LIBOR notes 
directly, and avoided millions in transaction costs, including 
the $7 million fee it paid to Merrill Lynch and the "premi-
ums" paid to the foreign partners for the purchase of their 
ownership interests.

     Without a finding on the business need for the partnership 
from AHP's standpoint in this transaction, the judgment 
under review cannot stand.  In addition, the foreign partners 
Syringa and Addiscombe were, like the foreign entities in 
ASA, "concocted" for the occasion--neither having existed 
prior to the transaction's commencement, nor serving any 
other purpose, and both being funded through loans from 
ABN, the bank which we found to lack the requisite intent to 
enter a legitimate business partnership with Allied Signal in 
ASA.  In fact, the parties stipulated in the court below that 
both entities came into being only on April 19, 1990, the same 
day that Boca was created.  Stip. of Facts at p 29.  Nothing 
in the record indicates that AHP ever considered or weighed 
the benefits of using a different type of transaction in order 
to make these investments, including the option of purchasing 
them directly.

     Boca argues that the district court made the finding that 
the parties "intended to, and did, organize Boca as a partner-
ship to share the income, expenses, gains and losses from 

Boca's investments." Boca Investerings, 167 F. Supp.2d at 
349-50.  This finding, contrary to the appellee's assertion, 
does not satisfy the legal test for recognition of this type of 
partnership for tax purposes, as we held in ASA Investerings.  
In order to satisfy the legal test for this type of partnership, 
the district court must have found a non-tax business purpose 
need for the partnership in order to accomplish the goals of 
the partners.  In this case, there is no evidence of any need 
for AHP to enter into the Boca partnership with the newly-
minted Addiscombe and Syringa in order to invest in the 
LIBOR notes and PPNs.  Nor is there even evidence of any 
non-tax purpose in the use of the partnerships.  The only 
logical explanation then, for the partnership's formation was 
the exploitation of Temp. Treas. Reg. s 15A.453-1(c)(3)(I) 
and the gain of a paper tax loss to absorb its enormous capital 
gains.  The district court stated as its first conclusion of law 
that

     the transactions financing the purchase and sale of the 
     PPNs had economic substance, were not prearranged 
     and predetermined, and had a legitimate purpose.  They 
     therefore should be recognized for federal income tax 
     purposes.
     
Boca Investerings, 167 F.Supp.2d at 580.  As the record 
would not support a finding that the partnership form served 
any non-tax business purpose, this conclusion is unsupported, 
inconsistent with ASA Investerings, and constitutes revers-
ible error.

     Boca argues that the clear error standard places a heavy 
burden on the appellant upon review, and we agree that there 
was ample evidence in the record to support the numerous 
and well-documented findings of fact made by the district 
court.  As we stated above these findings are not the prob-
lem.  The principal error is in the lack of findings on the non-
tax purpose for the partnership, but that error is determina-
tive.  We do not of course suggest that in every transaction 
using a partnership a taxpayer must justify that to form, but 
as we made clear in both ASA Investerings and Saba Part-
nership, where taxpayers use an "elaborate partnership" with 

entities created solely for the purpose of the questioned 
transaction, "the absence of a non-tax business purpose" is 
fatal to the recognition of the entity for the tax purposes.  
ASA Investerings, 201 F.3d at 512.  See also Saba P'ship, 273 
F.3d at 1141.  Because the district court did not find that a 
legitimate, non-tax necessity existed for the formation of the 
Boca partnership, and because the evidence of record would 
not have supported such a finding if made, we reverse.

                               