                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 12, 2002    Decided June 11, 2002 

                           No. 01-5182

                         David F. Power, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                 Jo Ann Barnhart, Commissioner, 
                 Social Security Administration, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv00398)

     David F. Power, appearing pro se, argued the cause and 
filed the briefs for appellant.

     Fred E. Haynes, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With him on the brief were Roscoe C. Howard, 
Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. 
Attorney.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Attorney David Power seeks a 
writ of mandamus compelling the Social Security Administra-
tion (SSA) to approve a fee agreement he submitted to 
recover fees for representing a claimant before the SSA.  The 
district court dismissed Power's complaint, finding that he 
had failed to satisfy the strict requirements for mandamus.  
Because neither Power's right to relief nor the SSA's duty to 
provide it is clear, and because Power failed to avail himself 
of an adequate alternative remedy, we affirm the district 
court's determination that a grant of the extraordinary reme-
dy of mandamus is inappropriate in this case.

                                I

     Under the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. s 406(a), an 
attorney who represents a person with a claim for Social 
Security benefits before the SSA has a right to a reasonable 
fee, fixed in accordance with regulations prescribed by the 
Commissioner of Social Security.  Id. s 406(a)(1).  In 1980, 
the SSA issued regulations establishing a "fee petition" pro-
cess for the purpose of determining a reasonable fee.  See 20 
C.F.R. ss 404.1720-.1725, .1730.  Those regulations require 
the attorney to submit a petition listing such information as 
the services rendered, the amount of time expended, and the 
fee desired.  Id. s 404.1725(a).  The SSA then evaluates the 
petition based on such factors as the complexity of the case, 
the level of skill required of the attorney, and the results 
achieved for the claimant.  Id. s 404.1725(b)(1).1

     In 1990, Congress amended s 406(a), adding a new subsec-
tion, s 406(a)(2).  See Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 
1990, Pub. L. No. 101-508, s 5106(a), 104 Stat. 1388, 1388-
266.  That subsection authorizes an attorney who assists a 

__________
     1 Pursuant to a petition, the Commissioner may authorize a fee 
even if the claimant was unsuccessful in obtaining benefits.  20 
C.F.R. s 404.1725(b)(2).

claimant with an administrative claim to receive compensation 
pursuant to a "fee agreement" entered into with the claimant.  
Such an agreement must satisfy three prerequisites:  (i) it 
must be submitted to the Commissioner in writing prior to 
the time the Commissioner makes a determination on the 
claim;  (ii) it must specify a fee that does not exceed the lesser 
of 25% of the past-due benefits awarded or $4,000;2  and (iii) 
the Commissioner must make a determination favorable to 
the claimant.  42 U.S.C. s 406(a)(2)(A).  If these require-
ments are satisfied, "then the Commissioner of Social Securi-
ty shall approve that agreement at the time of the favorable 
determination, and ... the fee specified in the agreement 
shall be the maximum fee."  Id.  As with fee petitions, when 
a fee agreement is approved, the SSA certifies the fee for 
payment out of the past-due benefits owed to the claimant.  
See id. s 406(a)(4);  20 C.F.R. s 404.1730(b).

     This case originated in a claim for disability benefits filed 
by Jerome Fleeton in 1997.  At that time, Fleeton lived in 
Ohio and was represented before the agency there by John A. 
McNally, III.  Fleeton signed an "Appointment of Represen-
tative" form and a fee agreement naming McNally as his 
attorney.  See Joint Appendix (J.A.) at 19-20.  Fleeton's 
initial application for disability benefits was denied, and he 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge 
(ALJ).  Before the hearing took place, however, Fleeton 
moved to Maryland and had the hearing transferred to the 
Washington, D.C. hearing office.

     Fleeton engaged Power, the plaintiff here, to represent him 
before the ALJ in Washington.  Fleeton signed a second 
Appointment of Representative form and another attorney 
fee agreement, this time with Power.  See J.A. at 21, 27.  The 
ALJ awarded Fleeton past-due benefits on October 24, 1998, 

__________
     2 This amount was increased to $5,300 effective February 2002.  
See 42 U.S.C. 406(a)(2)(A) (allowing the Commissioner of Social 
Security to increase the maximum fee agreement award);  Maxi-
mum Dollar Limit in the Fee Agreement Process, 67 Fed. Reg. 
2477 (Jan. 17, 2002).

and issued an order "approv[ing] the fee agreement between 
the claimant and his representative."  J.A. at 24.

     The SSA soon realized that two attorneys had represented 
Fleeton over the course of his claim.  On July 6, 1999, the 
Deputy Chief ALJ of the SSA's Office of Hearings and 
Appeals issued an order disapproving Power's fee agreement.  
In a letter to Power, the Deputy Chief ALJ explained that 
"[s]ince the claimant appointed more than one representative, 
and all did not sign a single, common fee agreement or waive 
charging and collecting a fee, the Social Security Administra-
tion cannot process your fee under the fee agreement pro-
cess."  J.A. at 25.  In order to collect a fee, the letter advised, 
Power would have to "file a fee petition."  Id.

     Power did not file a fee petition, nor did he seek a fee 
waiver from McNally.  Instead, he filed suit in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia under 28 
U.S.C. s 1361, seeking a writ of mandamus ordering the SSA 
to approve his fee agreement.3  The district court dismissed 
Power's complaint, holding that s 406(a) does not grant an 
attorney a clear right, nor impose upon the SSA a clear duty, 
with respect to approval of a fee agreement when two or 
more attorneys have submitted agreements regarding the 
same claim.  The court also held that, given the availability of 
the fee petition process, Power had failed to show that 
mandamus was the only adequate remedy available.  We 
review the district court's dismissal of the complaint de novo, 
accepting the complaint's allegations as true for purposes of 
this appeal.  See Gray v. Poole, 243 F.3d 572, 575 (D.C. Cir. 
2001).

                                II

     The "remedy of mandamus is a drastic one, to be invoked 
only in extraordinary circumstances."  Allied Chemical Corp. 
v. Daiflon, Inc., 449 U.S. 33, 34 (1980).  Mandamus is avail-
able only if:  "(1) the plaintiff has a clear right to relief;  (2) 

__________
     3 Section 1361 provides:  "The district courts shall have original 
jurisdiction of any action in the nature of mandamus to compel an 
officer or employee of the United States or any agency thereof to 
perform a duty owed to the plaintiff."

the defendant has a clear duty to act;  and (3) there is no 
other adequate remedy available to plaintiff."  Northern 
States Power Co. v. U.S. Dep't of Energy, 128 F.3d 754, 758 
(D.C. Cir. 1997) (quoting Council of and for the Blind of 
Delaware Cty. Valley, Inc. v. Regan, 709 F.2d 1521, 1533 
(D.C. Cir. 1983) (en banc)).  The party seeking mandamus 
"has the burden of showing that 'its right to issuance of the 
writ is clear and indisputable.' "  Northern States Power, 128 
F.3d at 758 (quoting Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. v. Mayaca-
mas Corp., 485 U.S. 271, 289 (1988)).  The plaintiff has failed 
to satisfy that burden here.

                                A

     Power bases his claim that he has satisfied the first two 
requirements of mandamus--that plaintiff's right to relief and 
defendant's duty to act be clear--on the language of 42 
U.S.C. s 406(a)(2)(A).  That provision declares that the Com-
missioner of Social Security "shall approve" a fee agreement 
if the agreement meets the three prerequisites of the subsec-
tion described above.  As the SSA points out, however, 
s 406(a)(2) is silent as to what the Commissioner should do if 
she is presented with more than one fee agreement.  Indeed, 
the three statutory prerequisites, as well as the "shall ap-
prove" clause, are all written in the singular--indicating that 
Congress did not contemplate a scenario in which multiple 
attorneys presented agreements.4  Moreover, as the SSA 
further argues, if there were a mandatory duty to approve 

__________
     4 Section 406 (a)(2)(A) provides:

     In the case of a claim of entitlement to past-due benefits under 
     this subchapter, if--
     
          (i) an agreement between the claimant and another person 
     regarding any fee to be recovered by such person to compen-
     sate such person for services with respect to the claim is 
     presented in writing to the Commissioner of Social Security 
     prior to the time of the Commissioner's determination regard-
     ing the claim,
     
          (ii) the fee specified in the agreement does not exceed the 
     lesser of--
     
any agreement that met the three prerequisites, and if two 
agreements in a single case did so, then approval of both 
could conflict with an important purpose of s 406(a)(2)(A)(ii):  
to cap the amount that a claimant may agree to pay in 
attorneys' fees at the lesser of 25% of his recovery or $4,000.  
Accordingly, the SSA concludes--as set forth in its July 6 
letter--that where there are agreements with more than one 
attorney, the attorneys must file fee petitions so that the 
agency can review the requested fees for their overall reason-
ableness.

     Power concedes that the statute is silent on the question of 
how the SSA should handle multiple fee agreements.  He 
argues, however, that the SSA need not resort to the fee 
petition process of s 406(a)(1) to handle the problem of 
multiple fees that in combination may exceed the statutory 
maximum.  As Power points out, an alternative solution is 
offered by s 406(a)(3)(A), which empowers the Commissioner 
to reduce a fee agreement if the agreed-upon fee is "clearly 
excessive for services rendered."  Nonetheless, the fact that 
there are alternative solutions to the problem posed by 
multiple fee agreements does not impose a clear duty on the 
SSA to choose the alternative preferred by the plaintiff.

     Power also contends that the SSA's position in this case is 
inconsistent with its prior interpretation of s 406(a)(2).  Fol-
lowing the trail of agency pronouncements on this subject 
poses only slightly less difficulty than following the trail of 
bread crumbs left by Hansel and Gretel.  Power rests his 
claim on an attachment to a 1992 internal memorandum 
__________
                (I) 25 percent of the total amount of such past-due bene-
                        fits ..., or 

                (II) $4,000, and 

 
          (iii) the determination is favorable to the claimant, 
     
      then the Commissioner of Social Security shall approve that 
     agreement at the time of the favorable determination, and 
     (subject to paragraph (3)) the fee specified in the agreement 
     shall be the maximum fee.
     
42 U.S.C. s 406(a)(2)(A) (emphasis added).

written by Daniel L. Skoler, who at the time was the Associ-
ate Commissioner of the SSA's Office of Hearings and Ap-
peals.  The attachment to the memorandum states that, even 
if an ALJ mistakenly approves one of multiple fee agree-
ments, the SSA should continue to process the agreement 
because the agency's exception to paying under multiple 
agreements is "not statutory."  J.A. at 43.  The SSA re-
sponds to Power's argument by advising that it has replaced 
the Skoler memorandum with a new interpretation of the 
statutory requirements of s 406(a)(2), an interpretation that 
the agency says is reflected in its current Program Opera-
tions Manual System (POMS).  See Letter from SSA to 
Power (July 6, 1999) (citing POMS GN 03940.025C.4) (J.A. at 
25).  Under this new interpretation, the agency says, a fee 
request must be made by petition where two or more attor-
neys represent a claimant.  Id.;  see SSA Br. at 13-14.  
Power replies that the POMS does not have the authority of 
the internal memo, and is in any event inconsistent with yet 
another agency pronouncement, this time made in question-
and-answer format in the latest edition of the SSA's Hear-
ings, Appeals and Litigation Law Manual (HALLEX).  That 
pronouncement, Power contends, states that when there are 
multiple fee agreements, the ALJ should honor the most 
recent agreement.  See Power Br. at 10 (citing HALLEX, 
Temp. Instr. I-5-109).  In surreply, the SSA counters that 
Power has misconstrued the HALLEX, and that the cited 
Q&A refers only to multiple agreements between a claimant 
and the same attorney.  SSA Br. at 16.

     There is no reason for us to venture further into this 
thicket to determine which SSA interpretation is most cur-
rent or most authoritative, or whether the agency has ade-
quately explained any changes in its views.  Both Power and 
the SSA agree that all three of the interpretive documents 
noted above lack the administrative formality or other attrib-
utes that would justify substantial judicial deference under 
Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 
467 U.S. 837 (1984), and hence that they would at best qualify 
for the more limited form of deference accorded under Skid-
more v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944).  See United States 

v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 230-31 (2001);  SSA Br. at 14;  
Power Br. at 34.  Under Skidmore, we grant an agency's 
interpretation only so much deference as its persuasiveness 
warrants.  See Mead, 533 U.S. at 235 (citing Skidmore, 323 
U.S. at 140).  Thus, even were we to choose the document to 
which we should pay heed, the degree of deference we would 
apply would hardly be sufficient to transform s 406(a)(2)'s 
silence on the subject of multiple fee agreements into the 
"clear duty" required to justify a grant of mandamus.  As we 
have just recently reiterated, where an alleged "duty is not 
... plainly prescribed, but depends on a statute or statutes 
the construction or application of which is not free from 
doubt, it is regarded as involving the character of judgment 
or discretion which cannot be controlled by mandamus."  
Consolidated Edison Co. of N.Y. v. Ashcroft, 286 F.3d 600, 
605 (D.C. Cir. 2002) (quoting Wilbur v. United States, 281 
U.S. 206, 218-219 (1929)).

                                B

     Power's petition also fails to satisfy the third requirement 
of mandamus:  that there be no other adequate remedy 
available.  "[T]he alternative remedies that might call for 
refusal to resort to writ of mandamus encompass judicial 
remedies ... as well as administrative ones."  Cartier v. 
Secretary of State, 506 F.2d 191, 199 (D.C. Cir. 1974) (cita-
tions omitted);  see Ganem v. Heckler, 746 F.2d 844, 852 (D.C. 
Cir. 1984).  In this case, the SSA advised Power that he could 
obtain his fee by filing an administrative fee petition pursuant 
to 20 C.F.R. s 404.1725.  Power has failed to satisfy his 
burden of showing that the fee petition alternative was either 
unavailable or inadequate.

     There is no question that the petition alternative was 
available, as the SSA expressly advised Power in its July 6 
letter.  At various places in his briefs, Power suggests that 
the petition route was unavailable, contending that, in adding 
s 406(a)(2), "Congress intended the fee agreement process to 
replace the fee petition process."  Power Br. at 4;  see Power 
Reply Br. at 5-7.  But nothing in the statutory language 
indicates such an intention;  the 1990 addition of s 406(a)(2) 

simply left the fee petition provision of s 406(a)(1) undis-
turbed.  In support of his argument, Power cites the Confer-
ence Report on the 1990 amendments, which he says makes 
Congress' intent clear.  But that report merely reflects Con-
gress' understanding that the new subsection would "general-
ly replace the fee petition process with a streamlined pro-
cess," and goes on to state that "[i]f a fee was requested for a 
claim which did not meet the conditions for the streamlined 
approval process, it would be reviewed under the regular fee 
petition process."  H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 101-964, at 933 (1990) 
(emphasis added).  In the SSA's view, the latter is precisely 
the circumstance presented by this case.  Finally, even if we 
did have any lingering doubts as to whether fee petitions and 
fee agreements continue to coexist as alternative means for 
requesting payment, the Supreme Court's recent description 
of the s 406(a)(2) fee agreement provision as "an alternative 
to fee petitions" is sufficient to dispel them.  Gisbrecht v. 
Barnhart, No. 01-131, slip op. at 4, 535 U.S. ____, ____, 2002 
WL 1049193, at *4 (May 28, 2002).

     Nor has Power persuaded us that proceeding by fee peti-
tion would be an inadequate remedy.  He does not contend 
that he would receive less money by proceeding pursuant to 
petition rather than agreement;  indeed, he expressly disa-
vows such a claim.  See Power Reply Br. at 16, 18.  The 
petition regulations themselves certainly do not suggest that 
Power's award would be lower were he to take that route.  
To the contrary, while awards pursuant to fee agreements are 
statutorily capped at $4,000, there is no such cap on awards 
granted pursuant to petition.5

__________
     5 At oral argument, Power suggested that it would be difficult for 
him to provide support for a fee petition because, in reliance on the 
more streamlined fee agreement process, he had not kept time 
records.  The plaintiff did not suggest this potential inadequacy of 
the fee petition process in his opening or reply briefs, and it is 
simply too late to raise it for the first time in oral argument.  See 
Galvan v. Federal Prison Indus., Inc., 199 F.3d 461, 468 (D.C. Cir. 
1999).  Moreover, responding to this point at argument, counsel for 
the SSA said he believed that, in the absence of original records, 
the agency would accept a fair estimate of time expended because 
benefits cases of this kind are fairly standardized.

     Power argues that, regardless of whether he would receive 
less money through petition than agreement, the avenue of 
petition is inadequate because the right he seeks to vindicate 
is approval of the fee agreement and not payment of the fee.  
See Power Br. at 15-16;  Power Reply Br. at 14-15, 18.  This 
argument, however, misconstrues both s 406(a) and the na-
ture of mandamus relief.  If the SSA does owe any duty to 
Power under s 406(a), it is a duty to pay him a fee for his 
services out of the benefits that he recovered for the claimant.  
See 42 U.S.C. s 406(a)(1), (2).  The petition and agreement 
procedures are merely alternative means to that end.  See 
Gisbrecht, slip op. at 4, 535 U.S. at ___.  Indeed, were we to 
define the means to the end as the end itself, we would simply 
write the third prong out of the mandamus test.  The point of 
that prong is to ensure that where there are alternative 
means of vindicating a statutory right, a plaintiff's preference 
for one over another is insufficient to warrant a grant of the 
extraordinary writ.

     This principle is well illustrated in our mandamus cases.  
In Council of and for the Blind, the plaintiffs sought to 
compel the Office of Revenue Sharing to use administrative 
means to enforce a provision of the Revenue Sharing Act, 31 
U.S.C. s 1242, that prohibited state and local governments 
from using revenue sharing funds in discriminatory pro-
grams.  See 709 F.2d at 1524-25.  This court held that 
mandamus relief was not appropriate because the plaintiffs 
could achieve the purpose of the statutory provision, which 
ultimately was "to guarantee that the federal government 
does not finance discriminatory practices by recipients of 
federal funds," by suing those governments directly under the 
private citizen suit provision of the Act.  Id. at 1532 (citation 
omitted);  see id. at 1532-33.

     Similarly, in Northern States Power, we again denied (in 
part) a petition for mandamus on the ground that the plain-
tiffs had another adequate remedy.  See 128 F.3d at 761.  In 
doing so, we first reiterated an earlier holding that the 
Nuclear Waste Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. s 1013(a)(2), imposed an 
unconditional duty on the Department of Energy to begin 
accepting nuclear waste for disposal by January 31, 1998.  Id. 

at 758-59.  Yet, notwithstanding the Department's announce-
ment that it would not accept such waste by the statutory 
deadline, we declined to grant the plaintiff utilities' petition 
for a writ to compel the Department to do so.  Contractual 
remedies under a standard contract between the parties, we 
said, provided the plaintiffs with "another potentially ade-
quate remedy" in the event the Department failed to perform 
on time.  Id. at 759.6

     As in Council of and for the Blind and Northern States 
Power, there is an alternative, adequate remedy available to 
vindicate Power's statutory interests in this case:  the fee 
petition.  Accordingly, Power is unable to satisfy the third 
requirement of mandamus relief.

                               III

     Because Power has failed to demonstrate that his "right to 
issuance of the writ is clear and indisputable," Gulfstream, 
485 U.S. at 289 (internal quotation omitted), a grant of the 
extraordinary remedy of mandamus is unwarranted.  The 
judgment of the district court is therefore

                                                                 Affirmed.

__________
     6 See also DRG Funding Corp. v. Secretary of HUD, 76 F.3d 
1212, 1214 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (rejecting the plaintiffs' petition for a 
writ of mandamus to enforce a judgment against the Secretary of 
Housing and Urban Development, on the ground that the plaintiffs 
could also obtain payment through the administrative process, 
followed by a lawsuit if necessary).

                 