                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                     Argued September 9, 2002

                    Decided September 19, 2002

                      Filed October 4, 2002

                           No. 02-5133

                Marijuana Policy Project, et al., 
                            Appellees

                                v.

                    United States of America, 
                            Appellant

       District of Columbia Board of Elections and Ethics, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 01cv02595)

     Michael S. Raab, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for appellant.  On the briefs were Roscoe C. 
Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, Mark B. Stern and Alisa B. 
Klein, Attorneys, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Alexei M. Silverman argued the cause for appellees.  With 
him on the brief were Gregg H. Levy and James M. Garland.

     Julie M. Carpenter was on the brief for amicus curiae 
DKT Liberty Project in support of appellees.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and Williams, 
Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Through a rider to the District of 
Columbia appropriations act, Congress denied the District 
authority to "enact ... any law" reducing penalties associated 
with possession, use, or distribution of marijuana.  The dis-
trict court declared the rider unconstitutional, finding that it 
interfered with D.C. citizens' First Amendment rights to use 
the city's ballot initiative process to enact medical marijuana 
legislation.  Because Article I of the Constitution gives Con-
gress "exclusive" power to define the District of Columbia's 
legislative authority, and because the legislative act--in con-
trast to urging or opposing the enactment of legislation--
implicates no First Amendment concerns, we reverse.

                                I.

     "Congress shall have Power ... [t]o exercise exclusive 
Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over ... the Seat of the 
Government of the United States."  U.S. Const. art. 1, s 8, cl. 
17.  Pursuant to this authority, Congress exercises "all police 
and regulatory powers which a state legislature or municipal 
government would have in legislating for state or local pur-
poses."  Palmore v. United States, 411 U.S. 389, 397 (1973).  
For most of the first 171 years following the District of 
Columbia's 1802 incorporation, Congress exercised "exclu-
sive" authority over the District through direct legislation and 
appointment of local governors with no input from residents.  
Clarke v. United States, 886 F.2d 404, 406 (D.C. Cir. 1989), 
vacated as moot, 915 F.2d 699 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (en banc).

     Responding to calls for local self-government, Congress 
enacted the District of Columbia Self-Government and Gov-
ernmental Reorganization Act in 1973, Pub. L. No. 93-198, 87 

Stat. 774 (1973) (codified as amended at D.C. Code Ann. 
s 1-201.01 et seq.), granting residents the right to elect a 
mayor and a D.C. Council.  This "Home Rule Act" delegates 
to the D.C. Council "legislative power" over "all rightful 
subjects of legislation."  D.C. Code Ann. ss 1-203.02, 
1-204.04.  The Act then lists certain matters that are not 
rightful subjects:  The District may not impose a commuter 
tax on non-residents' income;  it may not regulate federal 
courts, D.C. local courts, or the Commission on Mental 
Health;  and it may not permit the construction of buildings 
taller than then-existing height restrictions.  D.C. Code Ann. 
s 1-206.02(a)(4)-(a)(8).  Even with respect to rightful subjects 
of legislation, D.C. Council enactments become law only if 
Congress declines to pass a joint resolution of disapproval 
within thirty days (or sixty days in the case of criminal laws).  
D.C. Code Ann. s 1-206.02(c)(1)-(c)(2).  Moreover, Congress 
expressly reserves the right to enact legislation concerning 
the District on any subject and to repeal D.C. Council enact-
ments at any time.  D.C. Code Ann. s 1-206.01.  Finally, the 
Act prohibits District officers and employees from expending 
any funds unless authorized to do so by Congress.  D.C. Code 
Ann. s 1-204.46.

     In 1978, the D.C. Council established (and Congress did not 
disapprove of) a ballot initiative process.  Initiative, Referen-
dum, and Recall Charter Amendments Act of 1977, D.C. Code 
Ann. s 1-204.101 et seq. An initiative proposal approved by a 
majority of the electorate "shall be an act of the Council."  
D.C. Code Ann. s 1-204.105.  The initiative process is subject 
to the same legislative restrictions as the D.C. Council, in-
cluding the congressional veto power and substantive limits 
on taxing commuters, authorizing tall buildings, and regulat-
ing federal and local courts.  See Convention Ctr. Referen-
dum Comm. v. D.C. Bd. of Elections & Ethics, 441 A.2d 889, 
897 (D.C. 1981) (en banc).

     The D.C. Board of Elections and Ethics, the gatekeeper for 
the initiative process, is charged with determining whether a 
proposed measure constitutes a "proper subject" for an initia-
tive.  D.C. Code Ann. s 1-1001.16(b)(1).  The Board of Elec-
tions may not accept initiatives that conflict with powers 
granted to the D.C. Council in the Home Rule Act, that 

authorize discrimination prohibited by the D.C. Human 
Rights Act, D.C. Code Ann. s 2-1401.01 et seq., or that negate 
or limit budget acts of the D.C. Council.  D.C. Code Ann. 
s 1-1001.16(b)(1).  Only after the Board accepts a proposal 
under the "proper subject" standard may proponents 
begin to gather signatures.  D.C. Code Ann. 
s 1-1001.16(c)(1)-.16(j).  If five percent of registered voters 
sign a petition supporting the proposed initiative, the Board 
certifies it for inclusion on the ballot of the next election.  
D.C. Code Ann. s 1-1001.16(i), 1-1001.16(p)(1).

     Appellee, the Marijuana Policy Project ("MPP"), submitted 
the Medical Marijuana Initiative of 2002 to the Board of 
Elections for certification as a proper subject.  According to 
its summary statement, the Initiative would have permitted:

     [P]atients suffering from cancer, AIDS, and other debili-
     tating medical conditions to legally use marijuana for the 
     alleviation of their symptoms, provided they have the 
     approval of a licensed physician and adhere to the other 
     limitations and safeguards established by this measure.  
     This measure also protects from sanctions physicians 
     who recommend marijuana to patients who might other-
     wise benefit from it.
     
     The Board of Elections refused to certify the proposal, 
citing the so-called Barr Amendment, a rider to the D.C. 
appropriations act.  Named for its sponsor, Congressman 
Bob Barr, the Amendment states that:  "None of the funds 
contained in this Act may be used to enact or carry out any 
law, rule, or regulation to legalize or otherwise reduce penal-
ties associated with the possession, use, or distribution of any 
schedule I substance under the Controlled Substances Act 
... or any tetrahydrocannabinols derivative."  Pub. L. No. 
107-96, s 127(a), 115 Stat. 923 (2001).

     Arguing that the Barr Amendment violates the First 
Amendment, the MPP filed suit in the United States District 
Court for the District of Columbia.  On cross motions for 
summary judgment, the district court declared the Barr 
Amendment unconstitutional, holding that it interferes with 
"core political speech."  Marijuana Policy Project v. D.C. Bd. 

of Elections & Ethics, 191 F. Supp. 2d 196, 216 (D.D.C. 2002).  
The court permanently enjoined the Board from refusing to 
certify the Initiative, and the United States now appeals.  
Our review is de novo.  See Troy Corp. v. Browner, 120 F.3d 
277, 281 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (summary judgment reviewed de 
novo).

                               II.

     We begin with some preliminary observations.  First, 
through the Home Rule Act, Congress delegated some, but 
not all, of its Article I "exclusive" legislative authority over 
the District of Columbia to the D.C. Council.  For instance, 
only Congress, not the D.C. Council, may impose a commuter 
tax or permit buildings above a certain height.  The Barr 
Amendment's ban on expenditures "to enact ... any law ... 
to ... reduce penalties associated with" marijuana adds 
another item to this list of matters that, in the words of the 
Home Rule Act, are not "rightful subjects of legislation."  
The Amendment says only that Congress, not the D.C. Coun-
cil, may reduce marijuana penalties.  Second, the Barr 
Amendment's limitation on local legislative power extends not 
only to the D.C. Council, but also to the ballot initiative 
process--"a power of direct legislation by the electorate."  
Convention Ctr. Referendum Comm., 441 A.2d at 897 (inter-
nal quotation marks and citation omitted); see D.C. Code Ann. 
s 1-204.105;  Biddulph v. Mortham, 89 F.3d 1491, 1497 (11th 
Cir. 1996) ("[I]n the initiative process people do not seek to 
make wishes known to government representatives but in-
stead to enact change by bypassing their representatives 
altogether.").  The Amendment thus denies D.C. voters any 
authority to step into the D.C. Council's shoes and reduce 
marijuana penalties themselves.  Finally, as is evident from 
the parties' fine briefs, this case involves not the pros and 
cons of medical marijuana, but rather a straightforward con-
stitutional question:  Does the First Amendment restrict Con-
gress's ability to withdraw the District's authority to reduce 
marijuana penalties?

     Urging us to answer this question affirmatively, the MPP 
argues that the Barr Amendment proscribes "core political 
speech," i.e., that it prevents the MPP from "conducting a 
petition drive ..., speak[ing] at public Board hearings re-
garding the initiative ..., [and] signing a formal petition to 
place the initiative on the ballot."  Appellees' Brief at 12.  
The Barr Amendment, however, restricts no speech;  to the 
contrary, medical marijuana advocates remain free to lobby, 
petition, or engage in other First Amendment-protected activ-
ities to reduce marijuana penalties.  The Barr Amendment 
merely requires that, in order to have legal effect, their 
efforts must be directed to Congress rather than to the D.C. 
legislative process.

     The MPP, moreover, cites no case, nor are we aware of 
one, establishing that limits on legislative authority--as op-
posed to limits on legislative advocacy--violate the First 
Amendment.  This is not surprising, for although the First 
Amendment protects public debate about legislation, it con-
fers no right to legislate on a particular subject.  For exam-
ple, by enacting expressly preemptive statutes, Congress 
limits state authority to legislate on the same subject.  See, 
e.g., Morales v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 504 U.S. 374, 383 
(1992) (federal statute, providing that no state shall "enact[ ] 
or enforc[e] any law, rule, regulation, standard, or other 
provision" relating to certain airline services, preempts state 
law);  Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 463 U.S. 85, 91 (1983) 
(Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, provid-
ing that ERISA shall supersede "any and all State laws 
insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee 
benefit plan," preempts state law);  Jones v. Rath Packing 
Co., 430 U.S. 519, 530 n.17 (1977) (federal statute, providing 
that meat inspection requirements "in addition to, or different 
than, those made under this Act may not be imposed by any 
State or Territory or the District of Columbia," preempts 
state law).  Yet no one would argue that such limitations 
violate the First Amendment rights of state voters who 
supported the preempted legislation.  If Congress can 
preempt state legislation without running afoul of the First 
Amendment, then, in view of Congress's "exclusive" Article I 

authority over the District of Columbia, it can certainly limit 
D.C. legislative authority without violating D.C. voters' First 
Amendment rights.

     The MPP argues that the Barr Amendment amounts to 
unconstitutional "viewpoint discrimination" because by pro-
hibiting the District from reducing but not increasing mari-
juana penalties, it "silences one side of the medical marijuana 
debate while allowing the other side full access to the Dis-
trict's ballot initiative process."  Appellees' Br. at 19.  We 
disagree.  For one thing, if the Constitution permits Con-
gress--as it surely does--to reserve for itself "exclusive" 
authority to enact marijuana legislation, it certainly permits 
Congress to retain for itself the more limited authority to 
reduce marijuana penalties.  Moreover, the Barr Amendment 
silences no one;  it merely shifts the focus of debate between 
medical marijuana supporters and their opponents from the 
D.C. legislative process--the D.C. Council or ballot initia-
tive--to Congress.  To be sure, a ballot initiative could be 
used to increase marijuana penalties, but opponents, including 
the MPP, may utilize all of their First Amendment-protected 
tools to resist such efforts.  In other words, whatever the 
issue and wherever the debate occurs, whether over reducing 
marijuana penalties (in Congress) or increasing penalties (in 
either Congress or the District), both sides may fully partici-
pate.  Congress's decision as to where those debates must 
occur does not implicate the First Amendment.

     The MPP draws our attention to a line of cases holding that 
certain limitations connected with ballot initiatives impermis-
sibly restrict private political speech.  E.g., Buckley v. Ameri-
can Constitutional Law Foundation, Inc., 525 U.S. 182 (1999) 
(overturning various registration requirements for petition 
circulators);  Meyer v. Grant, 486 U.S. 414 (1988) (overturn-
ing prohibition on professional petition circulators).  In none 
of these cases, however, did anyone question whether the 
ballot initiative at issue addressed a proper subject.  The 
cases thus cast no light on the issue before us--whether a 
legislature can withdraw a subject from the initiative process 
altogether.

     The only circuit court we know to have addressed this issue 
has also concluded that the First Amendment imposes no 
restriction on the withdrawal of subject matters from the 
initiative process.  In Skrzypczak v. Kauger, 92 F.3d 1050 
(10th Cir. 1996), the Tenth Circuit held that a state supreme 
court decision removing an abortion initiative from the ballot 
did not violate a voter's First Amendment rights:

     [R]emoving [the proposal] from the ballot ... has not 
     prevented [the voter] from speaking on any subject.  She 
     is free to argue against legalized abortion, to contend 
     that pre-submission content review of initiative petitions 
     is unconstitutional, or to speak publicly on any other 
     issue....  Moreover, she cites no law, and we find none, 
     establishing a right to have a particular proposition on 
     the ballot.
     
Id. at 1053.

     Nothing in public forum cases, including the limited public 
forum cases relied on by the MPP, such as Good News Club 
v. Milford Central School, 533 U.S. 98 (2001) (public schools 
cannot deny after-school use of facilities to religious pro-
grams) and Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of University of 
Virginia, 515 U.S. 819 (1995) (university-funded student pub-
lications cannot exclude religious viewpoints), requires a dif-
ferent result.  The defining characteristic of traditional and 
limited public fora, such as streets, parks, public school 
facilities, and student newspapers, is that they are "devoted 
to assembly and debate" or "opened for use by the public as a 
place for expressive activity."  Perry Educ. Ass'n v. Perry 
Local Educators' Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 45 (1983).  Although 
places designated for the expression of views about legisla-
tion--the grounds of the U.S. Capitol, for example, Lederman 
v. United States, 291 F.3d 36 (D.C. Cir. 2002)--share these 
characteristics, the legislative act itself, i.e., the voting that 
occurs inside the Capitol, does not.  The same is true for the 
ballot initiative process:  That process certainly stimulates 
First Amendment-protected debate and discussion, but no 
case holds that the act of voting in a ballot initiative--a 
legislative act--is itself a public forum.

     The MPP relies on Legal Services Corp. v. Velazquez, 531 
U.S. 533 (2001), which held that Congress could not bar 
federally funded legal services lawyers from challenging the 
constitutionality of state or federal welfare statutes.  Ve-
lazquez, however, has nothing to do with this case not only 
because the decision rests on limited public forum doctrine, 
but also because of its unique concern with a "serious and 
fundamental restriction on advocacy of attorneys and the 
functioning of the judiciary."  Id. at 544.  In contrast, the 
Barr Amendment does not prohibit "speech necessary to the 
proper functioning" of the legislative process.  Id.  The 
Amendment merely removes a subject from that process 
altogether.

     In sum, the Barr Amendment's limitation on District of 
Columbia legislative authority restricts no First Amendment 
right.  Ruling otherwise would not only run counter to the 
very nature of the legislative act, but would require Congress, 
should it really want to deprive D.C. voters of authority to 
enact marijuana legislation (as opposed to subsequently over-
turning their decision to do so), to repeal the initiative process 
altogether or even the Home Rule Act itself.  Mindful of the 
Supreme Court's admonition against producing "less speech, 
not more"--in this case, First Amendment-protected activity 
surrounding the initiative process--by putting the govern-
ment to an "all-or-nothing choice," Ark. Educ. Television 
Comm'n v. Forbes, 523 U.S. 666, 680 (1998), we reverse the 
district court's decision and vacate its injunction.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                