                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 30, 2000   Decided February 2, 2001 

                           No. 99-1395

                     WorldCom, Inc., et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

          United States Telephone Association, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                         99-1404, 99-1472

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Carl S. Nadler argued the cause for petitioners and sup-
porting intervenors.  With him on the briefs were Ian Heath 

Gershengorn, Thomas F. O'Neil, III, William Single, IV, 
Jeffrey A. Rackow, Mark C. Rosenblum, Peter H. Jacoby, 
Judy Sello, Gene C. Schaerr, James P. Young, Brian Conboy, 
Thomas Jones, Albert H. Kramer, Robert J. Aamoth, Charles 
C. Hunter and Catherine M. Hannan.  Maria L. Woodbridge 
entered an appearance.

     Lisa S. Gelb, Counsel, Federal Communications Commis-
sion, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the brief 
were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, and John E. 
Ingle, Deputy Associate General Counsel.  Robert B. Nichol-
son and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys, U.S. Department of 
Justice, Daniel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, 
Federal Communications Commission, and Laurence N. 
Bourne, Counsel, entered appearances.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, and Sentelle and 
Randolph, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners, WorldCom, AT&T, 
Time Warner Telecom, and other long distance telephone 
service providers, seek review of the FCC's Fifth Report and 
Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in In Re 
Access Charge Reform, 14 F.C.C.R. 14,221 (1999) (hereinafter 
"Order" or "Pricing Flexibility Order").  That order grants 
local exchange carriers ("LECs") immediate pricing flexibility 
for some interstate access services and establishes procedures 
through which LECs may seek substantial additional relief 
from existing price cap regulation.  Petitioners maintain that 
the Order is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law in that 
it violates the FCC's statutory mandate to ensure "just and 
reasonable" prices for telecommunication services and pro-
mote the public interest.  Several LECs--BellSouth, Qwest, 
SBC Communications, and Verizon--intervene in support of 
the FCC.

     We hold that the FCC's decision to grant additional pricing 
flexibility to incumbent LECs through a series of collocation 

based triggers, deregulation of new services, and deaveraging 
of rates was neither arbitrary and capricious nor contrary to 
law.  The FCC made a reasonable policy determination that 
collocation was a sufficient proxy for market power in deter-
mining whether to grant pricing flexibility to LECs and 
sufficiently explained the basis for its decision to grant imme-
diate pricing flexibility for some services.  For these reasons, 
we uphold the FCC's order and deny the petitions for review.

                          I. Background

A.   Legal and Regulatory Context

     In recent years, the FCC has sought to facilitate greater 
competition in the provision of both long-distance and local 
telephone service.  See, e.g., AT&T v. FCC, 220 F.3d 607 
(D.C. Cir. 2000);  Bell Atl. Tel. Cos. v. FCC, 79 F.3d 1195 
(D.C. Cir. 1996);  Nat'l Rural Telecom Ass'n v. FCC, 988 F.2d 
174 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  Competition for telephone services, 
where it exists, serves the FCC's statutory goal of ensuring 
fair and reasonable prices for telecommunications services.  
Therefore, as telephone markets become more competitive, 
the FCC has lessened regulatory control over those markets, 
including the market for interstate access services.  It is 
within this evolving regulatory context that this case arises.

     1.   Interstate Access Services
          
     Local telephone service is provided by local exchange carri-
ers.  47 U.S.C. s 153(26).  Typically, one LEC is the domi-
nant, or "incumbent," service provider in each local area.  
Until relatively recently, the incumbent LECs had virtual 
monopolies over the provision of local phone service in their 
territories.

     Long distance service--that is, service between local access 
and transport areas ("LATAs") or "InterLATA" service--is, 
for the most part, provided by interexchange carriers 
("IXCs"), such as petitioners WorldCom and AT&T.  Long 
distance providers are reliant upon LECs to reach their 
customers.  When a customer makes a long distance call, the 
IXC must have "access" to the local networks at both the 

originating and receiving end of the call in order to complete 
the connection.  Generally, the LEC connects the call from 
the caller to a switch or "end office," which is in turn 
connected to a "serving wire center" (SWC), which is itself 
connected to an interconnection point, or "point of presence" 
(POP), with the long distance carrier.  This same series of 
connections will also be made at the receiving end of the 
phone call--from POP to SWC to switch to call recipient.  
LECs charge the IXCs for providing this "access service" in 
accordance with 47 C.F.R. Part 69.  IXCs then bill customers 
directly for long distance calls.

     There are two types of access service:  "switched access" 
and "special access."  Switched access service requires the 
creation of a connection between the caller and the long 
distance company on a "call-by-call" basis.  This entails (1) a 
connection between the caller and a local LEC switch, (2) a 
connection from the LEC switch to the SWC ("interoffice 
transport"), and (3) an entrance facility which connects the 
SWC and the long distance company's POP.  Switched access 
can either be dedicated to a particular IXC ("dedicated 
transport" or "direct trunked transport") or shared among 
IXCs.  "Special access" service, on the other hand, uses 
dedicated lines between the customer and the IXC's local 
POP.  Switched access is used by most residential customers.  
Most users of special access services are companies with high 
call volumes.

     For quite some time incumbent LECs dominated access 
service markets.  In recent years, however, other companies 
have begun to enter these markets.  Market entrants typical-
ly provide a portion of full access service, such as from the 
IXC POP to the SWC, in any given market.  This develop-
ment was facilitated by changes in FCC regulations.  Begin-
ning in 1992, the FCC required incumbent LECs to permit 
competitors to "collocate" their equipment at LEC wire cen-
ters and connect directly to the LEC networks as a means of 
spurring additional competition in access service.  See Ex-
panded Interconnection with Local Tel. Co. Facilities, 7 
F.C.C.R. 7369, p P1-3, 39, reconsidered 8 F.C.C.R. 127 (1992), 
vacated in part and remanded in part, Bell Atl. Tel. Cos. v. 

FCC, 24 F.3d 1441 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Now, the FCC believes, 
there may be sufficient competition for access services to 
justify deregulatory measures.

     2.   Regulatory Framework
          
     For years the FCC imposed traditional rate of return 
regulation on the LECs.  Beginning in 1990, however, the 
FCC substituted "price cap" regulation for the largest LECs.  
See Nat'l Rural Telecom Ass'n, 988 F.2d at 178-79.  Price 
cap regulation imposes a "cap" on aggregate prices charged 
by LECs for certain services in a given area.  See 47 C.F.R. 
ss 61.41-.49.  For the purposes of setting the caps, services 
are grouped in various "baskets."  See 47 C.F.R. s 61.42(d).  
These are the common line basket, traffic-sensitive basket, 
trunking basket, and special access basket, the latter two of 
which are at issue in this case.  LECs are also required to 
charge averaged (i.e., uniform) rates in given service areas, 
absent substantial cost differentials.  See 47 C.F.R. 
s 69.3(e)(7).  This averaging requirement is designed to pre-
vent price discrimination by LECs.

     Price cap regulation offers more pricing flexibility than rate 
of return regulation, as companies are relatively free to set 
their own prices so long as they remain below the cap.  A 
company can raise the price for one service so long as that 
increase is offset by a price decrease in another.  Prices that 
are below upper price "bands" for a given service are also 
presumed lawful and given streamlined review by the FCC.  
See Bell Atl. Tel. Cos., 79 F.3d at 1198.  The FCC implement-
ed price cap regulation for LECs as "a transitional regulatory 
scheme until actual competition makes price cap regulation 
unnecessary."  Order p 11.

     Price cap regulation is supplemented by tariff requirements 
for "dominant carriers" (including all regional Bell Operating 
Companies in their local service areas), under which compa-
nies are required to publish rate changes before they are 
implemented.  47 U.S.C. s 203(a), s 204(a).  Tariffs must be 
filed fifteen days in advance of price increases and seven days 
in advance of price decreases.  47 U.S.C. s 204(a)(3).  This 
allows both the FCC and affected customers to review and 

challenge price changes by LECs.  The tariff requirement is 
waived for those carriers that are deemed non-dominant 
because they face substantial competition from other firms.

     3.   The 1996 Act
          
     In 1996, Congress enacted the Telecommunications Act of 
1996 to "promote competition and reduce regulation in order 
to secure lower prices and higher quality services for Ameri-
can telecommunications consumers and encourage the rapid 
deployment of new telecommunications technologies."  Pub. 
L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56, 56 (Introductory Statement).  
The 1996 Act requires incumbent LECs to grant competitors 
(such as the IXCs) greater access to their local networks 
through collocation of facilities, the purchase and resale of 
"unbundled network elements" and services, and mandated 
interconnection.  47 U.S.C. s 251(c)(2)-(4).  In response to 
the 1996 Act, the FCC has sought to move toward greater 
competition for, and less regulation of, telecommunications 
services.

B.   The FCC's Pricing Flexibility Order

     On August 5 1999, the FCC adopted the Fifth Report and 
Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in In Re 
Access Charge Reform, 14 F.C.C.R. 14,221 (1999).  In accor-
dance with the stated goals of the 1996 Act, the Order 
granted immediate pricing flexibility for some services and 
set competition thresholds to trigger additional relaxation of 
regulatory controls. According to the FCC, the Order was the 
"logical next step in the Commission's ongoing effort to 
coordinate reduced regulation with competitive develop-
ments."  Brief for Federal Communications Commission at 9.

     1.   Immediate Pricing Flexibility
          
     The Order provides immediate pricing flexibility for LECs 
in three important respects:  (1) LECs may introduce "new 
services" subject to a streamlined approval process;  (2) 
LECs may offer deaveraged rates for services in the trunking 
basket;  and (3) interstate interLATA and intraLATA toll 
services are removed from price cap regulation.  Order 

p p 34-66.  Petitioners challenge the first and second changes 
as unlawful.

     New services are those services that, by definition, "ex-
pand[ ] the range of service options available to consumers."  
Id. p 37.  Previously, an LEC needed a waiver to offer a new 
switched access service that did not fit into the preexisting 
rate structure.  The LEC was required to demonstrate that 
such a waiver was in the "public interest."  Finding that 
existing "new service rules impede the introduction of new 
services," id. p 37, the FCC Order eliminates the required 
"public interest" showing and allows LECs to file tariffs for 
new services with only one-day's notice.  LECs are still 
prohibited from offering "new services outside of price cap 
regulation."  Id. p 43.

     Under the FCC's regulations, price cap LECs are general-
ly required to geographically average charges for access 
elements across a given "study area" (typically a state or 
region).  47 C.F.R. s 69.3(e)(7).  Deaveraging--the disaggre-
gation of charges for specific service access elements--was 
only allowed in up to three zones per LEC and only subject to 
certain conditions, such as intensity of use.  Under the new 
rules, LECs may define up to seven zones subject to the 
requirements that (1) each zone other than the highest price 
zone accounts for at least fifteen percent of the LEC's 
trunking basket revenues in the study area, and (2) annual 
price increases in a zone cannot exceed fifteen percent.  
Order p 62.  According to the FCC, this new flexibility "en-
hances the efficiency of the market for those services by 
allowing prices to be tailored more easily and accurately to 
reflect costs and, therefore, promotes competition."  Id. p 59.

     The Pricing Flexibility Order also removes interLATA and 
intraLATA toll services from price cap regulation upon an 
LEC's implementation of toll dialing parity.  See id. p 45.  
Toll service is "telephone service between stations in different 
exchange areas for which there is made a separate charge not 
included in contracts with subscribers for exchange service."  
47 U.S.C. s 153(48).  When an LEC provides toll dialing 
parity, it permits its local service customers within a given 

calling area "to make a local telephone call notwithstanding 
the identity of the customer's or the called party's telecommu-
nications service provider."  47 C.F.R. s 51.207.  LECs are 
required to implement toll dialing parity throughout their 
service areas.  See 47 C.F.R. ss 51.205, .209, .211, .213.  
Upon meeting this requirement for all interLATA and intra-
LATA toll services, an LEC's provision of these services is 
removed from price cap regulation.  This portion of the 
Pricing Flexibility Order is not challenged in this case.

     2.   Future Pricing Flexibility
          
     The FCC order also provides for additional pricing flexibili-
ty once an LEC shows that certain competitive thresholds 
("triggers") have been met in a given metropolitan statistical 
area (MSA).  According to the FCC, this step is merely the 
latest effort to "allow incumbent LECs progressively greater 
pricing flexibility as they face increasing competition."  Order 
p 67.  The triggers measure market competition based upon 
investments in infrastructure by potential competitors.  The 
FCC's stated aim is to balance the benefit of further deregu-
lation with the potential risk of exclusionary behavior or 
increased prices for consumers.  See id. p 69 (noting that the 
relief "if granted prematurely, might enable price cap LECs 
to (1) exclude new entrants from their markets, or (2) in-
crease rates to unreasonable levels").  Therefore, the more 
relief sought, the higher the trigger is set--that is, a greater 
level of investment by competitors is required.

     The relief comes in two phases.  In Phase I, LECs may 
offer contract tariffs and volume and term discounts, while 
remaining subject to some price cap rules and tariff require-
ments.  In addition, for LECs subject to Phase I relief, new 
tariffs only require one day advance notice as opposed to 
seven or fourteen days notice under current rules.  Phase I 
relief is available upon a showing "that competitors have 
made irreversible investments in the facilities needed to 
provide the services at issue, thus discouraging incumbent 
LECs from successfully pursuing exclusionary strategies."  
Id. p 69.  Phase I relief is potentially available for dedicated 
transport (entrance facilities, direct-trunked transport), chan-

nel terminations, and common line and traffic-sensitive ser-
vices.

     In order to obtain Phase I relief for dedicated transport 
services an incumbent LEC must show collocation in fifteen 
percent of wire centers within the MSA in which relief is 
sought, or in wire centers accounting for at least thirty 
percent of revenues for services in question.  Id. p 93.  In 
addition, at least one competitor must rely on transport 
facilities provided by a non-incumbent LEC in each wire 
center relied on in the applicant LEC's petition.  Phase I 
relief is available for channel terminations upon a showing of 
collocation in fifty percent of wire centers within the MSA in 
which relief is sought or in wire centers accounting for at 
least sixty-five percent of revenues for services in question.  
Id. p p 105-06.  The trigger for common line and traffic-
sensitive services is that a competitor must offer service to 
fifteen percent of incumbent LEC's customer locations using 
its own transport and switching facilities.  Id. p 120.

     In each case Phase I relief is subject to several conditions 
to prevent price discrimination or other potentially predatory 
behavior.  Under Phase I, contract tariff rates must be 
available to all similarly situated customers, and volume 
discounts must be available to all similarly situated customers 
willing to make equivalent term commitments.  Id. p p 124, 
130.  Incumbent LECs must continue to offer services pursu-
ant to price caps as well.  Id. p 24.  Finally, LECs remain 
subject to FCC enforcement actions for anticompetitive be-
havior.  See, e.g., id. p p 127, 131;  47 U.S.C. s 208.

     In Phase II, LECs are given greater freedom to raise and 
lower rates outside of price cap regulation.  Phase II relief is 
available for the same services and may be sought once 
"competitors have established a significant market presence 
in the provision of the services at issue."  Order p 69.  Phase 
II relief allows LECs to offer services outside of price cap 
regulation, though LECs must still file generally available 
tariffs and remain subject to FCC enforcement actions for 
anticompetitive behavior.

     In order to obtain Phase II relief for dedicated transport 
services an incumbent LEC must show collocation in fifty 
percent of wire centers within the MSA in which relief is 
sought or in wire centers accounting for at least sixty-five 
percent of revenues for services in question.  Id. p p 148-49.  
In addition, as with Phase I relief, at least one competitor 
must rely on transport facilities provided by non-incumbent 
LECs in each wire center relied on in the applicant LEC's 
petition.  Id. p 82.  Phase II relief is available for channel 
terminations upon a showing of collocation in sixty-five per-
cent of wire centers within the MSA in which relief is sought 
or in wire centers accounting for at least eighty-five percent 
of revenues for services in question.  Id. p 150.  The FCC has 
not yet set a collocation trigger for common line and traffic-
sensitive services Phase II relief.

     As with Phase I relief, LECs must file tariffs and remain 
subject to FCC enforcement actions for anticompetitive be-
havior under the relevant statutory provisions.  Id. p 151.  
The FCC acknowledged that its rule may allow Phase II 
relief before the manifestation of actual competitive alterna-
tives for interstate access service customers but that "the 
costs of delaying regulatory relief outweigh the potential 
costs of granting it before IXCs have a competitive alterna-
tive for each and every end user."  Id. p 144.

     Both Phase I and Phase II relief are available on an MSA-
wide basis.  This is because, according to the FCC, "MSAs 
best reflect the scope of competitive entry, and therefore are 
a logical basis for measuring the extent of competition."  Id. 
p 72.  Relief is not available on a rural service area basis.  
Rather relief is available for the "non-MSA parts of a study 
area"--typically one or more rural service areas--if the trig-
gers are satisfied for the entire area.  Id. p 76.  The FCC 
acknowledges the "theoretical possibility" that granting relief 
on an MSA-wide basis could enable LECs to engage in 
predatory behavior.  Id. p 83.  However, the Commission 
concluded "the costs, particularly the administrative costs, of 
granting pricing flexibility on a wire center-by-wire center 
basis outweigh the benefits of protecting against such theo-
retical harms."  Id.  The Commission declined to provide 

relief on a LATA basis, as in some states the relevant LATA 
encompasses the entire states.  Id. p 73.

     The triggers relied upon by the FCC are largely based 
upon collocation by competitors at LEC facilities.  The FCC 
adopted this trigger for two reasons.  First, the FCC con-
cluded that collocation is a reasonable proxy for competitive 
conditions in a given MSA.  Id. p 78.  Specifically, the FCC 
found that "collocation by competitors in incumbent LEC 
wire centers is a reliable indication of sunk investment by 
competitors."  Id. p 81.  Sufficient sunk investment of this 
sort, in the FCC's view, will discourage "exclusionary pricing 
behavior."  Id. p 78.  In addition, the FCC determined that 
the collocation level is "an easily verifiable, bright-line test" 
that serves "to avoid excessive administrative burdens."  Id.  
In this sense, the trigger balances the FCC's desire for an 
accurate measure of actual competitive conditions in a given 
MSA, while also establishing a clear administrative standard.

     The FCC acknowledged that adopting specific thresholds, 
like utility ratemaking, "is not an exact science."  Id. p 96;  
accord United States v. FCC, 707 F.2d 610, 618 (D.C. Cir. 
1983).  "Rather, the thresholds are policy determinations 
based on our agency expertise, our interpretation of the 
record before us in this proceeding, and our desire to provide 
a bright-line rule to guide the industry."  Id. p 96 (footnote 
omitted).  Moreover, the FCC claimed its "effort to select 
triggers that precisely measure competition for particular 
services also is hampered by the lack of verifiable data 
concerning competitors' revenues and facilities."  Id.

     To set the proper trigger thresholds the FCC examined a 
few local markets to assess the extent of market penetration 
that correlates with a given level of collocation investment, 
and scaled the various triggers to correlate with the level of 
relief sought.  Thus, the Phase II triggers are higher than 
those for Phase I, and different services have different trig-
ger levels depending upon the FCC's estimation of the threat 
of predatory or anticompetitive conduct.  Thus, the amount of 
collocation required to obtain Phase I relief for channel 
terminations is higher than for dedicated transport services.

                           II. Analysis

A.   Collocation Thresholds for Pricing Flexibility

     Petitioners challenge the FCC's decision to offer LECs 
relief from price cap regulation based upon a showing that 
one or more competitors have made substantial local invest-
ments in collocation.  Petitioners contend that this decision 
was arbitrary and capricious and contrary to law because the 
FCC failed to condition this relief upon a finding of competi-
tion sufficient to protect consumers from anticompetitive con-
duct.  Collocation, petitioners contend, is a poor proxy for 
actual competition in the provision of interstate access ser-
vices.  As a result, petitioners claim that the Order violates 
the Commission's statutory duty to ensure that prices are 
"nondiscriminatory, 'just,' and 'reasonable.' "

     Petitioners specifically challenge three aspects of the 
FCC's new pricing flexibility framework:  (1) basing the trig-
gers for pricing flexibility on collocation rather than an 
analysis of actual competitive conditions;  (2) granting pricing 
flexibility on an MSA-wide basis based on collocation in only a 
portion of the MSA;  and (3) selecting specific triggers in an 
arbitrary fashion and without sufficient explanation.  In as-
sessing these claims, we consider whether the FCC's actions 
are "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise 
not in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).  This is a 
"deferential standard" that "presume[s] the validity of agency 
action."  Southwestern Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 168 F.3d 1344, 
1352 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  accord Jersey Shore Broad. Corp. v. 
FCC, 37 F.3d 1531, 1537 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Like agency 
ratemaking, price cap regulation of local carriers "involves 
policy determinations in which the agency is acknowledged to 
have expertise."  Time Warner Entm't Co. v. FCC, 56 F.3d 
151, 163 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (per curiam) (internal quotation 
omitted).  Therefore, it is not our role to second guess the 
FCC's policy judgment, so long as it comports with estab-
lished standards of administrative practice.  "The FCC's 
judgment about the best regulatory tools to employ in a 
particular situation is ... entitled to considerable deference 

from the generalist judiciary."  Western Union Int'l, Inc. v. 
FCC, 804 F.2d 1280, 1292 (D.C. Cir. 1986).

     1.   Collocation
          
     Under the Pricing Flexibility Order, LECs are eligible for 
regulatory relief upon a showing that there is sufficient 
collocation by one or more competitors.  In this fashion, the 
FCC uses investment in collocation as a proxy for competition 
in access service.  Petitioners contend that this is arbitrary 
and capricious because collocation is not a sufficient measure 
of actual market competition.  Therefore, petitioners argue, 
the FCC can offer no assurance that LECs will continue to 
offer "just" and "reasonable" rates once they are granted 
pricing flexibility.  To petitioners, the regulatory relief pro-
vided for by the FCC's Order is tantamount to foregoing 
dominant carrier regulation altogether, and can only be justi-
fied upon a finding of actual competition.

     It may well be that collocation is a poor measure of market 
share, as petitioners attest.  That competing firms have 
invested in collocation does not mean that they have captured 
a significant portion of the market for access services.  Yet 
the FCC did not conclude that a loss of market share was 
necessary to prevent an incumbent LEC from raising prices.  
The FCC has long held that market share is not the be-all, 
end-all of competition.  See AT&T Corp. v. FCC, No. 99-1535, 
slip op. at 13 (D.C. Cir. Jan. 23, 2001) ("the FCC has never 
viewed market share as an essential factor" in evaluating 
market competition) (emphasis in original).  It is merely one 
of several relevant factors considered when making a market 
power determination.  For example, in Motion of AT&T 
Corp. to Be Declared Non-Dominant for International Ser-
vice, 11 F.C.C.R. 17,963, 17,976 p 34 (1996), the FCC wrote 
that

     market shares, by themselves, are not the sole determin-
     ing factor of whether a firm possesses market power.  
     Other factors, such as demand and supply elasticities, 
     conditions of entry and other market conditions must be 
     examined to define a relevant market, and determine 
     whether a particular firm can exercise market power in 
     the relevant market.
     
The FCC is free to change this policy so long as it provides 
an adequate explanation for the shift, AT&T, slip op. at 13-
14, but it has not done so.

     As the FCC noted in its Order, the presence of substantial 
sunk investment, and the resulting potential for entry into the 
market, can limit anticompetitive behavior by LECs.  Specifi-
cally, the FCC found that:

     Once multiple rivals have entered the market and cannot 
     be driven out, rules to prevent exclusionary pricing be-
     havior are no longer necessary.  Investment in facilities, 
     particularly those that cannot be used for another pur-
     pose, is an important indicator of such irreversible entry.  
     If a competitive LEC has made a substantial sunk invest-
     ment in equipment, that equipment remains available and 
     capable of providing service in competition with the 
     incumbent, even if the incumbent succeeds in driving that 
     competitor from the market.
     
Order p 80.  Even if a rival LEC is unsuccessful at challeng-
ing an incumbent, "the presence of facilities-based competi-
tion with significant sunk investment makes exclusionary 
pricing behavior costly and highly unlikely to succeed."  Id. 
Collocation, in the FCC's expert view, "is a reliable indication 
of sunk investment by competitors."  Id. p 81.  Therefore, 
collocation can reasonably serve as a measure of competition 
in a given market and predictor of competitive constraints 
upon future LEC behavior.

     Whatever its faults as a measure of competition, the FCC 
found collocation to be superior to the various alternatives 
proposed by petitioners during the notice and comment peri-
od.  See id. p p 84, 104.  Petitioners, for their part, offer no 
alternative save a painstaking analysis of market conditions 
such as that which is required when an LEC seeks classifica-
tion as a non-dominant carrier or the forbearance of dominant 
carrier regulation under Section 10 of the Communications 
Act.  See, e.g., AT&T Corp. v. FCC, No. 99-1535 (D.C. Cir. 
Jan. 23, 2001).  The FCC determined that this would be 
burdensome and time-consuming--a point which petitioners 
do not contest--and thus not appropriate in all cases.  It 

therefore sought an alternative for the purpose of providing 
pricing flexibility, in addition to the statutory procedure 
under Section 10, 47 U.S.C. s 160, which remains a "viable 
and independent means" for carriers to seek regulatory relief.  
AT&T, slip op. at 16.

     That the FCC chose to rely upon an admittedly imperfect 
measure of competition does not render its use arbitrary and 
capricious.  Nat'l Ass'n of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. FCC, 
737 F.2d 1095, 1116 (D.C. Cir. 1984) ("NARUC").  Nor is the 
FCC's decision to make ease of administration and enforce-
ability a consideration in setting its standard for regulatory 
relief.  So long as the FCC's proxy is reasonable, as it is 
here, we have no basis upon which to require the FCC to 
engage in a more searching analysis of competition before 
granting pricing flexibility.  Cf. United States v. FCC, 652 
F.2d 72, 90-91 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (en banc) ("Someone must 
decide when enough data is enough.  In the first instance 
that decision must be made by the Commission....  To allow 
others to force the Commission to conduct further evidentiary 
inquiry would be to arm interested parties with a potent 
instrument for delay.").

     Petitioners emphasize the FCC's concession that the pric-
ing flexibility contained in the Order could "if granted prema-
turely ... enable price cap LECs to (1) exclude new entrants 
from their markets, or (2) increase rates to unreasonable 
levels."  Order p 68.  Petitioners contend it is reversible error 
for the FCC to fail to show that its new regulations will result 
in "just and reasonable" rates for consumers.  See Farmers 
Union Cent. Exch., Inc. v. FERC, 734 F.2d 1486, 1510 (D.C. 
Cir. 1984).

     The FCC readily admits that its decision to adopt the 
thresholds contained in the Pricing Flexibility Order was 
dependent, at least in part, on the agency's predictive fore-
casts.  Despite their inherent uncertainty, there is little ques-
tion that agency prognostications of this sort may be used in 
the formulation of policy;  "it is within the scope of the 
agency's expertise to make such a prediction about the mar-
ket it regulates, and a reasonable prediction deserves our 

deference notwithstanding that there might also be another 
reasonable view."  Envtl Action, Inc. v. FERC, 939 F.2d 
1057, 1064 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  There is no statutory require-
ment that the FCC be confident to a metaphysical certainty 
of its predictions about the future of competition in a given 
market before it may modify its regulatory scheme.

     Petitioners also contend that the FCC's reliance upon a 
proxy for competition is arbitrary and capricious because it is 
contrary to Commission precedent.  Petitioners argue that 
since the Pricing Flexibility Order would grant incumbent 
LECs much of the relief afforded to carriers that are de-
clared non-dominant, the FCC should be precluded from 
granting such relief without engaging in the sort of competi-
tion analysis it conducted when considering whether to de-
clare a carrier non-dominant.  We do not agree.

     The Commission readily admits it made different findings 
when declaring AT&T to be non-dominant, as petitioners 
claim.  See Motion of AT&T Corp. to Be Reclassified as a 
Non-Dominant Carrier, 11 F.C.C.R. 3271 (1995).  However, 
the Pricing Flexibility Order expressly does "not grant in-
cumbent LECs all the regulatory relief ... afford[ed] to non-
dominant carriers."  Order p 151.  Even those LECs which 
receive Phase II relief must still file tariffs.  This is not 
insignificant;  tariff filing is the "centerpiece of ... common 
carrier regulation."  Southwestern Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 19 
F.3d 1475, 1479 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Therefore, the fact that the 
FCC did not engage in the thorough competition analysis 
common in non-dominance proceedings does not render the 
FCC's action arbitrary and capricious.

     Petitioners' appeal to other FCC precedent is equally una-
vailing.  For instance, petitioners note that in the UNE 
Remand Order, the FCC preferred actual measures of com-
petition to a "bright-line test" in determining when to relieve 
LECs of specific regulatory burdens.  In re Implementation 
of the Local Competition Provisions of the Telecomms. Act of 
1996, 15 F.C.C.R. 3696 (1999).  However, this proceeding 
concerned the conditions upon which local service providers 
are given access to unbundled transport in the first place, not 
whether deregulatory measures are warranted once competi-

tive providers have used such access to gain a foothold in a 
given market.

     There is no rule against agencies adopting new policy 
positions.  "Everyone agrees that an agency's change of mind 
does not itself render the agency's action arbitrary."  Bell 
Atl., 79 F.3d at 1202.  Rather "[w]hat matters is the Commis-
sion's explanation."  Id. Agencies are "not bound to the 
service of any single regulatory formula;  they are permitted, 
unless their statutory authority otherwise plainly indicates, to 
make pragmatic adjustments which may be called for by 
particular circumstances."  Permian Basin Area Rate Cases, 
390 U.S. 747, 776-77 (1968) (internal quotation omitted).  
Here, the Commission determined that there was reason to 
modify the regulatory requirements imposed upon LEC pro-
vision of access services and, unlike in its consideration of US 
West's forbearance petition, thoroughly explained why the 
Commission found it appropriate to grant incumbent LECs 
relief from existing regulations upon certain competitive 
showings.  See AT&T Corp. v. FCC, No. 99-1535 (D.C. Cir. 
Jan. 23, 2001) (remanding FCC denial of forebearance peti-
tion for failure to adequately explain departure from FCC 
precedent).

     More broadly, the FCC contends that the Order should not 
be viewed in isolation, but rather as an additional step along 
the road of greater deregulation and pricing flexibility in the 
interstate access market.  See, e.g, Order p 67.  Beginning in 
1990, the FCC has taken several steps to encourage innova-
tion, cost-reduction, and greater efficiency by reducing regu-
latory strictures in favor of market discipline.  See, e.g., id. 
p p 11-18 (summarizing replacement of rate-of-return regula-
tion with price-cap regulation and subsequent developments).  
Much as the FCC decided that replacing rate-of-return regu-
lation with price cap regulation furthered the public interest, 
it has now determined that relaxing price cap regulation, 
when certain levels of collocation have been achieved, furthers 
its statutory mandate and promotes the public interest.  Peti-
tioners fail to show how this conclusion is arbitrary and 
capricious or otherwise contrary to law.

     2.   MSA-Wide Deregulation
          
     Petitioners contend that the FCC was arbitrary and capri-
cious and abdicated its statutory obligations by authorizing 

MSA-wide relief upon a showing of collocation in only a 
portion of the MSA.  According to petitioners, due to this 
provision of the Pricing Flexibility Order the FCC cannot 
ensure that interstate access service prices will be just and 
reasonable, and therefore the collocation triggers are unlaw-
ful.  According to petitioners, the FCC's previous orders 
establish that in analyzing competitive issues, the proper 
"geographic market aggregates those consumers with similar 
choices regarding a particular good or service in the same 
geographical area."  NYNEX Corp., 12 F.C.C.R. 19,985 p 54 
(1997).  With the Pricing Flexibility Order, however, the 
FCC lumped together customers that do not have similar 
competitive alternatives into larger geographic markets--
MSAs--for the purpose of regulatory relief.  As a result, 
petitioners contend, LECs will gain regulatory relief while 
maintaining substantial bottlenecks and market power.

     The FCC considered this objection in devising its Order 
and nonetheless concluded that pricing flexibility should be 
granted on an MSA-wide basis. The FCC defined "the geo-
graphic area that it should use for purposes of reviewing 
requests for pricing flexibility ... narrowly enough so that 
the competitive conditions within each area are reasonably 
similar, yet broadly enough to be administratively workable."  
Order p 71.  Commenters proposed both larger and smaller 
relief areas. The FCC settled upon MSAs because, in the 
FCC's expert view, they "best reflect the scope of competitive 
entry."  Id. p 72.  Upon review, the FCC decided that 
smaller geographic areas would require incumbent LECs to 
file too many pricing flexibility petitions to achieve meaning-
ful relief--a conclusion petitioners do not dislodge with any 
evidence to the contrary.

     At bottom, petitioners' objection to the FCC's decision to 
offer pricing flexibility on an MSA-wide basis amounts to a 
difference in policy preferences.  This is not a sufficient basis 
upon which to upset the FCC's determination.  See Time 
Warner Entm't, 56 F.3d at 163.  The FCC considered alter-
natives to MSA-wide relief and determined that, on balance, 
these alternatives would be less beneficial to consumers and 
regulated entities.  As the FCC provided an adequate expla-

nation for this conclusion, we uphold the Commission's conclu-
sion.

     3.   Trigger Level Selection
          
     Petitioners' objections to the specific collocation thresholds 
established by the FCC are no more than policy differences 
with the Commission.  Like any agency, the FCC must 
provide a rational basis when setting a number for a stan-
dard, but it is not held to a standard of perfection.  The 
standard for reviewing such determinations was outlined in 
WJG Telephone Co. v. FCC:

     It is true that an agency may not pluck a number out of 
     thin air when it promulgates rules in which percentage 
     terms play a critical role.  When a line has to be drawn, 
     however, the Commission is authorized to make a "ra-
     tional legislative-type judgment."  If the figure selected 
     by the agency reflects its informed discretion, and is 
     neither patently unreasonable nor "a dictate of unbridled 
     whim," then the agency's decision adequately satisfies 
     the standard of review.
     
675 F.2d 386, 388-89 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (citations omitted);  
accord NARUC, 737 F.2d at 1141.

     Petitioners are correct that the Commission may not evade 
review of its decision-making merely by asserting that the 
thresholds were "policy determinations."  See San Antonio v. 
United States, 631 F.2d 831, 852 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (That a 
decision involves a policy judgment "does not excuse the 
[agency] from articulating fully and carefully the methods by 
which, and the purposes for which, it has chosen to act.") 
(internal quotes omitted).  Yet the FCC is not required to 
identify the optimal threshold with pinpoint precision.  It is 
only required to identify the standard and explain its relation-
ship to the underlying regulatory concerns.  The FCC notes 
that this court is "generally unwilling to review line-drawing 
performed by the Commission unless a petitioner can demon-
strate that lines drawn ... are patently unreasonable, having 
no relationship to the underlying regulatory problem."  Cas-
sell v. FCC, 154 F.3d 478, 485 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (internal 

quotations omitted).  The relevant question is "whether the 
agency's numbers are within a 'zone of reasonableness,' not 
whether its numbers are precisely right."  Hercules Inc. v. 
EPA, 598 F.2d 91, 107-08 (D.C. Cir. 1978).  Indeed, just last 
term we held that "the Commission has wide discretion to 
determine where to draw administrative lines, and appellants 
point to nothing suggesting that the agency abused its discre-
tion in drawing the line[s]" where it did.  AT&T Corp., 220 
F.3d at 627.

     The FCC made a predictive judgment that the amount of 
collocation required for each trigger will be sufficient to 
constrain anticompetitive practices by incumbent LECs.  The 
FCC also looked at areas where there was substantial colloca-
tion to determine whether that correlated with substantial 
involvement in competitive transport facilities.  See, e.g., Or-
der p p 81, 95.  For example, the FCC reviewed evidence that 
collocation in approximately eighteen percent of wire centers 
corresponded to over 2,000 miles of competitive fiber facili-
ties.  See id. p 95.  The FCC also notes that there are 
reasons to believe that, if anything, collocation underesti-
mates competition in relevant markets as "it fails to account 
for the presence of competitors that ... have wholly by-
passed incumbent LEC facilities."  Id.  Weighing these fac-
tors, the FCC concluded that its collocation triggers were 
sufficiently protective of the public interest.  This is precisely 
the sort of "rational legislative-type judgment" the FCC is 
empowered to exercise and we are required to respect.

B.   Immediate Pricing Flexibility for New Services

     Petitioners also challenge the FCC's decision to grant 
LECs immediate pricing flexibility for new services.  Prior to 
the new rule LECs were required to tariff new services 
fifteen days in advance and to demonstrate that prices were 
reasonable given the carrier's direct costs of providing the 
service.  As a result of the FCC's Pricing Flexibility Order, 
LECs may tariff with only one day's notice and (with the 
exception of loop-based services) need not show that the 
prices for new services bear any relation to costs.  As noted 
above, the FCC granted pricing flexibility for new services 

because it found that existing regulatory requirements de-
layed the development and introduction of new services to the 
detriment of consumers.  See id. p 37.

     Petitioners contend that the FCC's decision to grant imme-
diate pricing flexibility for new services is unlawful because it 
compromises the Commission's "fundamental obligation" to 
ensure that rates are just and reasonable.  Section 201(b) of 
the Communications Act provides that "[a]ll charges ... shall 
be just and reasonable, and any such charge ... that is 
unjust or unreasonable is declared to be unlawful."  47 U.S.C. 
s 201(b).  Citing the Second Circuit, petitioners argue that 
there is "no authority for the proposition that the FCC may 
abdicate its responsibility" under section 201(b) to regulate 
dominant carriers so as to ensure "just" and "reasonable" 
rates.  AT&T v. FCC, 572 F.2d 17, 25 (2d Cir. 1978).

     Contrary to petitioners' claims, there is nothing inherently 
unreasonable in the Commission's shift to streamlined review 
of new services.  Cf. Nat'l Rural Telecom Ass'n v. FCC, 988 
F.2d 174, 185 (D.C. Cir. 1993) ("In light of the FCC's objec-
tive of eliminating the filing burdens of both itself and the 
carriers, and its reasonable finding that caps and bands 
render the prospect of unreasonable filings sufficiently im-
probable, we find streamlined review to be reasonable.").  
The Commission is free to reduce regulatory requirements 
where, as here, it finds that less regulation will better serve 
its statutory goals.  As we noted above, "[t]he FCC's judg-
ment about the best regulatory tools to employ in a particular 
situation is ... entitled to considerable deference from the 
generalist judiciary."  Western Union Int'l, 804 F.2d at 1292.  
Here, the Commission determined that consumers are better 
served by loosening the government's grip on new service 
offerings and prices.

     Petitioners further argue that insofar as new services 
represent significant technological advances over existing ser-
vices, failure to offer that service to consumers or competitors 
at a reasonable price can produce competitive harm.  Al-
though the FCC did not remove new services from price cap 
regulation altogether, petitioners contend incumbent LECs 

may nonetheless incorporate a new service into the price caps 
at an inflated monopolistic price, thereby inflating the overall 
price cap and enabling LECs to raise the prices of other 
services.  The FCC also rejected this contention, noting that 
price caps are determined on a revenue-weighted basis.  
Therefore, should an LEC offer a new service at an inflated 
price, it would have little revenue weight so it would not 
enable the LEC to inflate the rates for other services.

C.   Rate Deaveraging for Transport Basket Services

     As part of the Pricing Flexibility Order, the FCC gave 
LECs additional flexibility to deaverage rates for transport 
basket services, subject to certain limitations, because aver-
aged rates have the potential to "create a pricing umbrella for 
competitors that would deprive customers of the benefits of 
more vigorous competition."  Order p 60.  The FCC believes 
that deaveraged rates promote efficiency, and existing regula-
tions discouraged carriers from pursuing deaveraged rates.  
Petitioners challenge this decision on the grounds that allow-
ing rate deaveraging will result in "predatory pricing and 
cross-subsidization."  In particular, petitioners contend that 
LECs will use this new pricing flexibility to lower their 
transport rates in competitive markets and increase their 
rates where competition is minimal.

     Merely because WorldCom disagrees with the FCC's con-
clusion that deaveraging rates will produce more consumer 
benefits than maintaining the existing regulatory structure is 
no reason for this court to strike down the FCC's decision.  
As noted above, the FCC's policy judgments are entitled to 
due deference from this court so long as the agency's conclu-
sions are reasonable and supported by substantial evidence, 
and the agency complies with the applicable procedural re-
quirements.  As above, the FCC's decision with regard to 
deaveraging rates meets this minimal test.

     Petitioners' concerns were raised by both AT&T and 
WorldCom during the notice and comment period, were con-
sidered by the FCC, and rejected.  The FCC concluded that 
petitioners' fears are exaggerated, and there is no basis upon 
which this court could conclude that this determination was 

arbitrary, capricious or otherwise contrary to law.  Indeed, 
"there is a consensus among commentators that predatory 
pricing schemes are rarely tried, and even more rarely suc-
cessful."  Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 
475 U.S. 574, 589 (1986).  Moreover, the FCC took specific 
steps to guard against the possibility of anticompetitive con-
duct.  In particular, the Order limits annual price increases 
within pricing zones to fifteen percent, and the annual in-
creases in the study area are limited to five percent.  See 
Order p 63;  47 C.F.R. s 61.47(e).  According to the Commis-
sion, this safeguard ensures "that incumbent LECs cannot 
define zones that are, for all practical purposes, specific to 
particular customers."  Order p 62.  Finally, LECs can still 
be subject to prosecution should they engage in predatory 
behavior.  After thorough review, the FCC considered these 
safeguards to be sufficient in this instance, and we can find no 
reason to upset that result.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the FCC, and the 
petitions for review are denied.

                           