                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 6, 2002      Decided June 4, 2002 

                           No. 01-7104

               Scandinavian Satellite System, AS, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    Prime TV Limited, et al., 
                            Appellees

                            ---------

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 00cv02482)

                            ---------

     Gary C. Tepper argued the cause for appellant.  With him 
on the brief was Caroline Turner English.

     Robert B. Rosen argued the cause for appellees. With him 
on the brief was Richard K. Coplon.

     Before:  Edwards, Henderson, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  Appellant Scandinavian Satellite 
System ("SSS") claims rights under an exclusive copyright 
license to broadcast programming created by Pakistan Televi-
sion Corporation ("PTV"), a government-owned enterprise 

based in Pakistan that produces news and entertainment 
programs.  On May 25, 1998, PTV granted Sports Star 
International ("SSI"), a Pakistani company, an exclusive li-
cense to broadcast PTV programming.  On July 1, 1998, SSI, 
in turn, granted SSS, a Norwegian company, the exclusive 
rights to broadcast PTV programming outside of Pakistan.  
SSS intended to use Prime TV Limited ("Prime TV"), a 
British company, to broadcast PTV programming in Europe.  
Finally, on February 17, 1999, SSS executed a Joint Venture 
Agreement with SSI, authorizing SSI to assume control over 
Prime TV, which previously had been a wholly owned subsid-
iary of SSS, and transferring the exclusive license to broad-
cast PTV programming from SSS to Prime TV.

     SSS now sues Prime TV and two individual defendants for 
copyright infringement, claiming that Prime TV violated 
SSS's copyright by broadcasting, or preparing to broadcast, 
PTV programming in the United States.  SSS also contends 
that the SSS/SSI Joint Venture Agreement is null and void 
because it was executed under duress.  In answer to SSS's 
complaint, Prime TV moved to dismiss the case on three 
grounds:  lack of personal jurisdiction;  principles of interna-
tional comity arising from related lawsuits in Pakistan;  and 
the existence of forum selection clauses in the disputed 
SSS/SSI contracts that required the parties to resolve their 
disputes pursuant to arbitration in Pakistan.

     SSS's action is based on a claim of copyright infringement 
under 17 U.S.C. ss 106 and 602.  The District Court, howev-
er, saw the case differently.  The District Court ruled that, 
because the "Joint Venture Agreement is at the core of this 
action," Scandinavian Satellite Sys., AS v. Prime TV Ltd., 
146 F. Supp. 2d 6, 10 (D.D.C. 2001), the action is principally 
one for contract rescission, not copyright infringement.  The 
trial court also held that, even if the Joint Venture Agree-
ment were voided - "which is necessary for SSS to maintain a 
copyright action - SSS would have no cause to seek relief 
under the copyright laws, since Prime [TV] would be its 
wholly owned subsidiary."  Id. at 18.  The District Court 
therefore held that it had no subject matter jurisdiction to 
decide the case, because the matter did not arise under an act 

of Congress relating to copyrights.  See 28 U.S.C. s 1338(a) 
(federal courts have subject matter jurisdiction over matters 
"arising under any Act of Congress relating to patents, plant 
variety protection, copyrights and trade-marks").

     Because we find that the District Court has subject matter 
jurisdiction over appellant's complaint, we reverse and re-
mand for further proceedings.  SSS's complaint is founded on 
a claim of copyright infringement arising under the Copyright 
Act for which it seeks declaratory and injunctive relief from 
appellees' infringing conduct.  This is sufficient to establish 
subject matter jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. s 1338(a).  It 
does not matter that appellees may interpose a contract 
defense based on the Joint Venture Agreement;  rather, the 
important point here is that SSS's claim rests solely on its 
asserted copyright license.  Furthermore, we reject the Dis-
trict Court's holding that SSS has no cause to seek relief from 
Prime TV, because Prime TV is purportedly SSS's wholly 
owned subsidiary.  The mere claim of a parent-subsidiary 
relationship is not enough to decide this issue, for the court 
must first determine whether SSS does in fact control Prime 
TV.  Indeed, in this case, Prime TV claims to be controlled by 
SSI, not SSS.

     Because the District Court erred in dismissing the case 
solely on the basis of subject matter jurisdiction and, thus, 
failed to rule on appellees' numerous other arguments for 
dismissal, we reverse and remand for further proceedings.

                          I. Background

     PTV executed an agreement with SSI in May 1998 granting 
SSI "[e]xclusive world wide rights" to use PTV programming.  
See Am. Compl.pp 7, 8, reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 
227;  Agreement Between PTV and SSI 1 (May 25, 1998), 
reprinted in J.A. 237.  SSI then transferred exclusive rights 
to SSS to broadcast PTV programming outside of Pakistan.  
See Agreement Between SSI and SSS p 1 (July 1, 1998), 
reprinted in J.A. 234.  SSS, then the sole shareholder of 
Prime TV, planned on using Prime TV to broadcast PTV 
programming in Europe.  Am. Compl. p 13, reprinted in J.A. 

228.  However, in February 1999, before SSS had undertaken 
any broadcast operations, Raja Nasir Hussain, the principal 
of SSS, signed a Joint Venture Agreement with SSI.  Id. 
p 14.  The Joint Venture Agreement gave SSI a controlling 
interest in Prime TV and transferred SSS's license to broad-
cast PTV programming to Prime TV.  Id. p 14.  Hussain now 
claims that defendant Yusaf Baig Mirza "coerced" him into 
signing the Joint Venture Agreement by threatening Hussain 
and his family.  Id. pp 14, 16.

     SSS filed suit in the District Court seeking a declaratory 
judgment that SSS (not Prime TV) owns the copyright in 
PTV programming, damages for copyright infringement, an 
injunction barring Prime TV from using PTV programming, 
and attorney's fees. Id. pp 26, 29.  SSS's complaint asserts 
that "Prime [TV] will broadcast, or has broadcasted PTV 
Programming in the District of Columbia," and that "Prime 
[TV] is importing into the United States, without the authori-
ty of the owner of [the] copyright, copies ... of PTV Pro-
gramming ... in order to broadcast PTV Programming in 
the United States for profit."  Id. pp 19-20.  The defendants 
moved to dismiss the case, arguing that the choice of law and 
choice of forum clauses in all three contracts required the 
resolution of any disputes to take place in Pakistan under 
Pakistani law;  that the principles of international comity 
dictated that the District Court defer to two pending court 
actions in Pakistan involving the same controversy;  and that 
the court had no personal jurisdiction over the defendants.  
See Defs.' Mem. in Supp. of Mot. to Dismiss, reprinted in J.A. 
22.

     Before ruling on the motion to dismiss, the District Court 
sent a letter to counsel requesting briefing on whether the 
court had subject matter jurisdiction over the case and 
whether SSI was an indispensable party under Rule 19 of the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  See Letter to Counsel 
(March 12, 2001), reprinted in J.A. 344.  All parties subse-
quently agreed that the District Court properly had subject 
matter jurisdiction over the dispute.  The District Court, 
however, granted the defendants' motion to dismiss, holding 
that the court had no subject matter jurisdiction over the 

dispute because the action was one for contract rescission, not 
copyright infringement:

     The necessity of determining whether the Joint Venture 
     Agreement was executed under duress - and, as a result, 
     whether it is null and void - essentially preempts SSS' 
     copyright claim.  If the contract is found to be valid, then 
     SSS has no rights to broadcast PTV Programming, and it 
     cannot assert any copyright action.  If the agreement is 
     voided, SSS maintains the rights to the PTV Program-
     ming - but also retains its controlling interest as the sole 
     shareholder in Prime.  So while SSS would own the 
     copyright license (assuming that the License Agreement 
     was not terminated), the defendants in this action would 
     be (1) a wholly-owned subsidiary of SSS [Prime TV], and 
     (2) two individuals who would have no control over that 
     subsidiary.  [T]his unique posture means that this action 
     does not "arise under" the federal copyright laws, but 
     amounts to nothing more than a straightforward contract 
     action for rescission of the Joint Venture Agreement.
     
Scandinavian Satellite, 146 F. Supp. 2d at 10.  SSS appeals 
from this decision.

                          II. Discussion

     The District Court dismissed appellant's complaint for lack 
of subject matter jurisdiction solely on a motion to dismiss.  
Therefore, in addressing this issue, we "must accept as true 
all of the factual allegations contained in the complaint."  
Swierkiewicz v. Sorema N.A., 122 S. Ct. 992, 995 n.1 (2002).

     28 U.S.C. s 1338(a) grants district courts subject matter 
jurisdiction to hear "any civil action arising under any Act of 
Congress relating to ... copyrights."  As this case demon-
strates, the scope of federal subject matter jurisdiction to 
hear contract disputes involving copyright ownership "poses 
among the knottiest procedural problems in copyright juris-
prudence."  3 Melville B. Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer 
on Copyright s 12.01[A] (2002).  It is clear that not every 
complaint that mentions the Copyright Act "arises under" 
that law for the purposes of s 1338(a).  See, e.g., Bassett v. 

Mashantucket Pequot Tribe, 204 F.3d 343, 347 (2d Cir. 2000).  
Thus, for example, a "suit on a contract does not 'arise under' 
the copyright laws even though a copyright may have been 
the subject matter of the contract."  13B Charles Alan 
Wright et al., Federal Practice and Procedure s 3582 (2d ed. 
1984).  However, the mere existence of an underlying con-
tract dispute in a suit relating to a copyright does not deprive 
a court of jurisdiction to hear an action for copyright infringe-
ment.  See 28 U.S.C. s 1367;  Bassett, 204 F.3d at 355.  So 
where does this take us?

     Fortunately, the search for the proper analytical frame-
work pursuant to which to assess claims of subject matter 
jurisdiction under s 1338(a) is not painstaking.  In T.B. 
Harms Co. v. Eliscu, 339 F.2d 823 (2d Cir. 1964), in a seminal 
opinion by Judge Henry Friendly, the Second Circuit held 
that

     an action "arises under" the Copyright Act if and only if 
     the complaint is for a remedy expressly granted by the 
     Act, e.g., a suit for infringement or for the statutory 
     royalties for record reproduction, or asserts a claim 
     requiring construction of the Act, ... or, at the very 
     least and perhaps more doubtfully, presents a case where 
     a distinctive policy of the Act requires that federal 
     principles control the disposition of the claim.
     
Id. at 828 (citations omitted).  This decision has guided the 
federal courts for many years in judicial determinations of 
subject matter jurisdiction under s 1338(a).  See, e.g., Gibral-
tar, P.R., Inc. v. Otoki Group, Inc., 104 F.3d 616, 619 (4th Cir. 
1997);  Royal v. Leading Edge Prods., Inc., 833 F.2d 1, 2 (1st 
Cir. 1987).  Recently, in Bassett, the Second Circuit reaffirm-
ed the reach of T.B. Harms, holding that federal courts have 
jurisdiction to hear a dispute under s 1338(a) "[w]hen a 
complaint alleges a claim or seeks a remedy provided by the 
Copyright Act."  204 F.3d at 355.  We agree with these 
holdings of our sister circuit, for we can find no better 
interpretation of s 1338(a).

     Appellees cite International Armor & Limousine Co. v. 
Moloney Coachbuilders, Inc., 272 F.3d 912 (7th Cir. 2001), in 

an effort to defend the District Court's judgment in this case.  
International Armor involves an application of s 1338(a) to 
an alleged trademark infringement.  Moloney, a car customiz-
er, sold his business assets, including the name "Moloney 
Coach Builders," and agreed not to compete in certain ways 
with the buyer.  Id. at 913.  The buyer subsequently com-
plained about Moloney's use of his name in his new enter-
prise;  Moloney then filed suit, seeking a declaration that the 
use of his name did not violate the Lanham Act.  15 U.S.C. 
s 1125.  The buyer counterclaimed, arguing that Moloney's 
use of his name violated the parties' sales contract and the 
Lanham Act.  Id.  The Seventh Circuit held that, because 
"the only serious dispute is how the contracts ... allocate 
ownership rights in the Moloney name and business history, 
... [t]he dispute arises under the law of contracts;  any 
trademark claims are entirely derivative of the contract is-
sues."  Id. at 916.  The court therefore concluded that the 
case did not "arise under" 28 U.S.C. s 1338(a) and dismissed 
the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  Id. at 918.

     In reaching this conclusion, the court in International 
Armor construed T.B. Harms as holding that "a dispute 
about the ownership of a copyright does not arise under 
federal law."  Id. at 915.  Respectfully, we believe that this is 
a misguided interpretation of the T.B. Harms test.  And it 
surely does not square with the Second Circuit's application 
of T.B. Harms in Bassett, a point conceded by appellees' 
counsel during oral argument.  Furthermore, in our view, the 
Seventh Circuit's position is premised on an unduly narrow 
and unrealistic reading of s 1338(a).

     Countless copyright ownership disputes indubitably arise 
under an Act of Congress relating to copyrights.  For exam-
ple, a dispute that turns on whether a copyrighted work was 
created independently or as a "work made for hire" is an 
ownership dispute that unquestionably arises under the 
Copyright Act.  See Cmty. for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 
490 U.S. 730 (1989).  Similarly, as even the court in Interna-
tional Armor recognized, a dispute over copyright ownership 
that seeks a remedy that is only available under the Copy-
right Act also arises under federal law.  See 272 F.3d at 916-

17;  see also Bassett, 204 F.3d at 355.  Therefore, when a 
complaint alleges a claim or seeks a remedy provided by the 
Copyright Act, subject matter jurisdiction under s 1338(a) is 
not lost merely because a contract ownership dispute may be 
implicated.

     The appellant in the instant case, unlike the complainant in 
International Armor, sought remedies expressly provided by 
the Copyright Act, i.e., injunctive relief to halt claimed in-
fringement and attorney's fees.  See 17 U.S.C. s 502(a) (au-
thorizing injunctive relief);  id. s 505 (authorizing award of a 
"reasonable attorney's fee").  Appellant therefore satisfied 
the requirement of T.B. Harms that the complaint must 
involve "a remedy expressly granted by the Act." 339 F.2d at 
828.  It does not matter that the appellees may raise a 
contract defense which rests on the disputed Joint Venture 
Agreement.  What matters is that SSS's claim rests solely on 
its asserted copyright license.  SSS plausibly asserts that the 
July 1, 1998 agreement between SSI and SSS granted SSS an 
exclusive copyright license to broadcast PTV programming 
outside of Pakistan and that this copyright has been infring-
ed.  On a motion to dismiss, the District Court was limited to 
these allegations in the complaint;  therefore, Prime TV's 
purported contract defense did not defeat the court's jurisdic-
tion to hear the complaint.  Cf. Taylor v. Anderson, 234 U.S. 
74, 75 (1914) (stating "whether a case is one arising under the 
Constitution or a law or treaty of the United States, in the 
sense of the jurisdictional statute, ... must be determined 
from what necessarily appears in the plaintiff's statement of 
his own claim in the bill or declaration").

                             * * * *

     The District Court justified its dismissal of appellant's case 
on an alternative ground:  the trial court held that if the Joint 
Venture Agreement is found not to bar SSS's lawsuit, SSS 
still would have no claim under the copyright laws, because 
SSS (the parent company) could not sue Prime TV (its wholly 
owned subsidiary).  The District Court assumed that "a 
parent company cannot sue its wholly-owned subsidiary for 

infringement without violating basic principles of corporate 
and copyright law."  Scandinavian Satellite, 146 F. Supp. 2d 
at 18.  We disagree.

     "Corporations may bring actions against each other, even if 
... one corporation is the parent or subsidiary of the other."  
9 Victoria A. Braucher, et al., Fletcher Cyclopedia of the 
Law of Private Corporations s 4229 (1999).  It is true that 
the law sometimes disregards the separate corporate forms of 
parent and subsidiary corporations to hold one accountable 
for the actions of another, especially when a failure to do so 
"would work fraud or injustice."  Taylor v. Standard Gas & 
Elec. Co., 306 U.S. 307, 322 (1939);  see also First Nat'l City 
Bank v. Banco Para el Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 462 U.S. 
611, 632 (1983) (declining "to adhere blindly to the corporate 
form where doing so would cause such an injustice").  Howev-
er, before it can be found that a parent and subsidiary are 
one entity in the eyes of the law, it must first be determined 
whether the subsidiary is in fact controlled by the parent.  
See, e.g., NLRB v. Deena Artware, Inc., 361 U.S. 398, 403 
(1960).

     In this case, Prime TV claims to be controlled by SSI, not 
SSS;  and, belatedly, SSS claims that Hussain, not SSS, owns 
Prime TV.  The District Court, at a minimum, must deter-
mine the actual relationship between SSS and Prime TV, 
including whether the extent of control exercised by SSS over 
Prime TV rises to the level necessary to disregard their 
separate corporate identities.  Without any such analysis, the 
District Court had no basis upon which to conclude that SSS 
was precluded from suing Prime TV.

     The appellees cite Copperweld Corp. v. Independence Tube 
Corp., 467 U.S. 752 (1984), for the proposition that a parent 
and its wholly owned subsidiary have a "complete unity of 
interest," and, therefore, must be viewed as one.  Id. at 771.  
Copperweld, however, addressed the limited issue of whether 
a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiary are 
legally capable of conspiring with one another under s 1 of 
the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. s 1.  Id. at 777.  That inquiry 
focused on "Congress' decision to exempt unilateral conduct 

from s 1 scrutiny," not the extent of control exercised by 
every parent company over a subsidiary.  Id. at 776.  Be-
cause Copperweld does not purport to answer the question 
now facing this court, it is not dispositive.  Instead, we are 
guided by the basic principle that "ownership, alone, of capital 
stock in one corporation by another, does not create an 
identity of corporate interest between the two companies."  
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Ry. Co. v. Minneapolis Civic 
& Commerce Ass'n, 247 U.S. 490, 500 (1918).  The unity of 
interest cannot be determined without an examination of the 
control exercised by the parent over the subsidiary.

                             * * * *

     We will therefore reverse the District Court's dismissal on 
grounds of subject matter jurisdiction and remand the case 
for further proceedings.  On remand, SSS faces a number of 
hurdles, any one of which may well result in another dismiss-
al.  One issue, recognized but not decided by the District 
Court, is whether SSI is an indispensable party to this action 
under Rule 19 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  
Another issue is whether SSS's claims for relief are moot, in 
whole or in part, because SSS's copyright license has expired.  
Another is whether the forum selection clauses in the disput-
ed agreements preclude appellant's action in this forum.  Yet 
another potentially dispositive issue is whether the action 
should be dismissed in consideration of international comity, 
because of the pending litigation in Pakistan.  And, finally, if 
SSS does in fact own and control Prime TV, then there may 
be a question as to whether SSS has standing to sue Prime 
TV.  We leave these matters to the District Court to decide 
in the first instance.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the District 
Court is reversed and the case is remanded for further 
proceedings.

                                                                    