                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 7, 2001   Decided October 12, 2001 

                           No. 00-1306

           Prime Service, Inc., d/b/a Prime Equipment, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

           International Union of Operating Engineers, 
                   Local Union No 3, AFL-CIO, 
                    Intervenor for Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Harry J. Secaras argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs was Howard L. Bernstein.

     Steven B. Goldstein, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 
brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John H. 
Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Julie B. Broido, 
Senior Attorney.  Howard E. Perlstein, Deputy Assistant 
General Counsel, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph, and Rogers, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Prime Service, Inc.'s petition to 
review and the National Labor Relations Board's cross-
petition to enforce an order of the Board raise the question 
whether Prime Service should have been treated as a succes-
sor employer who breached its duty to bargain with the 
incumbent union and, if so, whether the Board's affirmative 
bargaining order is an appropriate remedy.  Also before us is 
Prime's motion for an order requiring the Board to reopen 
the record.  We deny Prime's petition and its motion and 
enforce the Board's order.

     Prime Service, a Delaware corporation headquartered in 
Houston, Texas, rented and sold construction and industrial 
equipment.  In 1998 Prime entered into an agreement to 
acquire the assets of Clementina, Ltd., a company in a similar 
line of business in California.  Clementina had a collective 
bargaining agreement with the Operating Engineers Local 
Union No. 3, International Union of Operating Engineers, 
AFL-CIO (the "Union"), covering seventeen employees work-
ing at its stores in San Francisco, San Mateo, Sacramento, 
San Jose, and Berkeley.

     On August 7, 1998, Prime notified the Union that it was in 
the process of acquiring Clementina's assets and that it would 
meet with Clementina's employees to discuss the sale.  In an 
August 11 reply, the Union requested a meeting with Prime 
and asserted that its collective bargaining agreement with 
Clementina should remain in force after the sale.  Prime 
responded on August 13, stating that although it would 

consider Clementina's employees for jobs with Prime, it 
would not be bound by the Clementina collective bargaining 
agreement.  The next day the Union again suggested a 
meeting with Prime and cautioned Prime against making any 
unilateral changes in the Clementina employees' terms and 
conditions of employment.

     Sometime between August 25 and 27, Roland M. Katz, the 
contracts manager for the Union, and other Union represen-
tatives met with representatives of Prime, including Prime's 
director of human resources, regional manager, and in-house 
counsel.  At this lunch meeting, Prime's representatives ex-
pressed the company's desire to have a "seamless transition," 
and stated that they were thinking of calling the acquired 
operation "Clementina/Prime" in order to facilitate a smooth 
transition.  Katz stated the Union's position that Prime had 
to recognize Local 3 and had to continue to employ the 
Clementina collective bargaining unit employees.  The Prime 
people stated that they would have to recognize the Union 
only if a majority of employees were former Clementina 
employees.

     The participants also discussed potential locations for con-
ducting negotiations.  Katz told Prime's representatives that 
the Union always negotiated near the workplaces and sug-
gested Alameda as a location.  One of Prime's representatives 
proposed Houston;  another suggested a location in between 
such as Phoenix.

     Prime took over Clementina's five unionized facilities on 
August 28.  Of Clementina's seventeen bargaining unit em-
ployees, twelve accepted Prime's offer of employment.  Dur-
ing the next few weeks, several of the twelve employees 
resigned, forcing Prime to run advertisements seeking new 
employees.  Prime also was forced to transfer temporarily 
employees from its other facilities.  By September 25, 1998, 
due to resignations and Prime's hiring of additional non-
Union employees, the former Clementina bargaining unit 
employees no longer constituted a majority of Prime's work 
force.

     Throughout September and October, the Union repeatedly 
contacted Prime regarding its assurance that it would honor 
all legal obligations and negotiate with Local Union No. 3 if 
legally required to do so.  When Prime refused to bargain, 
the Union filed an unfair labor practice charge, alleging that 
Prime had a duty to bargain with the Union as a successor 
employer and that its refusal to bargain violated the National 
Labor Relations Act.  After a hearing, an Administrative 
Law Judge found that Prime had violated sections 8(a)(1) and 
(a)(5) of the Act, see 29 U.S.C. ss 158(a)(1) and (a)(5), and 
recommended the issuance of a cease and desist order and an 
affirmative bargaining order.  On March 10, 2000, the Board 
affirmed the ALJ's findings, and ordered Prime to bargain 
with the Union.

     After the Board issued its order, Prime took affirmative 
steps on March 24, 2000, to comply by posting a "Notice to 
Employees."  The notice informed employees that the Board 
had found that Prime violated the National Labor Relations 
Act and that Prime would not refuse to bargain with the 
Union as the exclusive representative of its employees.  With-
in three weeks of the posting, fifteen of twenty-six Prime 
employees submitted written objections expressing their op-
position to the Union's representing them.  This led Prime to 
inform the Union that it would not proceed with collective 
bargaining because a majority of employees opposed Union 
representation.

                                I.

     We shall deal first with the Board's decision that Prime 
was a successor employer obligated to recognize and bargain 
with the Union.  In order to preserve industrial peace during 
the transition between employers, the presumption of majori-
ty support ordinarily enjoyed by a certified union may contin-
ue in successor situations, thereby obligating a successor 
employer to bargain with its predecessor's union.  See Fall 
River Dyeing & Finishing Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 41 
(1987);  NLRB v. Burns Int'l Sec. Servs., Inc., 406 U.S. 272 
(1972).  This presumption of majority status attaches if there 

is a "substantial continuity" between the predecessor's busi-
ness and that of the new employer;  if the incumbent union 
has made a bargaining demand;  and if the new employer has 
hired a "substantial and representative complement" of its 
work force, a majority of which consists of the predecessor's 
employees.  See Williams Enters., Inc. v. NLRB, 956 F.2d 
1226, 1232 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  These are primarily factual 
inquiries, and to that extent the Board's judgment must be 
sustained if it is supported by substantial evidence.  Fall 
River, 482 U.S. at 43;  Williams, 956 F.2d at 1232.

     The parties agree that substantial continuity existed be-
tween Prime and Clementina.  The dispute is whether the 
Union made a valid bargaining demand on Prime before 
August 28 and whether Prime had hired a substantial and 
representative complement of its work force by that date.

                            A. Demand

     A union need utter no particular words to convey its 
demand for bargaining with a successor employer.  The 
demand may be in writing or it may be oral.  Although it is 
customary for a union seeking recognition to inform the 
employer that it represents a majority of employees, even 
this elementary representation may be unnecessary when the 
successor has retained the entire workforce and hired no one 
else.  See Burns Int'l Sec. Servs., 406 U.S. at 278-79.  Still, in 
conveying its intentions to the successor the union must do 
more than simply suggest a meeting without specifying the 
subjects of the meeting or when or where the union would 
like to get together.  We have held that such a vague 
proposal is not enough to trigger an employer's s 8(a)(5) 
obligation to bargain.  Williams, 956 F.2d at 1233;  see also 
K & S Circuits, Inc., 255 N.L.R.B. 1270, 1297 (1981);  Sheboy-
an Sausage Co., 156 N.L.R.B. 1490, 1500-01 (1966).  If the 
union does not clearly express its purpose, if it does not 
explicitly demand bargaining, then "some indicia of a demand, 
such as a suggested meeting place and time, proposed topics, 
and a method for reply" should be conveyed to the new 

employer.  Williams, 956 F.2d at 1233.  The burden is on the 
union to make its desires known.

     For example, in K & S Circuits, the Board held that a 
union's verbal communication to a company stating that its 
employees were forming a union and asking to negotiate did 
not constitute a request for recognition and bargaining.  255 
N.L.R.B. at 1297.  The Board relied on the fact that the 
communication "did not claim majority status, nor did it 
indicate how, or to whom" the company was to reply.  Id. 
Similarly, in Williams, we held that a phone call indicating 
that the union "would ... like to represent the employees of 
the new company" and "would like to have an opportunity to 
discuss, perhaps negotiate" was not a sufficient request for 
recognition.  956 F.2d at 1229.  The call was vague and 
nothing more than a suggestion.  Id. at 1233.

     The facts of this case are different.  Katz testified that he 
made a demand for recognition on behalf of the Union in 
early August.  The ALJ credited his testimony.  Katz also 
testified that when they met for lunch at the end of August he 
informed the Prime representatives of the Union's position 
that the company had to recognize Local 3.  Katz further 
testified that the Union and Prime then discussed potential 
bargaining locations, and the subject of the transition from 
Clementina to Prime, which was about to occur.  Substantial 
evidence thus supported the ALJ's and the Board's finding 
that the Union made a bargaining demand.  The Union 
requested recognition, and the parties discussed bargaining 
locations and the subject of negotiation.

     We recognize the line of judicial authority holding that a 
bargaining demand is not required in cases--such as this 
one--in which there has been an immediate rather than a 
gradual transition period.  See Banknote Corp. of America v. 
NLRB, 84 F.3d 637, 645-46 (2d Cir. 1996).  Whether this 
circumstance sufficiently distinguishes Fall River, 482 U.S. at 
47, and Williams, 956 F.2d at 1230, 1232-34, which required a 
bargaining demand in the context of gradual hiring during 
prolonged start-up periods, is an issue about which we ex-

press no opinion in light of our agreement with the Board 
that the Union did make a bargaining demand.

           B. Substantial and Representative Complement

     Prime also challenges the ALJ's (and the Board's) finding 
that a substantial and representative complement of the 
workforce existed at the five California stores on August 28.  
In fixing the time for determining the composition of the 
successor's workforce, the "substantial and representative 
complement" rule reconciles the employees' interest in choos-
ing a bargaining agent with their interest in being represent-
ed at the earliest possible time.  Fall River, 482 U.S. at 47, 48 
& n. 15.  "If, at this particular moment,"--the moment when 
a substantial and representative complement is on board--"a 
majority of the successor's employees had been employed by 
its predecessor, then the successor has an obligation to 
bargain with the union that represented these employees."  
Id. at 47.

     Deciding when a substantial and representative comple-
ment existed can be difficult, particularly when the new 
employer has plans to expand or alter operations.  See Sulli-
van Indus. v. NLRB, 957 F.2d 890, 895-96 (D.C. Cir. 1992);  
see also Pennsylvania Transformer Tech. v. NLRB, 254 F.3d 
217, 223 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  Here the matter is relatively 
simple.  Prime was not rebuilding a moribund business and 
the ALJ properly refused to give weight to the company's 
unsupported assertions that it planned to expand the work-
force.  Prime was intent on having what it described as a 
"seamless transition."  Appendix 65-66 (testimony of Roland 
M. Katz).  When Prime took over the stores on August 28, it 
encountered a shortage of workers because several former 
Clementina employees had rejected their employment offers 
or had quit immediately.  But the company quickly brought 
in new workers to fill the vacancies.  Employing twelve of 
Clementina's seventeen former bargaining unit employees, it 
continued Clementina's full operations on August 28 without 
any hiatus.  See NLRB v. Cutter Dodge, Inc., 825 F.2d 1375, 
1378 (9th Cir. 1987).  Prime itself wrote the Union on Octo-

ber 28 stating that its "substantial and representative comple-
ment of employees" consisted of eighteen workers, only one 
more than the contingent under Clementina.  See Appendix 
345.  Substantial evidence therefore supported the ALJ's 
finding, adopted by the Board, that August 28 was the correct 
date for determining whether the successor had a majority of 
union members in its workforce.  On that date a majority of 
Prime's employees were former Clementina employees.  
Prime was thus a successor employer obligated to recognize 
and bargain with the Union.  The Board properly decided 
that the company's failure to do so violated sections 8(a)(1) 
and (a)(5) of the National Labor Relations Act.

                               II.

     This brings us to Prime's motion to reopen the record.  
Prime asserts that regardless whether the Board correctly 
found it to be a successor employer, it still had no duty to 
bargain with the Union because new evidence showed that 
the Union lacked the support of unit employees.  Prime asks 
this court to grant its motion to reopen the record pursuant 
to s 10(e) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. s 160(e), so that it can adduce 
petitions and letters signed by fifteen of twenty-six bargain-
ing unit employees in April 2000 stating that they did not 
want to be represented by the Union.  Section 10(e) provides 
that reviewing courts may order evidence to be taken before 
the Board if the party moving for leave to adduce additional 
evidence shows "that such additional evidence is material and 
that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce 
such evidence in the hearings before the Board."  See NLRB 
v. Mexia Textile Mills, Inc., 339 U.S. 563, 569 (1950).  This 
information, according to Prime, gave it a good faith doubt 
about the Union's majority status.

     Once a successor employer develops a "good faith doubt" 
about a union's majority status, it is no longer obligated to 
recognize and bargain with the union.  Williams, 956 F.2d at 
1234;  see also St. Agnes Med. Ctr. v. NLRB, 871 F.2d 137, 
145 (D.C. Cir. 1989).  An anti-union petition signed by a 
majority of the successor's employees stating that they do not 

want to be represented by the union may serve to create such 
a good faith doubt.  See Williams, 956 F.2d at 1234.  But the 
Board has adopted a presumption--which this court has 
upheld--that an employer's unlawful refusal to bargain taints 
any later anti-union petition.  See Harter Tomato Prods. Co. 
v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 934, 938-39 (D.C. Cir. 1998);  see also Lee 
Lumber & Bldg. Material Corp. v. NLRB, 117 F.3d 1454, 
1458-61 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  An employer can rebut this pre-
sumption of taint only by showing :  (1) that employee disaf-
fection arose after it resumed recognition of the union;  and 
(2) that it bargained with the union for a reasonable time 
without committing additional unfair labor practices.  See 
Harter Tomato, 133 F.3d at 939.

     Prime did post a notice at some of its locations in compli-
ance with the Board's order, but it never engaged in bargain-
ing with the Union.  The company canceled a bargaining 
session scheduled for April 13, 2000.  Given these facts, 
Prime has not rebutted the Board's presumption that an 
employer's unlawful refusal to bargain taints any later anti-
union petition.

     We reject Prime's argument that we should reopen the 
record so that it can demonstrate that at the time the Board 
issued the bargaining order (March 10, 2000) the Union no 
longer enjoyed majority status.  If Prime had objected to the 
bargaining order it might have a point.  We have held that 
before the Board issues a bargaining order on the basis of a 
union majority of authorization cards--a Gissel order, after 
NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 (1969)--the Board 
must take into account changes between the time of the 
unfair labor practices and the issuance of its order.  See 
Flamingo Hilton-Laughlin v. NLRB, 148 F.3d 1166, 1170-71 
(D.C. Cir. 1998).  In mounting this argument Prime assumes 
that it may attack the bargaining order, an assumption we 
reject for the reasons given in the next section.

                               III.

     Prime argues that the Board erred in issuing the bargain-
ing order without offering a reasoned explanation.  This court 

has repeatedly held that the Board must supply a reasoned 
analysis for issuing a bargaining order rather than milder 
relief.  See Vincent Indus. Plastics, Inc. v. NLRB, 209 F.3d 
727, 738 (D.C. Cir. 2000);  Flamingo Hilton-Laughlin, 148 
F.3d at 1173.  But Prime failed to raise any specific objec-
tions to the propriety of the bargaining order in the Board 
proceedings.  It merely excepted to the remedy "in its entire-
ty" and to the order "in its entirety."  Appendix 350-52 
(Exceptions of Respondent/Employer Prime Service, Inc. to 
the Administrative Law Judge's Decision).  This form of 
generalized objection is insufficient to preserve the argument 
for appeal.  See Quazite Div. v. NLRB, 87 F.3d 493, 497 
(D.C. Cir. 1996).  Section 10(e) of the Act precludes reviewing 
courts from considering objections not first presented to the 
Board "unless the failure or neglect to urge such objection 
shall be excused because of extraordinary circumstances," 29 
U.S.C. s 160(e), circumstances not present here.  See 
Exxel/Atmos, Inc. v. NLRB, 147 F.3d 972, 978 (D.C. Cir. 
1998);  Quazite, 87 F.3d at 497-98.

     The petition for review and the motion to reopen are 
denied.  The Board's cross-petition for enforcement is grant-
ed.

                                                             So ordered.

                                                             