                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued March 13, 2000     Decided May 5, 2000 

                           No. 99-1048

                Environmental Defense Fund, et al 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                            Respondent


               Edison Electric Institute, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                            ---------

                        Consolidated with 
                           No. 99-1049

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                 Environmental Protection Agency

     David R. Case argued the cause for petitioners. With him 
on the briefs was Karen Florini.

     Norman L. Rave, Jr., Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief 
were Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, and Alan 
Carpien, Attorney, Environmental Protection Agency.  
Christopher S. Vaden, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
entered an appearance.

     William K. Rawson, Claudia M. O'Brien, Douglas H. 
Green, Steven J. Groseclose, David F. Zoll, Katheryn W. 
Smith, Lynn L. Bergeson and Cara S. Jablon were on the 
joint brief for intervenors Chemical Manufacturers Associa-
tion, et al.

     Before:  Silberman, Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  The Environmental Defense Fund 
("EDF") and the Environmental Technology Council ("ETC") 
petition for review of a final determination by the Environ-
mental Protection Agency ("EPA") not to add fourteen sol-
vent wastes to its list of hazardous wastes under Subtitle C of 
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 
("RCRA"), as amended, 42 U.S.C. s 6921-6939b.  Petitioners 
challenge two aspects of EPA's decision.  First, petitioners 
contend that EPA made the scope of its listing rulemaking 
narrower than is permissible under the plain language of 
EPA's regulation governing such listing determinations.  
EPA analyzed whether the wastes produced when each of the 
fourteen chemicals is used as a solvent is hazardous.  Such 
wastes usually consist of a number of constituent substances, 
but EPA limited its inquiry to whether the presence of the 
chemical solvent in the resulting waste was by itself a suffi-
cient reason to list the waste as hazardous.  Petitioners 
contend that EPA's regulation, 40 C.F.R. s 261.11(a)(3), 
which refers to "any toxic constituent," imposed on EPA the 
heavier burden of surveying the range of constituent sub-
stances comprising the waste before deciding not to list such 
wastes.  Second, under EPA's regulation, EPA is to gauge 

the risks posed by a waste in part by considering plausible 
mismanagement scenarios, and petitioners challenge EPA's 
decision that wastes produced when one chemical, isophorone, 
is used as a solvent could not plausibly be disposed of in a 
landfill, maintaining that EPA lacked sufficient data to make 
that decision, rendering it arbitrary.

     We hold that because EPA's regulation is silent as to how 
EPA must conduct its listing inquiry and because EPA 
reasonably concluded that no wastes from the solvent use of 
isophorone were, or were likely to be, disposed of in landfills, 
EPA permissibly limited the scope of its rulemaking to the 
toxicity of the solvents and conducted a reasonable evaluation 
of plausible mismanagement scenarios for isophorone.  Ac-
cordingly, we deny the petition for review.

                                I.

     Congress enacted Subtitle C of RCRA, 42 U.S.C. ss 6921-
6939b, to establish a "cradle-to-grave" regulatory structure 
providing for the safe treatment, storage, and disposal of 
hazardous waste.  Natural Resources Defense Council v. 
EPA, 25 F.3d 1063, 1065 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  Congress defined 
"hazardous waste" broadly in RCRA,1 delegating to EPA the 

__________
     1 "Hazardous waste" is:
     a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of 
     its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious 
     characteristics may-
     
          (A) cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mor-
     tality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating 
     reversible, illness;  or
     
          (B) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human 
     health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, 
     transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.
     
42 U.S.C. s 6903(5).  "Solid waste" is "any garbage, refuse, sludge 
from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air 
pollution control facility or other discarded material, including solid, 
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from 
industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and 
from community activities...."  Id. s 6903(27).

task of promulgating regulations identifying the characteris-
tics of hazardous waste and listing specific wastes as hazard-
ous.  Id.  Pursuant to this authority, EPA has promulgated 
listing criteria to determine whether solid wastes are hazard-
ous.  40 C.F.R. s 261.11.  Once listed as "hazardous," a 
waste is subject to significant regulation.  See Columbia 
Falls Aluminum Co. v. EPA, 139 F.3d 914, 915 (D.C. Cir. 
1998);  American Petroleum Institute v. EPA, 906 F.2d 729, 
733 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (citing 42 U.S.C. ss 6922-6925).

     In 1984, Congress amended RCRA to require EPA to 
decide by February 1986 whether to list "solvents" as haz-
ardous wastes.  42 U.S.C. s 6921(e)(2).  When EPA did not 
act promptly, EDF filed suit seeking an order directing EPA 
to make a listing determination as to the hazardous nature 
of certain solvents.  The result was a consent decree requir-
ing EPA to "promulgate a final listing determination for 
solvent wastes on or before May 31, 1997."2  The consent 
decree specified that the "listing determination [was to] in-
clude the following spent solvent wastes, still bottoms from 
the recovery of the following solvents, and spent solvent 
mixtures:  cumene, phenol, isophorone, acetonitrile, furfural, 
epicholorohydrin, methyl chloride, ethylene dibromide, ben-
zyl chloride, ... p-dichlorobenzene, ... 2-methoxyethanol, 
2-methoxyethanol acetate, 2-ethoxyethanol acetate, and cy-
clohexanol."3

     The rulemaking under review is one of a series in which 
EPA has considered whether wastes from the use of specified 
chemicals as solvents should be listed as hazardous.  See 51 
Fed. Reg. 6537 (1986);  45 Fed. Reg. 74,884 (1980).  To date, 
EPA has listed wastes from solvent use of approximately 30 
chemicals.  See 40 C.F.R. s 261.31, waste codes F001-F005.  
EPA determined that it could rely on the methodology it had 
used in the prior solvent rulemakings consistent with its 

__________
     2 The deadline was advanced one year on stipulation of EDF 
and EPA.

     3 EPA asserts in its brief that the chemicals at issue are not 
general use solvents, but are used, if at all, in a variety of specialty 
applications because of price and other characteristics.

obligations under the consent decree.  See 63 Fed. Reg. 
64372, 64373 (1998).

     After conducting its preliminary analysis, EPA issued a 
proposed rule on August 14, 1996, not to amend the solvent 
waste listing in 40 C.F.R. s 261.31 to include the fourteen 
solvent wastes.  61 Fed. Reg. 42,318, 42,138 (1996).  Relying 
on its longstanding methodology, EPA stated that it was 
examining the toxicity of the spent solvents only, as opposed 
to any additional chemicals that might mix with the solvent to 
form a larger waste stream.  See id. at 42,319-20.  EPA 
explained that many of these solvent wastes are already 
regulated as hazardous waste because they either exhibit a 
hazardous waste characteristic or are mixed with other sol-
vent wastes that are listed as hazardous.  Id. at 42,319.  EPA 
further explained that in limiting the scope of its proposed 
rule to "a determination only regarding the need for adding 
these specific wastes to the RCRA hazardous waste listings 
based on the specific criteria in the listing regulations," id. 
(emphasis added), it was exercising its broad discretion under 
RCRA and the consent decree "to reasonably define the 
scope of the listing determination."  Id. at 42,320.  This 
approach also was necessary as a practical matter, in EPA's 
view, because of the ubiquity of "solvents" in general.  Id.  03 
The proposed rule also identified the research and data 
gathered by EPA to determine "plausible mismanagement 
scenarios" for the solvents.  Id. at 42,320-49.

     Petitioners filed comments objecting to the limited scope of 
the proposed rule in view of the regulatory requirement to 
consider "any" hazardous constituents listed in Appendix VIII 
to 40 C.F.R. Part 261.4  Petitioners also argued that EPA had 
failed to consider all plausible mismanagement scenarios.  
Petitioners contended that because the universe of possible 
solvent uses is too large to capture all mismanagement sce-
narios through empirical study, EPA should have relied upon 

__________
     4 ETC noted a general objection that "the hazardous constitu-
ents that are typically found in these solvents were not identified, 
nor were the risks posed by multiple hazardous constituents evalu-
ated."

such "standard" mismanagement scenarios as those involving 
land disposal even if EPA's particular research did not sug-
gest the presence of such disposal methods.

     In the final rule, EPA concluded that the solvents should 
not be listed as hazardous wastes.  63 Fed. Reg. at 64,372.  
EPA reiterated that it defined "spent solvent wastes" solely 
in terms of the solvent constituents, and that in view of the 
large number of potential solvent waste combinations, prac-
tical necessity dictated this manner of proceeding.  Id. at 
64,373-74, 64,383.  EPA defended its methodology for deter-
mining plausible waste mismanagement scenarios, and 
deemed implausible those management scenarios EDF as-
serted to be "plausible."  Id. at 64,377-82, 64,383-85.  EDF 
and ETC petition for review.

                               II.

     Petitioners contend that EPA acted inconsistently with its 
regulation by limiting the scope of its rulemaking to solvents 
only, and that EPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously by 
relying on an industry-wide survey to identify plausible mis-
management scenarios for solvent wastes.5  The first con-
tention turns on petitioners' interpretation of EPA's listing 
regulation;  the second is limited by petitioners' focus on 
mismanagement scenarios for the solvent isophorone.

__________
     5 The court has jurisdiction to review EPA's determination not 
to amend 40 C.F.R. s 261.31 to include any of the fourteen solvent 
wastes under RCRA, 42 U.S.C. s 6976(a)(1), as a denial of a 
petition.  The relevant petition is EDF's complaint in the district 
court that led to the consent decree upon which EPA acted.  While 
the court in American Portland Cement Alliance v. EPA, 101 F.3d 
772 (D.C. Cir. 1996), rejected the view that comments submitted 
during an agency initiated rulemaking constituted a petition for 
purposes of s 7006(a) review of the agency's deferral of rulemaking, 
id. 778-79, EDF's complaint in the district court led to the rulemak-
ing proceeding in which EPA reached a non-listing decision, and 
thus served the function of a petition that EPA denied, thereby 
completing the regulatory process.  See id. 779.

                                A.

     EPA's listing regulation provides in pertinent part:

     (a) The Administrator shall list a solid waste as a haz-
     ardous waste only upon determining that the solid waste 
     meets one of the following criteria:
     
          (1) It exhibits any of the characteristics of hazardous 
     waste identified in subpart C.
     
          (2) It has been found to be fatal to humans in low 
     doses or.... [has been shown through laboratory studies 
     or otherwise to be capable of causing severe illness or 
     death].
     
          (3) It contains any of the toxic constituents listed in 
     appendix VIII and, after considering [certain enumerat-
     ed] factors, the Administrator concludes that the waste is 
     capable of posing a substantial present or potential haz-
     ard to human health or the environment when improper-
     ly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or other-
     wise managed....
     
40 C.F.R. s 261.11 (emphasis added).6  Petitioners focus on 
the italicized language of subsection (3) as requiring EPA to 

__________
     6 EPA identified "enumerated factors" to be considered after 
determining the presence of a toxic constituent in the waste as:
          (i) The nature of the toxicity presented by the constituent.
               (ii) The concentration of the constituent in the waste.
               (iii) The potential of the constituent or any toxic degradation 
     product of the constituent to migrate from the waste into the 
     environment under the types of improper management consid-
     ered in paragraph (a)(3)(vii) of this section.
               (iv) The persistence of the constituent or any toxic degrada-
     tion product of the constituent.
               (v) The potential for the constituent or any toxic degradation 
     product of the constituent to degrade into non-harmful constit-
     uents and the rate of degradation.
               (vi) The degree to which the constituent or any degradation 
     product of the constituent bioaccumulates in ecosystems.
     

consider the presence of "any" hazardous constituents listed 
in Appendix VIII to 40 CFR Part 261, not just the solvent 
itself.  Petitioners also maintain that to conclude otherwise 
would render meaningless the distinction between the routes 
to listing provided in subsections (1) and (2), which focus on 
the toxicity of the waste to be listed, and subsection (3), which 
focuses on the existence of toxic constituents in the waste and 
the potential for the waste to pose a health or environmental 
hazard when improperly managed.  Further, because most of 
the solvents at issue are not listed in Appendix VIII of Part 
261, petitioners maintain that EPA cannot construe 
s 261.11(a)(3), which refers to the presence of "toxic constitu-
ents listed in appendix VIII", to mean that the chemical 
solvent is the toxic constituent to be examined.  In addition, 
petitioners contest EPA's view of the impracticality of exam-
ining other toxic constituents potentially present in the sol-
vent wastes.

     The court is bound to accept " '[a]n agency's interpretation 
of its own regulations ... unless it is plainly wrong.' "  Chem-
ical Waste Management, Inc. v. EPA, 869 F.2d 1526, 1538-39 
(D.C. Cir. 1989) (quoting General Carbon Co. v. Occupational 
Safety and Health Review Comm'n, 860 F.2d 479, 483 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988)).  See also, e.g., Natural Resources Defense Coun-
cil v. EPA, 25 F.3d 1063, 1068-69 (D.C. Cir. 1994);  Hazard-
ous Waste Treatment Council v. Reilly, 938 F.2d 1390, 1395 
(D.C. Cir. 1991).  Especially "on 'a highly technical question 

__________
          (vii) The plausible types of improper management to which 
     the waste could be subjected.
     
          (viii) The quantities of the waste generated at individual 
     generation sites or on a regional or national basis.
               (ix) The nature and severity of the human health and envi-
     ronmental damage that has occurred as a result of the improp-
     er management of wastes containing the constituent.
     
          (x) Action taken by other governmental agencies or regula-
     tory programs based on the health or environmental hazard 
     posed by the waste or waste constituent.
     
          (xi) Such other factors as may be appropriate.
     
40 C.F.R. s 261.11(a)(3).

... courts necessarily must show considerable deference to 
an agency's expertise.' "  Chemical Waste Management, 869 
F.2d at 1539 (quoting MCI Cellular Tel. Co. v. FCC, 738 F.2d 
1322, 1333 (D.C. Cir. 1984)).  We hold that EPA did not 
clearly err in interpreting its listing regulation to require only 
that it analyze the toxicity of the solvents, rather than other 
constituents with which the solvents might be combined.

     Petitioners' "plain language" and supporting contentions 
are unpersuasive.  Subsection (3), on which petitioners rely, 
merely provides a threshold that must be met before a listing 
determination may be made on the basis of constituent con-
tent:  that is, that "any" Appendix VIII constituent be present 
in the waste.  40 C.F.R. s 261.11(a)(3).  And the distinction 
relied on by petitioners between the three major listing 
criteria in s 261(a) demonstrates only that EPA has given 
itself the option of evaluating either toxic characteristics of 
the waste as a whole, s 261(a)(1) and (2), or of specific 
constituents within the waste, s 261(a)(3), and does not pre-
clude the possibility that a waste may consist of one constitu-
ent, much less that in a particular rulemaking EPA will focus, 
pursuant to s 261(a)(3), on one constituent.7  That all of the 
solvents are not listed in Appendix VIII does not demonstrate 
error;  EPA points out that it is routine to add a waste to 
Appendix VIII and simultaneously to list a waste as hazard-
ous based on that constituent.  See Dithiocarbamate Task 
Force v. EPA, 98 F.3d 1394, 1398 (D.C. Cir. 1996).8

__________
     7 Indeed, the consent decree defines the relevant "spent sol-
vent" wastes as the solvents, mandating that EPA evaluate "the 
following spent solvent wastes", and then listing the solvents alone.

     8 Contrary to EPA's contention, petitioners' reference to the 
legislative history of 1984 delisting legislation, 42 U.S.C. s 6921(f), 
was properly raised in its reply brief in response to the statement in 
EPA's brief that in amending RCRA in 1984 Congress was aware of 
EPA's practice of making solvent listing determinations based 
solely on the toxicity of the solvent.  Petitioners' legislative history 
argument fails substantively, however, because delisting is different 
from the imposition of reasonable restrictions on the scope of a 
listing determination.

     It is also significant that EPA does not purport to have 
made a non-listing determination for specific solvent waste 
combinations without having evaluated the toxicity of those 
combinations;  to the contrary, EPA made clear that its 
rulemaking concerns only the toxicity of the solvents.  See, 
e.g., 63 Fed. Reg. at 64,383.  There is nothing to suggest that 
EPA could not in the future examine specific solvent waste 
combinations on the basis that the specific waste combina-
tions as a whole are toxic;  many such wastes already are 
listed due to the existence of toxic constituents other than the 
solvent itself.  61 Fed. Reg. 42,319.  EPA thus not only did 
not misinterpret its regulation, but did not abuse its discre-
tion under its regulation.9

                                B.

     To the extent that petitioners contend that EPA's risk 
analysis was flawed insofar as its study of "plausible misman-
agement" scenarios was inadequate, petitioners focus only on 
the solvent isophorone.  EPA's approach, as illustrated by its 
examination of isophorone, involved gathering data on those 
industry categories (known as "standard industry classifica-
tions", or "SIC"s) that might include facilities that use isopho-
rone as a solvent, mailing preliminary questionnaires to facili-
ties within those SICs, and then mailing more detailed, 

__________
     9 Merely disputing EPA's evaluation of the impracticality of 
examining what presently is an unknown number of solvent waste 
combinations, as petitioners do, is not the same as demonstrating 
that EPA abused its discretion to limit the scope of its rulemaking 
under s 261.11(a)(3).  Because we conclude that EPA did not abuse 
its discretion in analyzing only the solvents, we need not be 
detained by EPA's contention that petitioners failed in their initial 
brief to make an "arbitrary and capricious" challenge but relied 
instead on the broader contention that EPA had acted contrary to 
its listing regulation.

"Section 3007"10 questionnaires to those facilities for whom 
follow-up was warranted.  Contending that EPA's initial liter-
ature search was insufficiently thorough to target all relevant 
SICs, petitioners argue first, that a number of isophorone 
users were discovered through "pure serendipity" when they 
were mailed surveys for other reasons, and that there thus is 
no way of knowing how many remaining isophorone users 
exist, and second, that EPA has not accounted for all known 
domestic and imported quantities of isophorone in the United 
States.  More fundamentally, petitioners assert that the at-
tempt to conduct a comprehensive industry survey was flawed 
from the beginning, and that a "random sampling" would 
have been a preferred approach, because the solvents are 
potentially used by so many facilities in so many different 
industries.  As a result, petitioners conclude, EPA mistakenly 
assumed that it had isolated all potential isophorone misman-
agement scenarios and improperly disregarded the "presump-
tive" mismanagement scenario of landfill disposal on the basis 
that this scenario did not match EPA's empirical data.

     Upon considering petitioners' challenge to EPA's methodol-
ogy, we hold that petitioners fail to show that EPA's action 
was "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or other-
wise not in accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).  
Rather, EPA's "reasons and policy choices ... conform to 
'certain minimal standards of rationality'...."  Small Refin-
er Lead Phase-Down Task Force v. EPA, 705 F.2d 506, 520-
21 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (citation omitted).  See also, e.g., Citizens 

__________
     10 The "RCRA s 3007 Solvent Use Questionnaire" was more 
detailed than EPA's preliminary questionnaire, and concerned the 
use of twenty-one chemicals as solvents, including the fourteen 
chemicals at issue here.  EPA sent the s 3007 questionnaire to 
approximately 10% of the facilities to whom the preliminary ques-
tionnaire had been sent, given the responses from most facilities 
indicating either a lack of use of the chemicals as solvents, or small 
volume of use.

to Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402, 416 
(1971).  EPA has demonstrated that a landfilling "presump-
tion" did not necessarily apply in the case of isophorone.  
Rather, EPA concluded that the high organic content of 
isophorone found in EPA's survey called for a presumption of 
thermal treatment, such as incineration, combustion in a 
boiler, or fuel blending, given the fuel value of organic waste 
and the potential for liability arising from landfilling organic 
matter.11  See 61 Fed. Reg. at 42,345;  63 Fed. Reg. at 64,384-
85;  59 Fed. Reg. 66,072, 66,074 (1994).  EPA employed a 
reasonable methodology in reaching this conclusion, both in 
analyzing isophorone data to determine the high organic 
content of the solvent, and in analyzing isophorone treatment 
to compare the presumptive thermal treatment of organic 
waste with the empirical reality of isophorone's disposal.  
While petitioners maintain that EPA's literature search was 
incomplete, EPA's decision to review the relevant literature 
to identify uses of isophorone by SIC code, and to limit its 
review of the publication Chemical Abstracts to a four-year 
period, was well within its discretion.  As EPA pointed out, 
isophorone solvent use is extremely limited, and it is highly 
unlikely that a process that is still in use today would not be 
reported in recent publications.  A four-year research limita-
tion thus was a reasonable choice for EPA to make.  Similar-
ly, petitioners fail to show that EPA's methodology for com-
piling a facilities mailing list, which involved cross-referencing 
the SIC codes relevant to isophorone with other EPA data 
sources, was not reasonably designed to identify and contact 

__________
     11 The only wastes for which EPA's research indicated that 
landfilling might be a plausible management scenario were sludge 
from biological treatment and ash from combustion.  63 Fed. Reg. 
at 64,384.  Because biological treatment and combustion are effec-
tive in destroying solvents, EPA could reasonably conclude that 
these residuals contained at most a de minimis amount of solvent, 
and thus would not pose a sufficient solvent-based risk to warrant 
listing.  Id.

those facilities utilizing isophorone as a solvent.  Such cross-
referencing between the relevant SIC codes and EPA's Toxic 
Release Inventory ("TRI") for all facilities reporting the use 
of other TRI chemicals marks a thorough approach to scan-
ning across facilities to determine possible isophorone users 
that would not otherwise be located.  While there may be 
other ways to approach the task that EPA identified, EPA's 
approach was not arbitrary.

     Furthermore, regarding petitioners' contention that EPA 
overlooked many isophorone-using facilities that were later 
identified through "pure serendipity", EPA points out that all 
of the facilities responding to its initial survey that claimed to 
use isophorone as a solvent were either included in the 
targeted SIC codes or mistakenly responded where their use 
of isophorone did not meet the definition of solvent use.12  
Similarly, a number of responses to the final survey mistak-
enly claimed non-solvent uses of isophorone, and hence the 
final number of reported responses differs from the number 
originally identified as potential survey recipients.  More 
fundamentally, petitioners have provided no basis on which 
the court can conclude that "random sampling" would have 
produced more accurate data.  So far as we can tell from 
petitioners' succinct statement, the advantage of random sam-
pling arises from the fact that it purports to do no more than 
to gather representative facts from which to draw logical 
presumptions as to management scenarios, whereas EPA's 
"industry survey" risks analytical rigidity where the survey 
falls short of its task.  However, EPA did no more than draw 
the logical conclusion of presumptive thermal treatment from 
the high organic content of the isophorone wastes surveyed, a 
conclusion confirmed by empirical waste treatment data and 

__________
     12 The mistaken responses of non-solvent isophorone use are 
recorded in telephone logs and other background documents.

thus supporting the reasonableness of EPA's methodology.13

     Accordingly, we deny the petition for review.

__________
     13 For similar reasons, petitioners' argument that EPA might 
not have accounted for all isophorone produced or imported into the 
United States is a red herring.  Even if EPA's survey did not 
account for all isophorone used as a solvent in the United States, its 
methodology provided a reliable approximation thereof, and thus a 
sound basis on which to presume plausible mismanagement scenar-
ios from the high organic content of the isophorone surveyed, and to 
check that presumption against empirical data.  In any event, 
petitioners concede EPA's point that the term "consumption" in the 
Chemical Economics Handbook--the value of which EPA's analysis 
was based on--includes imports to the United States.  While peti-
tioners argue that EPA's consumption figure is unlikely, as it would 
require United States import and export figures to match, it offers 
no evidence to suggest that the figure is incorrect.

                               