                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 8, 2001    Decided March 15, 2002 

                           No. 00-7261

                       Phillip E. Duckett, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

     Margaret Quick, Director, D.C. Board of Parole, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv00831)

     Beverly G. Dyer, Assistant Federal Public Defender, ar-
gued the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. 
J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Mary L. Wilson, Assistant Corporation Counsel, argued 
the cause for appellees.  With her on the brief were Robert 
Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, Charles L. Reischel, Deputy 

Corporation Counsel, and Edward E. Schwab, Senior Coun-
sel.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  Phillip Duckett petitioned the Unit-
ed States District Court for a writ of habeas corpus, alleging 
that the District of Columbia Board of Parole (BOP) revoked 
his parole in violation of the Due Process Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States.  The district court denied the petition and Duckett 
appealed.  Finding no merit in Duckett's claims, we affirm 
the judgment of the district court, albeit for reasons distinct 
from those given by the district court.

                          I. Background

     In May, 1995 Duckett was released on parole.  Just over a 
year later he was arrested for failing to report to his parole 
officer;  as a result, in October, 1996 the BOP revoked his 
parole.  After unsuccessfully challenging the revocation in the 
courts of the District of Columbia, Duckett petitioned the 
district court for a writ of habeas corpus.  Because the BOP 
could not locate a usable audiotape recording of the original 
parole revocation hearing, it granted Duckett a new hearing.

     Duckett, who had the assistance of counsel at this second 
hearing, raised two defenses.  First, he argued that he did 
not know he was required to report and denied that his parole 
officer told him to report.  Second, Duckett argued that 
because he had found a job and a place to live and had stayed 
out of trouble, the BOP should not revoke his parole based 
upon a minor violation.  Nonetheless, the BOP again revoked 
Duckett's parole because of his failure to report.

     Duckett renewed his habeas petition, which was denied by 
the district court in October, 2000.  The district court con-
cluded that Duckett had received all the process he was due 
under Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471 (1972);  the BOP's 
revocation decision was supported by Duckett's admission 

that he failed to report;  and the BOP's failure to follow D.C. 
municipal regulations did not deny Duckett due process.  
Duckett v. Quick, No. 98-0831, slip op. at 2-3 (Oct. 4, 2000).  
Duckett filed a notice of appeal, and the district court issued 
a certificate of appealability.

                           II. Analysis

     "The writ of habeas corpus shall not extend to a prisoner 
unless ... [h]e is in custody in violation of the Constitution or 
laws or treaties of the United States."  28 U.S.C. 
s 2241(c)(3).  Duckett challenges the BOP's revocation of his 
parole as violating in a number of respects his constitutional 
right not to be deprived of liberty without due process of law.

     First, Duckett contends due process entails a substantive 
component requiring the BOP to consider not only whether 
he violated a condition of his parole but also whether "circum-
stances in mitigation suggest that the violation does not 
warrant revocation."  For this Duckett relies principally upon 
Black v. Romano, 471 U.S. 606 (1985).  Although the Court in 
Black did not hold that due process always requires "that the 
factfinder in a revocation proceeding ... be granted discre-
tion to continue probation or parole," it acknowledged that 
"concerns for fundamental fairness would preclude the auto-
matic revocation of probation" in some circumstances.  Id. at 
612, 615 (citing Bearden v. Georgia, 461 U.S. 660, 672 (1983)).  
Furthermore, "where such discretion exists ... the parolee 
or probationer is entitled to an opportunity to show not only 
that he did not violate the conditions, but also that there was 
a justifiable excuse for any violation or that revocation is not 
the appropriate disposition."  Black, 471 U.S. at 612.

     Black is of no help to Duckett because the record does not 
indicate that the BOP revoked his parole based solely and 
mechanically upon its finding he violated a condition of parole, 
and the transcript of the revocation hearing confirms he had 
the opportunity to argue that his violation was excusable and 
that his parole should not be revoked.  Duckett testified that 
he did not recall being told to report to his parole officer, 
presented to the BOP evidence that while on parole he had a 

job and a place to live, and argued against revocation on those 
grounds.  The BOP, however, determined that the reporting 
requirement was one of the most important conditions of 
parole, and that Duckett's violation of that requirement was 
"flagrant."  Thus, the BOP appears to have considered both 
the seriousness of Duckett's violation and the mitigating 
factors he advanced.  As a result, even if due process re-
quires the BOP to have exercised discretion before revoking 
his parole, we cannot conclude that it failed to do so.

     Duckett, noting that the hearing examiner "did not explicit-
ly find that [his] testimony that he did not recall being 
instructed to report back was not credible," and again empha-
sizing the factors militating against revocation, also argues 
that "the record in this case does not support a rational 
conclusion that [he] was not suitable for continued parole."  If 
the BOP's decision were either totally lacking in evidentiary 
support or were so irrational as to be fundamentally unfair, 
then the revocation of his parole indeed would violate due 
process.  See Douglas v. Buder, 412 U.S. 430, 432 (1973) 
(holding that revocation of probation "totally devoid of sup-
port" violates due process);  Bearden, 461 U.S. at 672 (estab-
lishing substantive due process right not to have probation 
revoked due to inability, despite reasonable efforts, to pay 
fines or restitution, unless alternative punishments are inade-
quate).

     Duckett has not made either showing, however.  The BOP 
had before it Duckett's admission that he failed to report, and 
his parole officer's statement that he had instructed Duckett 
upon his release to report back to him on June 5, 1995.  Thus, 
there was evidentiary support for the BOP's conclusion that 
Duckett had violated a condition of his parole.  And revoking 
Duckett's parole for failing to report as instructed was not 
fundamentally unfair.  Unlike the violation at issue in Bear-
den, Duckett's violation was within his control.  Furthermore, 
we think the BOP's conclusion that failing to report as 
directed is a major violation of parole was reasonable;  as the 
BOP explained, parole "is about accountability" and failing to 
report prevents the Government from monitoring a parolee's 
conduct.  See United States v. Manfredonia, 341 F. Supp. 

790, 795 (S.D.N.Y. 1972) ("The requirement to report, to 
account, is centrally and necessarily implied in the probation-
er's status").

     Next, Duckett argues that he was denied due process 
because the BOP failed to produce "a record of the hearing 
sufficient to establish compliance with due process require-
ments."  More specifically, he claims that neither the BOP's 
written decision nor the audiotape of his second revocation 
hearing "documents a finding" that he was told to report.  
The BOP did, however, state as a fact found in its "Order" 
dated July 21, 1999 that Duckett had "[f]ailed to report as 
directed" by his parole officer.  Because the BOP's written 
statement memorialized this finding, it is of no moment that 
there are gaps in the tape of the hearing.

     In a relatively undeveloped argument, Duckett contends 
that he was denied "the right to confront and cross-examine 
adverse witnesses," Morrissey, 408 U.S. at 489, because the 
BOP did not allow him to cross-examine his parole officer and 
did not find good cause why he should not be allowed to do so.  
Indeed, the BOP did not find good cause why the officer's 
testimony had to be admitted in documentary form, thereby 
depriving Duckett of the opportunity to cross-examine him.  
The right to cross-examine witnesses can be waived, however, 
see Taylor v. United States, 414 U.S. 17, 19-20 (1973) (defen-
dant in criminal trial waived right to cross-examine witnesses 
by failing to attend trial), and two circuits have recognized 
specifically that the right to cross-examine witnesses in a 
parole revocation hearing can be waived, see White v. White, 
925 F.2d 287, 291-92 (9th Cir. 1989) (stating Morrissey right 
to cross-examine can be waived but holding parolee's admis-
sion of parole violations did not constitute waiver);  McBride 
v. Johnson, 118 F.3d 432, 438-39 (5th Cir. 1997) (holding 
parolee had "invoke[d]" right of cross-examination by ques-
tioning witness's absence at prior hearing and objecting to 
proffered hearsay testimony).

     There is no indication that Duckett, who was represented 
by counsel at the revocation hearing, asked to cross-examine 
his parole officer.  Indeed, Duckett nowhere asserts that he 

made such a request and, when asked at oral argument, 
Duckett's counsel was unable to assert that Duckett had 
invoked his right at the hearing.  Because Duckett has failed 
to establish that he did not waive his right to cross-examine 
his parole officer, we cannot grant his petition on this ground.  
Cf. Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 468-69 (1938) (burden 
rests on habeas petitioner to establish that he did not waive 
his right to counsel).

     Finally, Duckett presses most vigorously his argument that 
the BOP denied him due process by failing to comply with 
D.C. municipal regulations requiring the BOP to (1) exercise 
discretion in determining whether violation of a condition 
requires revocation of parole, (2) consider certain specific 
factors, and (3) discuss each factor in its written decision.  
D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 28 ss 219.6, 219.8, 219.12.  Duckett 
contends that these regulations, like the regulations govern-
ing the parole determinations at issue in Greenholtz v. In-
mates of the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex, 442 
U.S. 1 (1979), and Board of Pardons v. Allen, 482 U.S. 369 
(1987), create a liberty interest in parole and, most important, 
that a violation of the regulations is therefore a denial of due 
process.

     Although it is obvious that in this case the BOP did not 
comply with the D.C. regulation requiring it to discuss in its 
written decision its consideration of each factor listed in 
s 219.8 of the regulations, the BOP did not thereby deny 
Duckett due process.  Duckett's argument is based upon the 
erroneous assumptions that his liberty interest in remaining 
on parole arose from the regulations governing parole revoca-
tion, and that therefore due process required the BOP to 
comply with the regulations.  In fact, Duckett's constitutional 
interest in remaining free on parole was independent of any 
regulation governing revocation procedures.  Morrissey, 408 
U.S. at 480-82.  Moreover, even when a liberty interest does 
arise from a state or local regulation, the procedures required 
before a person may be deprived of his constitutional right to 
liberty are derived not from the regulation but from the 
Constitution itself.  See Greenholtz, 442 U.S. at 14-16 (dis-
cussing procedures required by the Constitution).  The gen-

eral rule is that "[o]nce state law defines the substance, 
constitutional law establishes the minimum procedures."  Ar-
chie v. City of Racine, 847 F.2d 1211, 1217 (7th Cir. 1988);  
see also Brandon v. District of Columbia Board of Parole, 
823 F.2d 644, 648-49 (D.C. Cir. 1987) ("state procedural law 
requirements must be enforced in state courts under state 
law").  Therefore, Duckett's argument that due process re-
quired the BOP to follow its own regulations must fail.  The 
procedures required by due process before one's parole may 
be revoked, set out in Morrissey were, as we have held, 
provided to Duckett to the extent they were not waived by 
him.

     Duckett invokes yet another claimed liberty interest, name-
ly, that of keeping his good time credits, which he claims were 
"effectively invalidated" when the BOP revoked his parole.  
See Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539 (1974).  Because Duck-
ett had a liberty interest in remaining on parole, and the 
parole revocation procedures required under Morrissey and 
provided to Duckett are more extensive than those required 
under Wolff for revocation of good time credits, Wolff, 418 
U.S. at 563-72, Duckett's loss of good time credits could not 
have violated the requirements of due process.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the district 
court denying Duckett's petition for a writ of habeas corpus is

                                                                 Affirmed.

                                           