                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 5, 2000      Decided June 30, 2000 

                           No. 99-7180

                       Rosemarie Marra and 
                   Marrecon Enterprises, S.A., 
                    Appellants/Cross-Appellees

                                v.

                    Vaso Papandreou, et al., 
                    Appellees/Cross-Appellants

                        Consolidated with 
                             99-7191

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (96cv01535)

     David G. Leitch argued the cause for appellants/cross-
appellees.  With him on the briefs were John G. Roberts, Jr. 
and Catherine E. Stetson.

     Joseph L. Barloon argued the cause for appellees/cross-
appellants.  With him on the brief were Richard L. Brusca 
and Rachel Mariner.

     Before:  Silberman and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Buckley, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Silberman.

     Silberman, Circuit Judge:  The district court dismissed 
Rosemarie Marra's breach of contract action against the 
Greek government, concluding that a forum-selection clause 
in the contract compelled her to sue in Greece.  Marra 
appeals, arguing that the Greek government's actions official-
ly "revoking" the contract as a whole bar it from relying on 
the forum-selection provision.  We affirm.

                                I.

     In 1994 the Greek Ministry of Tourism announced an 
international tender for licenses to operate ten casinos in 
specified locations throughout Greece.  A group of investors, 
including appellant, formed a consortium that submitted a $44 
million bid for a license to operate a casino in Flisvos, a 
location just outside of Athens.  The consortium submitted 
the highest bid for the Flisvos site, and then-Minister of 
Tourism Dionyssis Livanos issued an official resolution grant-
ing the license to the consortium.  The license gave the 
consortium the right to construct and operate a luxury casino 
complex in partnership with the Greek government, which 
would receive in exchange both an annual fee and a percent-
age of the casino's profits each year;  after thirty years, 
ownership of the complex would pass from the consortium to 
the Greek government.  The license also contained a forum-
selection clause which (according to the translation offered by 
Marra and accepted by the district court) provided as follows:

     [A]ny dispute or disagreement between the State or the 
     National Tourism Organization and the [consortium] aris-
     ing from the application of this license, the interpretation 
     or performance of its terms, the extent of the rights and 
     obligations of the State and the holder of the license, and in 
     
     general any matter that may occur concerning a license, 
     shall be settled by the Greek courts.
     
Marra v. Papandreou, 59 F. Supp. 2d 65, 76 (D.D.C. 1999) 
("Papandreou II").

     Shortly after the consortium secured the license, matters 
began to go awry.  According to Marra, local political opposi-
tion against the construction of a casino at Flisvos developed, 
prompting Minister Livanos to resign and the Greek govern-
ment to begin negotiations with the consortium towards 
relocating the planned casino complex to a different site near 
Athens.  These political complexities were compounded when 
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou resigned because of 
illness, and a new administration took office while relocation 
negotiations were underway.  For reasons that are not en-
tirely clear from the record, the new administration was 
unfavorably disposed to the consortium's project, and began 
exploring avenues for "recalling" the license.  These efforts 
resulted in Minister Livanos's successor, appellee Vaso Pa-
pandreou, issuing a resolution identifying legal defects in the 
licensing process, and accordingly "revok[ing], from the time 
it came into effect" the Ministry of Tourism's earlier action 
granting the Flisvos license to Marra and her partners.

     While most of the partners in the consortium began legal 
proceedings in Greece challenging the legality of the license 
revocation, Marra--who owned a nine percent interest in the 
consortium--pursued a different strategy.  She sued in the 
district court, seeking $1.6 billion in damages from Vaso 
Papandreou and other Greek government entities ("the Greek 
government") for breach of contract and unlawful expropria-
tion of property.  The Greek government moved to dismiss 
Marra's claim, arguing, among several alternative grounds for 
dismissal, that it was immune from suit under the Foreign 
Sovereign Immunities Act, 28 U.S.C. ss 1330, 1602-1611.  
Marra responded that the Greek government's attempts to 
secure American investment in its casinos brought it within 
the "commercial activity" exception to the FSIA. See id. at 
s 1605(a)(2).  The district court permitted Marra limited 
jurisdictional discovery--including the right to depose senior 

Greek government officials--to determine whether the FSIA 
exception was applicable.  The Greek government filed a 
petition for a writ of mandamus in this court, asking us to 
vacate the district court's discovery order.

     We granted the Greek government's petition.  See In re 
Papandreou, 139 F.3d 247 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("Papandreou I").  
While we agreed with the district court that the information 
sought from the Greek officials was potentially relevant to 
determining the validity of the Greek government's FSIA 
defense, see id. at 252-53, we noted that a "district court 
authorizing discovery to determine whether [FSIA] immunity 
bars jurisdiction must proceed with circumspection, lest the 
evaluation of the immunity itself encroach unduly on the 
benefits the immunity was to ensure."  Id. at 253.  Since the 
Greek government had asserted several other defenses that 
were either "jurisdictional or ha[d] jurisdictional overtones," 
id. at 254, we directed the district court to consider such 
"alternative non-merits routes to dismissal" before reaching 
the FSIA issue.  Id. at 256.  We also observed that, if the 
district court were to dismiss Marra's suit on forum non 
conveniens grounds, any such dismissal "could not ... be 
subject to conditions, e.g., a condition that defendants promise 
to submit to the jurisdiction of another court."  Id. at 256 n.6.

     Following our decision in Papandreou I, the Greek govern-
ment moved to dismiss Marra's complaint on the grounds that 
her suit was barred by the license's forum-selection clause, 
and that the District of Columbia was a forum non conveniens 
for Marra's action.  Applying the standard set forth in The 
Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Oil Co., 407 U.S. 1 (1972), the 
district court concluded that the forum-selection provision 
was enforceable, and that its terms compelled Marra to file 
her suit in Greece.  See Papandreou II, 59 F. Supp. 2d at 77.  
The court also rejected Marra's argument that the Greek 
government's revocation of the Flisvos license "estopped" it 
from relying on a forum-selection clause within that license.  
The district court observed that Marra's position, if accepted, 
would "put[ ] the cart before the horse," requiring it to 
adjudicate the merits of the Greek government's substantive 
defense in order to determine whether the Greek government 

could rely on the forum-selection clause.  Id. at 70.  Accord-
ingly, the district court dismissed Marra's suit, but added two 
conditions to the dismissal to ensure that its decision did not 
prejudice Marra's ability to refile her suit in Greece:  the 
Greek government would have to waive any applicable statute 
of limitations if Marra filed suit in Greece within six months 
of the dismissal, and would have to appoint an agent in the 
United States to receive service of process in the suit.  See 
id. at 77.  Marra appeals the district court's dismissal of her 
case.  The Greek government cross-appeals, arguing that the 
conditions imposed by the district court violated our mandate 
in Papandreou I.

                               II.

                                A.

     We have a threshold question:  did the district court have 
jurisdiction to dismiss the case based on the forum-selection 
clause?  In Papandreou I we directed the district court to 
consider alternative defenses before adjudicating the Greek 
government's FSIA defense.  But we recognized the district 
court's discretion to do so was limited by Steel Co. v. Citizens 
for a Better Environment, 523 U.S. 83 (1998), in which the 
Supreme Court held that a federal court must establish its 
jurisdiction to hear a case before adjudicating its merits.  We 
concluded that Steel Company compelled the district court to 
address only "non-merits routes to dismissal," Papandreou I, 
139 F.3d at 256;  see also Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon Oil Co., 
526 U.S. 574, 585 (1999) (courts have discretion to "choose 
among threshold grounds for denying audience to a case on 
the merits"), and considered whether four alternative defens-
es advanced by the Greek government met that definition.  
We thought that three of these defenses--standing, personal 
jurisdiction, and forum non conveniens--were "jurisdictional" 
in the Steel Company sense, while the fourth--the Act of 
State doctrine--was not.  See Papandreou I, 139 F.3d at 
255-56.

     So we now must decide whether the district court's disposi-
tion of the case on forum-selection clause grounds was such a 
"non-merits route to dismissal."  To be sure, we did not state 

that the three threshold defenses discussed in Papandreou I 
were the only options available to the district court.  But it 
could be argued that a forum-selection clause inquiry requires 
a court to make "an assumption of law-declaring power," id. 
at 255, in a manner that, for instance, a forum non conveniens 
inquiry does not.  For while the validity of a forum-selection 
clause can turn on factors traditionally associated with forum 
non conveniens--such as whether the chosen forum is "seri-
ously inconvenient for the trial of the action," see The Bre-
men, 407 U.S. at 16--a court must also address issues that 
would be conventionally understood as going to the "merits" 
of a contract dispute.  Indeed, in the decision under review 
the district court examined whether Marra had entered into 
the license's forum-selection clause voluntarily.1 See Papan-
dreou II, 59 F. Supp. 2d at 70-71;  see also The Bremen, 407 
U.S. at 15 (forum-selection clause is valid unless opposing 
party can show "that enforcement would be unreasonable and 
unjust, or that the clause was invalid for such reasons as 
fraud or overreaching").

     But there is considerable weight on the other side of the 
scale as well.  A forum-selection clause is understood not 
merely as a contract provision, but as a distinct contract in 
and of itself--that is, an agreement between the parties to 
settle disputes in a particular forum--that is separate from 
the obligations the parties owe to each other under the 
remainder of the contract.  See Northwestern Nat'l Ins. Co. 
v. Donovan, 916 F.2d 372, 376 (7th Cir. 1990).2  Thus when a 
court determines that a forum-selection clause is enforceable, 
it is not making "an assumption of law-declaring power" vis-a-

__________
     1 The district court concluded that Marra had voluntarily entered 
into the forum-selection provision, a conclusion that she does not 
challenge in this appeal.

     2 This notion of "severability," first endorsed by the Supreme 
Court in the arbitration clause context, see Prima Paint Corp. v. 
Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U.S. 395 (1967), was extended to 
forum-selection provisions in Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., 417 U.S. 
506, 519 n.14 (1974).  See also Haynsworth v. The Corporation, 121 
F.3d 956, 963 (5th Cir. 1997).

vis other provisions of the contract.  While this does not 
resolve the Steel Company inquiry--it could still be said that 
a court exercising a law-declaring power with respect to the 
forum-selection provision is problematic--it focuses the ques-
tion on the clause itself, removing any implication that the 
district court in assessing the forum-selection clause neces-
sarily also is reaching the "merits" of the parties' substantive 
claims about the Flisvos license as a whole.  Moreover, while 
the forum-selection clause defense is a creature that has 
evaded precise classification,3 most courts and commentators 
have characterized it as a venue objection analogous to a 
forum non conveniens motion or motion for transfer of venue 
under 28 U.S.C. s 1404(a).  See 15 Wright, Miller & Cooper, 
Federal Practice and Procedure s 3803.1 (2d ed. 1986);  cf. 
Stewart Organization, Inc. v. Ricoh Corp., 487 U.S. 22 (1988) 
(forum-selection clause considered as a factor in a section 
1404(a) motion);  Commerce Consultants Int'l, Inc. v. Vetrerie 
Riunite S.p.A., 867 F.2d 697 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (affirming 
district court's dismissal of a case for improper venue under 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(3) after defendants raised forum-
selection clause defense).  This analogy to venue is sensible 
enough;  as Judge Posner has observed, a forum-selection 
clause is best understood as a potential defendant's ex ante 
agreement to waive venue objections to a particular forum.  
See Donovan, 916 F.2d at 375-76.  Accordingly while the 
district court's inquiry into the enforceability of the license's 
forum-selection clause resembled in certain respects a "mer-

__________
     3 Indeed, there is some doubt concerning the appropriate proce-
dural vehicle for giving effect to a forum-selection provision.  See, 
e.g., Haynsworth, 121 F.3d at 961 (noting the "enigmatic question of 
whether motions to dismiss on the basis of forum-selection clauses 
are properly brought as motions under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1), 
12(b)(3), or 12(b)(6), or 28 U.S.C. s 1406(a)");  Frietsch v. Refco, 
Inc., 56 F.3d 825, 830-31 (7th Cir. 1995);  Leandra Lederman, Note, 
Viva Zapata!  Toward a Rational System of Forum-Selection 
Clause Enforcement in Diversity Cases, 66 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 422, 
432-35 (1991) (observing that defendants "invoke an assortment of 
rules and concepts"--including subject matter jurisdiction, personal 
jurisdiction, and venue--to transfer or dismiss cases on forum-
selection clause grounds).

its" determination of the sort proscribed by Steel Company, 
there are sound reasons for taking the contrary view.

     We need not resolve this question, however, because of the 
Greek government's clarification of its position at oral argu-
ment.  Counsel explained that the Greek government's reli-
ance on the forum-selection clause in the district court should 
properly be understood as a waiver of its FSIA defense with 
respect to the clause.  We agree, and reject Marra's descrip-
tion of this as an impermissible "selective waiver" of the 
Greek government's sovereign immunity prerogatives.  If the 
Greek government were sued by Marra for breach of two 
different contracts, it certainly would have the prerogative to 
waive a sovereign immunity defense with respect to one of 
the contracts and invoke that defense for the other.  As we 
discussed above, a similar situation is presented here, since a 
forum-selection clause, properly understood, is a separate 
contract in which the parties agree to venue;  we therefore 
see no reason why the Greek government should not be able 
to waive its FSIA defense with respect to the forum-selection 
clause, but retain that immunity with respect to the remain-
der of the license.  Therefore the district court had jurisdic-
tion to address the Greek government's forum-selection 
clause defense.

                                B.

     It is clear to us that the forum-selection clause, if enforce-
able, requires Marra to file her suit in Greece.  The clause is 
broadly written, encompassing (even according to Marra's 
translation) "any dispute or disagreement" between the par-
ties "arising from the application of this license, the interpre-
tation or performance of its terms ... and in general any 
matter that may occur concerning a license."  Marra points to 
language later in the clause stating that the licensee agrees to 
"submit himself to the jurisdiction of the Greek courts," and 
argues that this sentence "indicates that the parties anticipat-
ed the forum-selection clause to apply to actions brought by 
the Greek State against the licensee for breach of the terms of 
the license," and not to suits by Marra against the Greek 

government.  We simply cannot accept that interpretation;  
nothing in this sentence in any way modifies the broad 
language that precedes it.4

     This brings us to the more difficult issue of the clause's 
enforceability.  In The Bremen, the Supreme Court an-
nounced that forum-selection provisions are presumptively 
enforceable, jettisoning the longstanding American judicial 
hostility to forum-selection clauses as founded in the "parochi-
al concept that all disputes must be resolved under our laws 
and in our courts."  407 U.S. at 9;  see also Vimar Seguros y 
Reaseguros, S.A. v. M/V Sky Reefer, 515 U.S. 528, 537-38 
(1995).  Marra does not point to factors typically relied on by 
litigants seeking to avoid enforcement of forum-selection 
clauses-for instance, that the clause is the product of fraud or 
that its enforcement would contravene a strong public policy 
of the forum in which suit is brought, see The Bremen 407 
U.S. at 10, 15-19-to overcome The Bremen's presumption of 
validity.  Rather, she argues that the Greek government 
should be estopped from availing itself of a forum-selection 
clause that is part of a contract that it professes to have 
"revoked."

     Each party's position produces an anomaly.  Marra notes 
that the Greek government's resolution revoking the Flisvos 
license was retroactive in effect, legally "extinguishing" the 
license as of the date it issued;  if that is so, she asks, how can 
the Greek government now seek refuge in a provision of a 
nonexistent license?  The Greek government responds that it 

__________
     4 As noted above, Marra's suit also includes an expropriation 
count.  This count, however, simply realleges and incorporates the 
paragraphs of her complaint pertaining to her breach of contract 
claim, and adds the following sentence:  "By means of their arbi-
trary, capricious, unjustified and unlawful revocation of plaintiff's 
license, defendants have expropriated plaintiffs' valuable property 
rights without providing prompt, adequate or effective compensa-
tion and therefore in violation of international law." Since Marra's 
expropriation claim is wholly derivative of the Greek government's 
alleged breach of the Flisvos license, it certainly presents a dispute 
"concerning a license" that is covered by the forum-selection provi-
sion.

is no less illogical to allow someone to sue under a contract 
while at the same time claiming not to be bound by a 
provision within that contract.  Moreover, in the Greek gov-
ernment's view, Marra is trapped in a lose-lose situation in 
her attempt to pursue litigation in the United States:  either 
the license was indeed lawfully revoked and she has no cause 
of action, or the license is valid and she is bound by the 
license's terms to pursue her case in the Greek courts.

     While there is no entirely satisfactory answer to this conun-
drum, we think that the Greek government has the stronger 
position.  Marra relies heavily on the implications that flow, 
under well-settled principles of contract law, from a party's 
"repudiation" of a contract.  Such a repudiation relieves the 
other party from performing its obligations under that con-
tract, see 13 Williston, Contracts s 39:37 (4th ed. 2000);  to 
put it another way (and in the way preferred by Marra), once 
a party repudiates a contract, it has no right to demand 
performance from the non-repudiating party.  This rule, in 
Marra's view, precludes the Greek government from "revok-
ing" the Flisvos license--and repudiating its obligations to 
Marra--at the same time that it avails itself of the forum-
selection clause.

     The "repudiation" shoe does not quite fit here, for two 
reasons.  Adherence to the forum-selection clause is not an 
obligation owed by Marra to the Greek government, but a 
condition precedent to suit under the contract, binding equal-
ly on both parties.  This is a distinction with a difference, 
since the "rationale behind the rule that a repudiation of a 
contract by one party will excuse the other party from the 
duty to perform contractual obligations and conditions, is the 
prevention of economic waste, in the sense that, following a 
clear repudiation, the other party should not be required to 
perform the formal, economically wasteful, and useless act of 
further performing."  Id.  This purpose of preventing "waste-
ful" and "useless" acts of performance is not served in any 
way by excusing Marra from compliance with the forum-
selection provision.  Moreover, the rule urged by Marra is 
contrary to the conceptual understanding, noted above, of a 
forum-selection clause as severable from the contract in which 

it is contained.  Therefore while the Greek government's 
denial of its contractual obligations to Marra relieves her of 
her duty to perform her side of the contract's terms (for 
instance, she is no longer obligated to pay her annual license 
fee), that action does not work a repudiation of the forum-
selection clause unless it is specifically directed at the clause 
itself.  Were this not the case, as the Greek government 
correctly points out, the value of a forum-selection clause 
would be significantly diminished, since it will often be the 
case that a plaintiff can plausibly allege that the defendant's 
nonperformance constitutes a "repudiation" of its contractual 
obligations precluding it from recourse to the clause.

     It is therefore understandable that Marra can point to no 
authority extending this general principle of contract law to 
preclude a party from relying on a forum-selection clause in a 
contract.  On the contrary, the Second Circuit has rejected 
this argument in the closely analogous context of a challenge 
to the enforcement of an arbitration clause in its oft-cited 
decision in Kulukundis Shipping Co. v. Amtorg Trading 
Corp., 126 F.2d 978 (2d Cir. 1942) (Frank, C.J.).  See also Sky 
Reefer, 515 U.S. at 534 (noting that "foreign arbitration 
clauses are but a subset of foreign forum selection clauses in 
general").  In Kulukundis, a defendant in a contract action 
sought to stay the suit pending arbitration pursuant to an 
arbitration clause in the contract.  The plaintiff--like Marra 
here--responded that the defendant's denial of the contract's 
existence barred it from recourse to the arbitration clause 
therein.  The Second Circuit rejected the plaintiff's estoppel 
theory, drawing on a principle of contract law that is echoed 
before us by the Greek government:

     As Williston remarks:  "A person who repudiates a contract 
     wrongfully cannot sue upon it himself, but if he is sued 
     upon it, he can be held liable only according to the terms of 
     the contract.  If, therefore, an arbitration clause amounts 
     to a condition precedent ... the defendant can be held 
     liable only if that condition is performed, prevented or 
     waived."
     
     Arbitration under the [contract] here was a condition pre-
     cedent.
     
Kulukundis, 126 F.2d. at 988 (citing 6 Williston, Contracts 
s 1921 (rev. ed. 1938)) (ellipsis added).  So too here;  under 
the terms of the Flisvos license, Marra was obliged to sue in 
the Greek courts in order to recover for breach of the license.  
The Greek government wins, in our view, the battle of dueling 
absurdities.

     We might have reached a different conclusion had there 
been a dispute as to whether the Flisvos license had been 
voluntarily agreed to by the parties.  Then it could be 
argued--even if one accepts, as we do, the position that a 
forum-selection clause is severable from the contract contain-
ing it--that if the parties never entered into a contract in the 
first place, they by definition did not agree to the forum-
selection clause, either.  Cf. Kulukundis, 126 F.2d at 986, 
988-89 (rejecting estoppel theory, but holding that district 
court must adjudicate the issue of whether parties entered 
into an agreement at all before submitting case to arbitrator).  
But the district court determined, and Marra does not chal-
lenge on appeal, that she freely entered into a broadly 
worded forum-selection agreement;  to borrow a formulation 
from the arbitration clause context, Marra offers no challenge 
to the "making of the agreement" between the parties to 
adjudicate their disputes in Greece.  Prima Paint, 388 U.S. 
at 404.  To the contrary, the event that supposedly renders 
the Flisvos license void ab initio took place after the making 
of this agreement.  If we were to hold that the validity of a 
contract and that of a forum-selection clause contained within 
it are unavoidably linked in this situation, then two parties 
can never agree to a binding provision in a contract, designat-
ing a forum for the resolution of disputes that might arise 
from supervening events calling into question that contract's 
validity.  That outcome could not be squared with the strong 
presumption in favor of the enforcement of forum-selection 
clauses established by The Bremen and subsequent Supreme 
Court cases.

                               III.

     We now turn, briefly, to the Greek government's cross-
appeal.  The district court attached two conditions to its 
dismissal of Marra's suit, both of which were designed to 
protect her ability to pursue a remedy in Greece;  the dis-
missal required the Greek government both to waive any 
applicable statute of limitations defense should Marra refile 
her suit in Greece within six months of the dismissal, and to 
appoint an agent to receive process in the United States.  
The Greek government argues that these conditions run afoul 
of our decision in Papandreou I, where we noted that a 
subsequent district court dismissal of the suit on non-FSIA 
grounds could not be accompanied by conditions on the Greek 
government.  See 139 F.3d at 256 n.6.

     Unlike Marra's appeal, this cross-appeal presents no onto-
logical dilemmas.  Indeed, as it turns out, it does not present 
a question at all.  Marra did not file a suit in Greece within 
the six-month period following dismissal set forth by the 
district court, and at oral argument she (understandably, 
since she has not filed suit) disavowed any interest in serving 
process on the Greek government in the United States.  The 
questions raised by the cross-appeal are therefore moot.

                             * * * *

     For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district 
court is affirmed, and the cross-appeal is dismissed.

                                                      So ordered.

          