                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 8, 2002   Decided November 15, 2002 

                           No. 01-1336

             Lee Lumber and Building Material Corp., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

               On Petition for Review and Cross-Application for 
                    Enforcement of an Order of the National 
                         Labor Relations Board

     James S. Frank argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs was Steven M. Post.

     Frederick C. Havard, Supervisory Attorney, National La-
bor Relations Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With 
him on the brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, 
John H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. 

Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Bridget 
O'Connor, Attorney.  Jill A. Griffin, Attorney, entered an 
appearance.

     Before:  Sentelle, Rogers, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Lee Lumber and Building Materi-
al Corporation petitions for review of a National Labor 
Relations Board (NLRB) decision, while the Board cross-
applies for enforcement.  The Board held that the company 
committed several unfair labor practices, including an unlaw-
ful refusal to bargain, and ordered it to cease and desist from 
such practices.  We read the scope of the Board's decision as 
applied to Lee Lumber to be significantly more limited than 
does the company, and accordingly we do not reach some of 
the broader points upon which the company requests rulings.  
We deny Lee Lumber's petition and grant the Board's cross-
application for enforcement.

                                I

     Lee Lumber's petition brings this case to us for the second 
time, twelve years after the events from which it originally 
arose.  In 1997, we reviewed an earlier Board decision that 
held that the company committed a number of violations of 
sections 8(a)(1) and (5) of the National Labor Relations Act 
(NLRA), 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1) & (5), and that (inter alia) 
ordered the company to bargain with Carpenter Local No. 
1027.  Lee Lumber and Building Material Corp. v. NLRB 
(Lee Lumber I), 117 F.3d 1454 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  We affirmed 
the Board's decision in all respects but two, and remanded 
the case for further proceedings.  Id. at 1456, 1458.  Our 
earlier opinion sets forth in detail the facts and procedural 
history that we review here.

                                A

     In October 1988, the NLRB certified Carpenter Local 1027 
as the exclusive bargaining representative of petitioner's mill 

shop employees.  The company and the union entered into a 
collective bargaining agreement that was effective from May 
26, 1989, through May 25, 1990.  In February 1990, the union 
informed the company that it wanted to begin negotiating for 
a renewal contract.  Around that time, the employees con-
ducted a straw poll that indicated that a majority still wished 
to be represented by the union.

     Sometime after the poll, two employees prepared and be-
gan circulating a petition seeking decertification of the union.  
A majority of the employees signed the petition, and the 
company allowed the employees to take paid time off from 
work to bring the petition to the Board's regional office, 
notwithstanding the company's general rule against payment 
for time spent away from work on personal business.  It also 
assisted the employees with transportation and parking ex-
penses.  On March 29, the union filed its first unfair labor 
practice charge against Lee Lumber, alleging illegal assis-
tance to the employees' decertification efforts.  On April 11, 
relying on the pending decertification petition, the company 
refused to bargain with the union.  On May 8, however, after 
the union filed another unfair labor practice charge alleging 
an unlawful refusal to bargain, the company agreed to negoti-
ate.

     The parties held the first of five bargaining sessions on 
May 23 and the last on June 25.  By the end of those 
sessions, they had almost reached agreement on a new con-
tract, and had scheduled a sixth session for July 3.  On July 
2, however, the company received a second petition signed by 
a majority of employees, this one stating that the group 
"hereby decertified [the union]."  Upon receiving the petition, 
the company refused to bargain further, and subsequently 
withdrew its recognition from the union and made unilateral 
changes in the unit employees' terms and conditions of em-
ployment.  Thereafter, the union filed additional unfair labor 
practice charges against the company.

     On February 27, 1992, the NLRB issued its initial decision 
in this matter.  306 NLRB 408 (1992).  The Board found that 
Lee Lumber violated sections 8(a)(1) and (5) of the NLRA, 29 

U.S.C. s 158(a)(1) & (5), by providing unlawful assistance to 
the employees who filed the April decertification petition, by 
refusing to bargain with the union in April, and by failing to 
provide the union with requested information.  The Board 
also found that the company violated section 8(a)(5) by again 
refusing to bargain in July, and by later withdrawing recogni-
tion and unilaterally changing the terms and conditions of 
employment.  The Board held that the company could not 
rely on the employees' July petition as objective evidence of 
the union's loss of support, because it was tainted by the 
company's unlawful refusal to bargain in April and by its 
unlawful assistance to the employees' decertification efforts.

     As a remedy, the Board issued an affirmative bargaining 
order, requiring the company to recognize and bargain with 
the union.  It also ordered the company to resume payments 
to a union apprenticeship fund, to make the fund whole for 
past delinquencies, and to post copies of the usual notice 
acknowledging that the Board found that the company had 
violated the NLRA and averring that the company would not 
do so in the future.

     Lee Lumber filed a petition for review in this court on 
March 26, 1992.  The NLRB moved to dismiss the petition 
without prejudice so that it could reconsider, in light of two of 
our intervening decisions,1 its positions on the lawfulness of 
the July withdrawal of recognition and on the appropriateness 
of an affirmative bargaining order.  We granted the Board's 
motion and, four years later, the Board issued a Supplemental 
Decision and Order reaffirming its original decision on both 
issues.  322 NLRB 175 (1996).  The Board held that when an 
employer unlawfully refuses to recognize or bargain with an 
incumbent union, and the union subsequently loses majority 
support, there is a presumption that the employees' disaffec-
tion from the union is the result of the employer's unlawful 
conduct.  Absent unusual circumstances, this presumption of 
taint may be "rebutted only by an employer's showing that 
employee disaffection arose after the employer resumed its 

__________
     1 See Sullivan Indus. v. NLRB, 957 F.2d 890 (D.C. Cir. 1992);  
Williams Enters., Inc. v. NLRB, 956 F.2d 1226 (D.C. Cir. 1992).

recognition of the union and bargained for a reasonable 
period of time without committing any additional unfair labor 
practices that would detrimentally affect the bargaining."  Id. 
at 178 (emphasis added).  The Board held that Lee Lumber 
failed to overcome the presumption because it did not bargain 
for a reasonable period.

     Following issuance of the Supplemental Decision in 1996, 
the company again petitioned for review in this court.  In Lee 
Lumber I, issued in 1997, we held that the Board's rebuttable 
presumption of taint, including its "reasonable period of time" 
requirement, was both "rational" and "consistent with" the 
NLRA.  117 F.2d at 1459.  Noting that "Lee Lumber has 
raised numerous [other] challenges to the Board's handling of 
its case," we affirmed the Board "in all respects" save two.  
Id. at 1462.

     First, we held that the Board inadequately explained its 
application of the reasonable period of time test to Lee 
Lumber.  Although the Board had announced that its deter-
mination of what constituted a "reasonable" period would 
" 'not depend on either the passage of time or on the number 
of meetings between the parties, but instead on what tran-
spired and what was accomplished during the meetings,' " it 
failed to apply this standard in deciding Lee Lumber's case.  
Id. (quoting Supplemental Decision, 322 NLRB at 179).  
Rather, the Board looked primarily at the number of sessions 
the parties had held and the length of time that had passed, 
and apparently ignored the considerable progress the parties 
had made by the time of the break-off in negotiations.  We 
held that the "Board's failure to explain this inconsistency is 
arbitrary," and "remand[ed] the question to the Board for 
correction of this flaw."  Id.  We further suggested that "[o]n 
remand the Board may also wish to provide a fuller explana-
tion of its 'reasonable period of time' standard" because, "[a]s 
it stands now, it is not entirely clear how any of the ... 
factors cut."  Id.

     Second, we criticized the Board's decision to issue an 
affirmative bargaining order.  Such an order "requires a 
company to bargain with the union" and "also imposes a 

'decertification bar' on employees."  117 F.3d at 1460.  As a 
consequence, the "union that is the subject of the bargaining 
order will continue as the employees' representative, regard-
less of the employees' wishes, until a 'reasonable time' has 
passed."  Id. at 1460-61.  We reminded the Board that this 
circuit has "repeatedly held" that the Board may not impose 
an affirmative bargaining order unless it "explain[s] why that 
remedy is appropriate given the facts of that particular case."  
Id. (citing Caterair Int'l v. NLRB, 22 F.3d 1114, 1123 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994);  Williams Enters., 956 F.2d at 1237;  Peoples Gas 
Sys., Inc. v. NLRB, 629 F.2d 35, 46 (D.C. Cir. 1980)).  Since 
the Board did not make "the particularized findings that our 
case law requires," we remanded "with instructions to either 
vacate the order or explain why an affirmative bargaining 
order is necessary given the facts of this case."  Id. at 1462.  
Moreover, "[w]ithout deciding the issue," we expressed "seri-
ous doubt as to how the Board possibly could make a determi-
nation that a bargaining order was appropriate on the facts of 
this case."  Id.

                                B

     In June 2001, the Board issued its Second Supplemental 
Decision and Order, addressing the issues we had remanded.  
334 NLRB No. 62 (2001).  Pursuant to our remand, the 
Board announced that it had reconsidered its "reasonable 
period of time" standard and had concluded that a new rule 
was appropriate.  Although the Board had not previously 
required that a "reasonable period of time" be of any mini-
mum length, it now concluded that "an insulated period of a 
defined length" was necessary and would "provide a measure 
of certainty that [was] lacking under existing law."  Id. at 4.  
Under the new rule, "when an employer has unlawfully 
refused to recognize or bargain with an incumbent union, a 
reasonable period of time for bargaining before the union's 
majority status can be challenged will be no less than 6 
months, but no more than 1 year."  Id. at 1.  To determine 
whether the period will be longer than the mandatory six 
months, the Board said it would employ "a multifactor analy-

sis," using factors "similar to those the Board has been 
examining for years."  Id. at 4.  These include:

     (1) whether the parties are bargaining for an initial 
     contract;  (2) the complexity of the issues being negotiat-
     ed and of the parties' bargaining processes;  (3) the 
     amount of time elapsed since bargaining commenced and 
     the number of bargaining sessions;  (4) the amount of 
     progress made in negotiations and how near the parties 
     are to concluding an agreement;  and (5) whether the 
     parties are at impasse.
     
Id.

     In discussing these factors individually, the Board ad-
dressed the specific concerns raised in our opinion.  First, 
while acknowledging that its prior statements may have been 
misleading, the Board explained that it had not meant to 
imply that the passage of time or the number of meetings is 
irrelevant to whether a reasonable period of time has passed, 
but simply that those factors are not alone dispositive.  334 
NLRB No. 62, at 5.  Second, while it reaffirmed its view that 
the degree of progress toward reaching a contract is a 
relevant factor, the Board explained that "which way the 
factor cuts depends on the context."  Id. at 6.  When "the 
parties have almost reached agreement and there is a strong 
probability that they will do so in the near future," the Board 
said it will view this fact as evidence that a reasonable period 
of time for bargaining has not yet elapsed.  Id.  In light of 
the new six-month mandatory period, however, "if the parties 
are still not close to reaching a contract after bargaining for 6 
months or more (whether or not they have made progress)," 
this factor will weigh in favor of a conclusion that a reason-
able period of time has passed.  Id. at 7.

     The Board then turned to the facts of this case.  It first 
noted that, because Lee Lumber did not bargain for six 
months before refusing to bargain with the union in July 
1990, the company would have breached the six-month rule 
had it been applicable.  Recognizing that application of the 
new rule would be retroactive, however, the Board held that 
even without the six-month rule, a reasonable period of time 

had not elapsed under the multifactor analysis.  Id.  The 
Board noted that the parties had met in only five negotiating 
sessions over the course of little more than a month, and 
concluded that this "brief time spent in bargaining, with few 
bargaining sessions, weigh[ed] heavily against finding that a 
reasonable time had elapsed."  Id. at 8.  It also found that 
the "parties' apparent nearness to concluding a contract, plus 
the fact that the parties were not at impasse--indeed, they 
had scheduled another negotiating session for the day after 
the July petition was presented--strongly demonstrate[d] 
that additional progress in the near future was a real possibil-
ity."  Id.  Those factors, the Board held, outweighed the 
countervailing factors:  that the parties were not bargaining 
for an initial agreement, and that the issues and processes 
were not complex.  Accordingly, the Board reaffirmed its 
earlier conclusions that a reasonable period of time had not 
elapsed, and that Lee Lumber therefore violated section 
8(a)(5) by refusing to bargain, by withdrawing recognition, 
and by unilaterally implementing changes in the terms and 
conditions of employment of unit employees.

     Finally, the Board reconsidered the question of remedy.  It 
declared that "[a]lthough normally we would issue a bargain-
ing order in a case such as this, given the court's observations 
[in Lee Lumber I] and the unfortunate delays of the case here 
at the Board, we recognize that such an order would likely be 
unenforceable."  334 NLRB No. 62, at 8.  Accordingly, the 
Board limited the remedy "to ordering the Respondent to 
cease and desist from further unlawful refusals to bargain."  
Id.  While it kept in place the provision of the original order 
enjoining Lee Lumber from withdrawing recognition from the 
union, the Board said that provision would remain in effect 
only until, after complying with the other provisions of the 
original order, the company "is presented with objective 
evidence sufficient to warrant its challenging the Union's 
majority status again."  Id.

                                II

     As it did in Lee Lumber I, the company raises numerous 
challenges to the Board's decision.  In Lee Lumber I, howev-

er, this court affirmed the Board "in all respects save for (1) 
its application of its 'reasonable period of time' test to the 
facts of this case, and (2) its issuance of an affirmative 
bargaining order."  117 F.3d at 1462.  Accordingly, many of 
the company's current challenges, which simply reassert its 
previous claims, must be dismissed under the law-of-the-case 
doctrine.  These include Lee Lumber's attacks on the Board's 
presumption that an unlawful refusal to bargain with an 
incumbent union taints the union's subsequent loss of majori-
ty support, and on its determination that employers must 
bargain for "a reasonable period of time" to remove that 
taint.  Lee Lumber I expressly affirmed these Board hold-
ings.  Id. at 1458-60.  Also readily dismissed are Lee Lum-
ber's challenges to the Board's determination that the compa-
ny committed unfair labor practices by refusing to bargain in 
April 1990 and by refusing to provide the union with request-
ed information, as well as its challenge to the Board's order 
requiring the company to resume payments to the union 
apprenticeship fund and to make the fund whole for past 
delinquencies.2  All of those arguments were raised in the 
company's briefs in Lee Lumber I,3 and were rejected by this 
court.4

     The " '[l]aw-of-the-case doctrine holds that decisions ren-
dered on the first appeal should not be revisited on later trips 
to the appellate court.' "  McKesson HBOC, Inc. v. Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 271 F.3d 1101, 1106 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (quot-
ing Crocker v. Piedmont Aviation, Inc., 49 F.3d 735, 739 
(D.C. Cir. 1995)).  Accordingly, the only issues left for our 
decision are the two that we remanded for further consider-
ation in 1997.  We consider each of those below.

__________
     2 We note, however, that at oral argument Board counsel stated 
that, at the compliance stage of the Board's proceedings, Lee 
Lumber may contest the extent of its liability for payments to the 
apprenticeship fund.

     3 See Pet'r Br., Lee Lumber I, at 38, 39, 41, 47 (Feb. 21, 1997).

     4 See Lee Lumber I, 117 F.3d at 1458 ("We reject all of the 
remaining challenges that we do not discuss.").

                                A

     The first issue that remains for review is the lawfulness of 
the Board's determination that Lee Lumber did not bargain 
for a reasonable period of time before cutting off negotiations 
in July 1990.  Our role in reviewing the Board's decision is 
limited.  The Supreme Court "has emphasized often that the 
NLRB has the primary responsibility for developing and 
applying national labor policy," and that courts therefore 
must accord its legal rules "considerable deference."  NLRB 
v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc., 494 U.S. 775, 787 (1990).  
We must "uphold a Board rule as long as it is rational and 
consistent" with the NLRA, "even if we would have formulat-
ed a different rule had we sat on the Board," and "even if it 
represents a departure from the Board's prior policy."  Id.  
We "review the Board's factual conclusions" only for "sub-
stantial evidence," and must "uphold the Board's application 
of law to facts unless arbitrary or otherwise erroneous."  
Harter Tomato Prods. Co. v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 934, 937 (D.C. 
Cir. 1998).

     As noted in Part I above, in response to our remand on the 
reasonable time issue, the Board announced a new rule:  
"[W]hen an employer has unlawfully refused to recognize or 
bargain with an incumbent union, a reasonable period of time 
for bargaining before the union's majority status can be 
challenged will be no less than 6 months, but no more than 1 
year."  Second Supplemental Decision, 334 NLRB No. 62 at 
1.  Lee Lumber asks us to overturn the six-month rule, 
contending that it operates as a de facto six-month bargaining 
order and impermissibly interferes with employee free choice.  
We need not, and indeed cannot, reach the merits of this 
argument.  We need not reach them because, at the same 
time the Board announced the new six-month rule, it acknowl-
edged that it would be problematic to apply the rule retroac-
tively to Lee Lumber, and held that "even in the absence of " 
the rule "we would find, under the multifactor analysis, ... 
that a reasonable time had not elapsed."  Id. at 7-8.  Be-
cause, as we discuss below, that finding is reasonable on the 
facts of this case, it is unnecessary for us to consider the 
merits of the six-month rule.

     Moreover, even if the Board had not relied on an indepen-
dent ground in finding Lee Lumber's refusal to bargain 
unlawful, we could not reach the merits of the six-month rule 
because we are without jurisdiction to do so.  Under section 
10(e) of the NLRA, "[n]o objection that has not been urged 
before the Board ... shall be considered by the court, unless 
the failure or neglect to urge such objection shall be excused 
because of extraordinary circumstances."  29 U.S.C. s 160(e);  
see Woelke & Romero Framing, Inc. v. NLRB, 456 U.S. 645, 
665-66 (1982).  Lee Lumber failed to object to the six-month 
rule below, and there are no extraordinary circumstances that 
excuse that failure.  It is true, of course, that the company 
could not have challenged the rule prior to the Second 
Supplemental Decision, since the rule was announced for the 
first time in that decision. But after the decision was issued, 
Lee Lumber could have filed a motion for reconsideration, 
thereby giving the Board an opportunity to consider its 
arguments.  The company's failure to seek Board reconsider-
ation bars our review under section 10(e).  See Woelke, 456 
U.S. at 666 ("Woelke could have objected to the Board's 
decision in a petition for reconsideration or rehearing.  The 
failure to do so prevents consideration of the question by the 
courts.");  Cobb Mechanical Contractors, Inc. v. NLRB, 295 
F.3d 1370, 1378 (D.C. Cir. 2002) ("Even if Cobb could not 
have made [the] argument before issuance of the Board 
decision, its failure to move to reconsider (or reopen the 
record) bars it from raising the issue on appeal.").5

     Lee Lumber's attack on the Board's finding under its 
multifactor analysis, by contrast, is not barred by section 
10(e).  The relevance and applicability of the various factors 
that compose that analysis were issues raised below and 
directly addressed by the Board.  But while we have jurisdic-
tion to consider the company's arguments, we reject them on 
their merits.  We conclude that the Board adequately an-
swered the concerns we raised in remanding the case, and 

__________
     5 See also International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union v. 
Quality Mfg. Co., 420 U.S. 276, 281 n.3 (1975);  Brockton Hosp. v. 
NLRB, 294 F.3d 100, 106 (D.C. Cir. 2002).

hold that its finding that a reasonable period of time had not 
passed was neither arbitrary nor unsupported by substantial 
evidence.

     In making that finding, the Board first noted that the 
company had cut off bargaining after little more than a 
month, and that during that month the parties had held only 
five bargaining sessions.  This "brief time spent in bargain-
ing, with few bargaining sessions, weigh[ed] heavily against 
finding that a reasonable time had elapsed."  Second Supple-
mental Decision, 334 NLRB No. 62, at 8.  Acknowledging 
that its comments on this subject in its first Supplemental 
Decision may have been misleading, the Board explained that 
the weight it placed on the passage of time and number of 
meetings accurately reflected its precedents.  Id. at 5 & n.37.  
We cannot say that the Board's reading of those decisions is 
unreasonable.6  Nor can we say that it is arbitrary for the 
Board--in applying a test aimed at determining whether "a 
reasonable period of time has elapsed"--to consider the actu-
al period of time that did elapse and the number of meetings 
that took place during that time.

     Also relevant to the Board's finding was the "parties' 
apparent nearness to concluding a contract, plus the fact that 
the parties were not at impasse--indeed, they had scheduled 
another negotiating session for the day after the July petition 
was presented."  Id. at 8.  These factors, the Board said, 
"strongly demonstrate[d] that additional progress in the near 
future was a real possibility" and that a reasonable period of 
time had not yet passed.  Id.  Again, the Board cited numer-
ous precedents that were consistent with its explanation of 
the role of the proximity-to-agreement factor, while recogniz-
ing that two others could be viewed as inconsistent;  to the 
extent that the two were inconsistent, the Board overruled 

__________
     6 See Driftwood Convalescent Hosp., 302 NLRB 586, 589 (1991);  
Shangri-La Health Care Ctr., 288 NLRB 334, 334 n.2, 336 (1988);  
Van Ben Indus., 285 NLRB 77, 79 (1987);  W.B. Johnston Grain 
Co., 154 NLRB 1115, 1116 (1965), enf'd, 365 F.2d 582 (10th Cir. 
1966).

them.7  And again, the Board's reading of its own cases is not 
unreasonable.8  Moreover, without commenting on the merits 
of the Board's approach in general, at least in this case, 
where so little time had passed and so few bargaining ses-
sions had taken place, we conclude that it was not arbitrary 
for the Board to take into consideration the fact that the 
employer withdrew recognition from the union just as an 
agreement appeared to be in hand.

     In announcing its decision, the NLRB explained that the 
factors in its multifactor analysis "must be considered togeth-
er," and that "none is dispositive individually or necessarily 
entitled to special weight."  334 NLRB No. 62, at 7.  The 
central question, the Board said, "is whether the union has 
had enough time to prove its mettle in negotiations, so that 
when its representative status is questioned, the employees 
can make an informed choice, without the taint of the employ-
er's prior unlawful conduct."  Id.  This analytic approach is 
neither facially unreasonable nor inconsistent with the 
NLRA.  As we said in Lee Lumber I, the Board's presump-
tion of taint "supports employee free choice because it pre-
vents an employer from 'pointing to an intervening loss of 

__________
     7 See Second Supplemental Decision, 334 NLRB No. 62, at 6 & 
n.47 (citing NLRB cases);  id. at 7 (overruling Brennan's Cadillac, 
231 NLRB 225 (1977), and Tajon, Inc., 269 NLRB 327 (1984)).

     8 See MGM Grand Hotel, 329 NLRB No. 50, at 4 (1999) (holding 
a decertification petition untimely where the parties had made 
substantial progress toward reaching agreement, had few remaining 
issues to resolve, and finalized agreement only days after the 
petition was filed);  Ford Ctr. for the Performing Arts, 328 NLRB 1, 
1-2 (1999) (finding a representation petition untimely where the 
parties were on the verge of complete agreement when the petition 
was filed);  Top Job Bldg. Maint. Co., 304 NLRB 902, 908 (1991) 
(holding that a reasonable time for bargaining had not elapsed 
where the parties were in the midst of negotiations, had resolved 
some questions, and had reasonable prospects of concluding an 
agreement soon);  N.J. MacDonald & Sons, Inc., 155 NLRB 67, 71 
(1965) (finding a decertification petition untimely where very few 
issues remained in dispute, the parties had reduced their agreement 
to writing, and another bargaining session was scheduled).

employee support for the union when such loss of support is a 
foreseeable consequence of the employer's unfair labor prac-
tice.' "  117 F.3d at 1459 (quoting Fall River Dyeing & 
Finishing Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 51 n.18 (1987)).  
Moreover, since the Board's approach is fact-specific, we need 
not consider hypotheticals about the logic of its application to 
other situations.  Because we have no warrant for disputing 
the Board's expert judgment that, on the facts of this case, 
the union did not have "enough time to prove its mettle," we 
are bound to uphold the Board's determination.9

                                B

     The second issue we must consider is the lawfulness of the 
NLRB's order that Lee Lumber cease and desist from refus-
ing to bargain with the union.  The company contends that 
the cease and desist order, combined with the new rule that 
an employer must bargain for at least six months to dissipate 
the taint of an unlawful refusal to bargain, "is effectively a 
per se bargaining order for six months in every case, irre-
spective of the facts."  Pet'r Br. at 21.  As Lee Lumber 
understands the Board's order in this case, it must bargain 
with the union for at least six months, during which time the 
union is insulated from any challenge to its majority status.  
Such a remedy, the company contends, contravenes Lee Lum-
ber I's instruction "to either vacate the order or explain why 

__________
     9 Lee Lumber further argues that even if it were reasonable to 
apply the multifactor test prospectively, the Board should not have 
applied it retroactively to this case.  But application of the test to 
this case "falls squarely within our precedents authorizing retroac-
tivity for agency rules that do not represent a shift from 'a clear 
prior policy.' "  Williams Natural Gas Co. v. FERC, 3 F.3d 1544, 
1554 (1993).  Although the Board "did modify existing law" some-
what, Board precedent "was neither clear nor consistent" at the 
time the union filed its initial charges, District Lodge 64 v. NLRB, 
949 F.2d 441, 448 (1991), and the Board's interpretation and recon-
ciliation of its precedents was reasonable.  Accordingly, retroactive 
application will not produce "substantial inequitable results."  Id. at 
448.

an affirmative bargaining order is necessary given the facts of 
this case."  117 F.3d at 1462.

     We need not decide whether an order like that described 
by Lee Lumber would be permissible, as the company plainly 
misunderstands the nature of the order that the NLRB has 
issued.  The Board did state that "normally we would issue a 
bargaining order in a case such as this."  Second Supplemen-
tal Decision, 334 NLRB No. 62, at 8.  But it also noted this 
court's critical observations in Lee Lumber I, as well as "the 
unfortunate delays of the case here at the Board," and 
concluded that "rather than engender more litigation and 
further delay over the propriety of a bargaining order, we will 
limit our remedy to ordering the Respondent to cease and 
desist from further unlawful refusals to bargain."  Id.  Al-
though the Board "retain[ed] the provision of the [original] 
Order enjoining the Respondent from withdrawing recogni-
tion from the Union," it made clear that the provision would 
remain effective only until, after complying with "the other 
provisions of the Order," the company is "presented with 
objective evidence sufficient to warrant its challenging the 
Union's majority status again."  Id. (citing Levitz, 333 NLRB 
No. 105 (2001)).  Contrary to Lee Lumber's assumption that 
it must continue to bargain for six months regardless of 
whether the union loses the support of a majority of the 
employees, the Board expressly recognized that its "cease 
and desist remedy will not ensure that the Respondent will 
recognize and bargain with the Union for a reasonable period 
of time."  Id. (emphasis added).

     In its briefs and at oral argument, the Board confirmed this 
reading of the remedial order.  According to Board counsel, 
the order bars Lee Lumber from challenging the union's 
majority status only until the company posts the required 
notice to employees and makes the required payments to the 
apprenticeship fund--the "other provisions of the Order" 
referred to in the portion of the Second Supplemental Deci-
sion quoted above.  Thereafter, Lee Lumber may challenge 
the union under the Board's generally applicable standards.10  

__________
     10 The Board has recently revised those standards.  See Levitz, 
333 NLRB No. 105 (2001).

In short, because the employer can challenge the union's 
majority status when presented with sufficient objective evi-
dence, and "the employees can petition for decertification at 
any time," Williams Enters. v. NLRB, 956 F.2d 1226, 1237-38 
(D.C. Cir. 1992), the Board is correct that "this is the kind of 
remedial order that has been endorsed, and distinguished 
from affirmative bargaining orders, by the court of appeals," 
Second Supplemental Decision, 334 NLRB No. 62, at 8-9 
(citing Williams Enters., 956 F.2d at 1237).  We do so again 
today.

                               III

     For the foregoing reasons, we deny Lee Lumber's petition 
for review and grant the Board's cross-application for en-
forcement.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, concurring:  While I join in the 
careful and thorough opinion of the court, I write separately 
to emphasize certain details in the strange history of this 
case, and to offer a suggestion to the litigants herein.  Lest it 
remain buried in the details, it is the National Labor Rela-
tions Board and not Lee Lumber that has for twelve years 
deprived the employees of their right to choose their own 
bargaining representative or to choose none at all.  Because 
Lee Lumber twelve years ago allowed some employees to 
take a petition for decertification for filing on company time, 
and because Lee Lumber paid a few dollars of parking for 
those employees, the National Labor Relations Board has 
resorted to foot dragging, suspicious remands, and even the 
entry of an unlawful bargaining order to prevent the employ-
ees of Lee Lumber from exercising their rights of labor 
democracy under 29 U.S.C. s 157 (2000).  See generally Lee 
Lumber and Building Material Corp. v. NLRB, 117 F.3d 
1454 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  Because the Board's order requires 
Lee Lumber to make a posting admitting its own violations, 
while we have no authority to order it, I would suggest to the 
parties that in fairness, Lee Lumber Company should also 
post the opinions of this court so that the employees might 
know that it was the unlawful acts of the Board and not those 
of Lee Lumber that have deprived them of free choice for 
these many years.

                                                              