                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 7, 2001      Decided July 27, 2001 

                           No. 00-1209

                      CF Industries, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Surface Transportation Board and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

                  Farmland Industries, Inc. and 
                  Koch Pipeline Company, L.P., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                         00-1213, 00-1248

           On Petitions for Review of an Order of the 
                   Surface Transportation Board

                            ---------

     Mitchell F. Hertz argued the cause for petitioners CF 
Industries, Inc. and Farmland Industries.  With him on the 
briefs were Frederic L. Wood, Jeffrey O. Moreno, Scott A. 
Harvey, Jeffrey A. Rosen, Daryl Joseffer and Daniel T. 
Donovan.  James D. Senger entered an appearance.

     John G. Roberts, Jr. argued the cause for petitioner Koch 
Pipeline Company, L.P.  With him on the briefs were Samuel 
M. Sipe, Jr., F. Michael Kail and Jonathan S. Franklin.

     Theodore K. Kalick, Attorney, Surface Transportation 
Board, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the 
brief were Ellen D. Hanson, General Counsel, and John M. 
Nannes, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Robert P. Ni-
cholson, Attorney, and John P. Fonte, Attorney, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice.

     Frederic L .Wood, Jeffrey O. Moreno, Scott A. Harvey, 
Jeffrey A. Rosen, Mitchell F. Hertz, Daryl Joseffer and 
Daniel T. Donovan were on the brief for intervenors CF 
Industries, Inc. and Farmland Industries, Inc.  James D. 
Senger entered an appearance.

     Samuel M. Sipe, Jr., F. Michael Kail, John G. Roberts, Jr. 
and Jonathan S. Franklin were on the brief for intervenor 
Koch Pipeline Company L.P.

     Before:  Edwards, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  In 1996, Koch Pipeline Company, 
L.P. raised shipping rates on its anhydrous ammonia pipeline.  
Pipeline customers CF Industries, Inc. and Farmland Indus-
tries, Inc. challenged the rate increase before the Surface 
Transportation Board (STB).  The Board found the new rates 
unreasonable.  In these consolidated petitions for review, 
Koch disputes the STB's decision to lower the rates, while CF 
and Farmland attack the Board's decision not to lower them 
still further.  We affirm both decisions and deny the petitions 
for review.

                                I

     Anhydrous ammonia is a hazardous compound of nitrogen 
and hydrogen that is used both to manufacture fertilizers and 
as a direct fertilizer application.  A significant amount of the 
compound is produced in Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas, 
and shipped to users in the Midwest.  Demand is seasonal, 
increasing sharply during the spring planting season and to a 
lesser extent in the fall.  During the year, shippers fill large 
storage terminals throughout the Midwest to ensure availabil-
ity when needed.  When the spring comes, the terminals are 
rapidly emptied through deliveries to local retailers, who in 
turn distribute the anhydrous ammonia to farmers for imme-
diate application.  CF Indus., Inc., No. 41685 at 2-3 (S.T.B. 
May 9, 2000) (Final Order).

     The STB inherited the Interstate Commerce Commission's 
(ICC's) jurisdiction over interstate "transportation by pipeline 
... when transporting a commodity other than water, gas, or 
oil."  49 U.S.C. s 15301;  ICC Termination Act of 1995, Pub. 
L. No. 104-88, s 106(a), 109 Stat. 803, 922.  This jurisdiction 
includes anhydrous ammonia pipelines.  See CF Indus., Inc. 
v. FERC, 925 F.2d 476, 478 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (affirming ICC 
jurisdiction over anhydrous ammonia pipelines).  A pipeline 
carrier's rates must be "reasonable" and non-discriminatory, 
49 U.S.C. s 15501, and if the Board determines that they are 
not, it "may prescribe the rate ... to be followed," id. 
s 15503(a), and direct the repayment of overcharges, id. 
s 15904(b)(1), (c)(2).  The Board must consider, "among other 
factors[,] ... the need for revenues that are sufficient, under 
honest, economical, and efficient management, to let the 
carrier provide that transportation," as well as "the availabili-
ty of other economic transportation alternatives."  Id. 
s 15503(b)(2), (3).

     Koch owns one of two pipelines that transport anhydrous 
ammonia to the Midwest in pressurized, liquid form.  Koch's 
pipeline originates in Louisiana and connects that state's 
producers to numerous Midwestern terminals.  The other 
pipeline, owned by the Mid-American Pipeline Company 
(MAPCO), originates in Texas and Oklahoma.  Koch pur-

chased its pipeline from Gulf Central Pipeline Company in 
1988 as part of a $200 million package that also included the 
Gulf Central Storage and Terminal Company and a natural 
gas company.  Koch continued to charge Gulf Central's ship-
ping rates until 1996, when Koch raised its rates.  For the 
locations relevant here, the increases averaged almost 20%.

     CF Industries and Farmland Industries are farmer-owned 
cooperatives that produce anhydrous ammonia in Louisiana 
and ship it to the Midwest via Koch's pipeline.  Both produc-
ers also occasionally ship by rail, and CF ships a significant 
amount of ammonia by barge.  Farmland's production facili-
ties are not located near a river and thus have no barge 
access.  On March 27, 1996, CF Industries filed a complaint 
with the Board, alleging that Koch's rate increases were 
unreasonable.1  Four months later, the STB granted Farm-
land's petition to intervene as a complainant.

     In May 1997, the STB issued an initial order to govern the 
proceedings.  See CF Indus., Inc., No. 41685 (S.T.B. May 14, 
1997) (Initial Order).  Two parts of that order are important 
here.  First, the Board decided that it would only prescribe 
rates at locations where it determined Koch to be "market 
dominant," finding no justification for the agency "to inject 
itself into the pricing of services" where competitive alterna-
tives act "as an effective constraint on a pipeline's rates."  Id. 
at 5.  In assessing the existence of effective competitive 
alternatives, the Board said it would be guided by the railroad 
market dominance guidelines issued by its predecessor agen-
cy, the ICC, and by the precedent developed under those 
guidelines.  Id. at 5 (citing Market Dominance Determina-
tions & Consideration of Prod. Competition, 365 I.C.C. 118, 
129 (1981), aff'd sub nom. Western Coal Traffic League v. 
United States, 719 F.2d 772 (5th Cir. 1983) (en banc), modi-

__________
     1  The complaint also charged that Koch's rates discriminated 
against CF in favor of a Koch affiliate, a charge the STB found 
moot for most of the terminals and rejected on the merits for two.  
Final Order at 28.  CF does not appeal the Board's disposition of 
the discrimination claim.

fied, Product & Geographic Competition, 2 I.C.C.2d 1 
(1985)).2

     Second, the Board stated that for locations where it found 
Koch to be market dominant, it would evaluate Koch's rates 
using the Constrained Market Pricing (CMP) principles artic-
ulated in the ICC's Coal Rate Guidelines.  Id. at 6 (citing 
Coal Rate Guidelines, Nationwide, 1 I.C.C.2d 520 (1985), 
aff'd sub nom. Consolidated Rail Corp. v. United States, 812 
F.2d 1444 (3d Cir. 1987)).3  Under CMP, the Board said, a 
complainant may choose among several rate constraints, in-
cluding the "stand-alone cost" and "revenue adequacy" con-
straints.  Id. at 6.

     In January 1998, CF moved to amend its complaint to add 
a challenge to the rates Koch had charged prior to its 1996 
increase.  CF argued that its amendment merely clarified the 
relief requested in its initial complaint, where it had asked for 
refunds of the rate increases as well as "such other relief as 
the Board deems just and proper."  Compl. p 53.  Koch 
opposed the amendment.

     On May 9, 2000, the STB issued its final decision.  At the 
outset, the STB denied CF's motion to amend its complaint as 
untimely--"having been filed almost 2 years after the initial 
complaint and 4 months after the close of discovery."  Final 
Order at 2 n.4.  It also held that CF was estopped from 
challenging pre-increase rates based on a settlement agree-
ment CF had signed with Koch's predecessor, Gulf Central.  
Id.

__________
     2  See ICC Termination Act s 204(a), 109 Stat. at 941 (providing 
that all ICC orders and regulations shall continue in effect until 
modified or revoked by the STB), reprinted in 49 U.S.C. s 701 
note.

     3  "Notwithstanding the title..., those guidelines are not limited 
to any one commodity.  Coal cases, which typify captive, high-
volume, repetitive rail traffic, were the springboard for our analysis 
because of the prevalence of coal rate challenges."  Rate Guide-
lines--Non-Coal Proceedings, Ex Parte No. 347 (Sub.-No. 2), 1995 
WL 705171 (I.C.C. Dec. 1, 1995).

     The Board then turned to Koch's 1996 rate increases, 
addressing first the question of Koch's market dominance.  
In analyzing this issue, the STB considered several possible 
competitive alternatives to Koch's pipeline, only one of which 
is at issue here:  "intermodal" competition from river barges.4  
The STB concluded--and Koch does not dispute in this 
proceeding--that barge shipping does not compete with the 
pipeline for Farmland's business because Farmland lacks 
access to barge transportation.  Id. at 11.  However, the 
Board also concluded--and this Koch does dispute--that 
barges do not effectively compete with the pipeline for CF's 
transportation to numerous pipeline destination points.  Id. at 
13-17.5

     Having found Koch to be market dominant at a number of 
terminals, the Board went on to ask whether Koch's rate 
increases for service to those terminals were reasonable.  To 
make that determination, the Board applied the revenue 
adequacy test of CMP, which asks whether rates generate 
revenues sufficient to "cover all costs and provide a rate of 
return on investment equal to the current cost of capital."  
Id. at 21 (citing Coal Rate Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 535).  It 
found that, even without the rate increases, Koch would more 
than recover its total investment in the pipeline by the end of 
2000, and that, with the exception of its first year of owner-

__________
     4  In parts of its opinion not challenged in this court, the STB 
found that Koch does not face effective:  (1) "intramodal" competi-
tion from the MAPCO pipeline, because that pipeline originates in 
Texas and Oklahoma rather than Louisiana where complainants are 
located, Final Order at 8;  (2) "geographic" competition from anhy-
drous ammonia produced at other locations, except at the one point 
at which the MAPCO and Koch pipelines cross and share a common 
storage terminal, id. at 17-19;  (3) "product" competition, i.e., the 
ability of farmers to substitute other fertilizer products for anhy-
drous ammonia, id. at 20-21;  or (4) "intermodal" competition from 
trucks or railroads, id. at 8-11.

     5  The STB found that barge shipping does constrain Koch's 
prices to CF at one pipeline destination, which is located on the 
Missouri River at Palmyra, Missouri.  Final Order at 12.  CF does 
not appeal that finding.

ship, Koch's return-on-investment (ROI) "has exceeded its 
cost of capital in all years and by increasingly larger margins 
so that by 1996 its ROI (21.52%) was almost twice the cost of 
capital (11.80%)."  Id. at 26.  The Board concluded that, 
"based on all reliable measures, it is clear that the pipeline is 
earning adequate revenues and that Koch's 1996 rate increas-
es are not warranted."  Id.

     Koch challenges the STB's determinations regarding both 
market dominance and rate reasonableness.  We consider 
those challenges in Parts II and III below.  In a separate 
petition for review, which we briefly address in Part IV, CF 
and Farmland challenge the Board's denial of CF's motion to 
amend its complaint to include an attack on Koch's pre-
increase rates.

                                II

     The STB's market dominance guidelines define "market 
dominance" as "an absence of effective competition, from 
other carriers or modes of transportation, for the traffic or 
movement to which a rate applies."  See Market Dominance, 
365 I.C.C. at 128 (applying the statutory standard for the 
regulation of railroad rates, 49 U.S.C. s 10707(a));  see also 49 
U.S.C. s 15503(b)(3) (requiring STB, when prescribing pipe-
line rates, to consider, inter alia, "the availability of other 
economic transportation alternatives").  " '[E]ffective compe-
tition['] ... means that, if a carrier raises the rate for such 
traffic, then some or all of that traffic will be lost to other 
carriers or modes."  Market Dominance, 365 I.C.C. at 129.  
Such competition, the guidelines state, "serves as a constraint 
on the ability of [the] carrier to raise rates."  Id.  To evaluate 
market dominance, the guidelines employ a "flexible" ap-
proach that rests on "case-by-case" analysis of competitive 
alternatives to a carrier's facility.  Id. at 119.

     In evaluating the effectiveness of barge transport as a 
competitive alternative, the Board first reviewed CF's claim 
that barge transport has qualitative disadvantages compared 
to pipeline transport.  The Board noted that barge companies 
lack sufficient hauling and storage capacity to handle a signif-

icant shift of anhydrous ammonia traffic from pipeline to 
barge;  that barge transport involves higher costs than pipe-
line transport, which could make a shift prohibitively expen-
sive;  that barges, unlike pipelines, are hindered by floods, low 
water, and icing;  and that barge trips take from days to 
weeks, while pipeline injection and withdrawal is essentially 
instantaneous.  See Final Order at 11.  The Board also noted 
CF's evidence that pipelines are a safer mode for transport-
ing a hazardous product like anhydrous ammonia.  Id. at 8.

     Next, the Board considered an "Alternative Inbound 
Study" developed by CF, which indicated that, because of 
insufficient storage capacity at CF's barge destination points, 
it would have to make prohibitively large expenditures or 
investments to shift from pipeline to barge.6  Although Koch 
criticized CF's claim of inadequate storage capacity, the 
Board accepted Koch's criticism only in part, finding that 
Koch's own restatement of CF's study ignored storage costs.  
The Board also considered a "matching" study prepared by 
Koch to demonstrate the effectiveness of barge competition, 
but found Koch's study unreliable.  Id. at 13-14.  The Board 
then consolidated data from both parties and recalculated 
where necessary to account for the problems it had identified.  
Id. at 15.

     Finally, "[a]s a measure of the effectiveness of barge 
competition," the Board "compared Koch's revenues ... un-
der the old rate structure to its revenues under the new rate 
structure, assuming all cost-competitive traffic would be di-
verted."  Id. at 15.  That comparison showed that "Koch's 
revenues for the CF traffic that it would retain--based on its 
increased rates--would exceed pre-increase revenues" at a 
number of terminal points.  Id. As a result, the Board 
concluded that Koch does not face effective barge competition 
at those locations.  Id. at 15 & n.43 (citing Market Domi-
nance, 365 I.C.C. at 128-29, 131;  Aluminum Ass'n Inc., 367 
I.C.C. 475, 489, aff'd sub nom. Aluminum Co. of Am. v. ICC, 

__________
     6  According to CF's study, Koch could raise its rates an addi-
tional 20-50% without facing effective barge competition.  Final 
Order at 11 (citing CF exhibits and verified statements).

761 F.2d 746 (D.C. Cir. 1985);  Salt River Project Agric. 
Improvement, 1 I.C.C.2d 684, 691 (1985), aff'd, Salt River 
Project Agric. Improvement & Power Dist. v. United States, 
762 F.2d 1053 (D.C. Cir. 1985)).7

     Koch attacks the STB's market dominance determination 
on two grounds.  First, it contends that the Board's compari-
son of its pre-and post-increase revenues was an inappropri-
ate test for market dominance.  Second, it contends that the 
Board disregarded record evidence of effective competition, 
particularly Koch's own "matching" study.

     We consider these two challenges below.  We do so with 
the understanding that "since decisions concerning market 
dominance are peculiarly within the expertise of the [Board], 
our review of such decisions must be particularly deferential."  
Aluminum Co., 761 F.2d at 750 (Scalia, J.).  We may vacate 
the Board's market dominance determination only if it is 
"arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not 
in accordance with law ... [, or if it is] unsupported by 
substantial evidence."  Arizona Pub. Serv. Co. v. United 
States, 742 F.2d 644, 649 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (quoting 5 U.S.C. 
s 706(2)(A), (E)).

                                A

     Koch contends that the Board resolved the issue of market 
dominance based on a single, unprecedented, and irrational 
standard:  whether Koch could raise its rates and still in-
crease its net revenues.  We conclude that none of those 
three adjectives appropriately characterizes the standard em-
ployed by the Board.

__________
     7  There were four points at which Koch would not increase net 
revenue if all cost-competitive tonnage were diverted to barge.  
Final Order at 16.  As to these points, however, the Board found 
that the tonnage that could actually be diverted, given capacity 
constraints at the storage terminals, was "too small an amount ... 
to constrain Koch's rates," and that Koch would "still earn greater 
revenues on its retained traffic (with the rate increases) at each of 
these pipeline points than what it earned for all of the traffic at each 
of those points under the prior rates."  Id. at 17.

     First, although the STB's comparison of revenues before 
and after the rate increase was important to its analysis, it 
was not the only factor the STB examined.  Rather, that 
comparison came last in the STB's analysis.  It was employed 
only after the Board had reviewed a host of qualitative 
considerations that it found to limit the effectiveness of barge 
competition--including capacity, reliability, speed, and safe-
ty--and after it had reviewed the studies proffered by both 
Koch and the complainants.8  While the Board's market 
dominance guidelines contemplate the use of such qualitative 
considerations, they do not exclude the application of quanti-
tative analysis as well.  See Market Dominance, 365 I.C.C. at 
119 n.5.9

     Second, the revenue comparison methodology is hardly 
unprecedented.  To the contrary, it is well in accord with 
both the market dominance guidelines and the agency prece-
dent cited by the Board.  See 365 I.C.C. at 131 ("If the loss in 
future revenues exceeds the gains from exercising market 
power in the short term, then a rail carrier will be deterred 
from charging excessive rates.");  id. at 129 (stating that 
"effective competition ... means that, if a carrier raises the 
rate for such traffic, then some or all of that traffic will be 

__________
     8  Koch points out that, in a footnote, the STB stated:  "While 
we do not rely on" quantitative measures like the revenue compari-
son methodology "as a substitute for a thorough qualitative exami-
nation of all possible competitive alternatives ... , we are not 
restricted from using any valid tool ... where, as here, the other 
evidence leaves the question [of effective competitive alternatives] 
unresolved."  Final Order at 15-16 n.43.  But rather than read this 
footnote, as Koch does, as indicating that the Board's ultimate 
conclusion rested solely on the outcome of the revenue comparison, 
we read it, in accord with the text of the STB opinion, as confirming 
that the Board undertook a "thorough qualitative examination of all 
possible competitive alternatives" before reaching its conclusion.

     9  Koch correctly notes that the market dominance guidelines 
did reject the use of certain quantitative presumptions:  e.g., high 
price/cost ratios, observed market share percentages, and substan-
tial shipper-related investments.  365 I.C.C. at 120-26.  None of 
those presumptions was employed in this case.

lost to other carriers or modes");  Aluminum Ass'n Inc., 367 
I.C.C. at 489 ("A potential loss in future revenues which 
merely exceeds any gain from exercising market power in the 
short term will deter a rail carrier from charging excessive 
rates.");  Salt River, 1 I.C.C.2d at 691 ("[T]he potential loss of 
future revenues, provided that the loss exceeds any gains 
from the exercise of market power, will deter rail carriers 
from charging excessive rates."), aff'd, Salt River, 762 F.2d at 
1053;  see also Burlington N. Inc., Finance Docket No. 32549, 
1995 WL 528184, at *44 n.72 (I.C.C. Aug. 23, 1995) (noting 
that market power is defined as "the ability profitably to 
sustain higher prices or lower service quality" (internal quota-
tion omitted)).  It is also in accord with judicial precedent.  
See Burlington N. R.R. v. STB, 114 F.3d 206, 212 (D.C. Cir. 
1997) (upholding STB market dominance determination 
where carrier "could recoup profits on lost incremental coal 
traffic by charging higher rates" on shipments that complain-
ant could not avoid);  Arizona Pub. Serv. Co., 742 F.2d at 654 
(noting that effectiveness of competition "would depend (at 
least) on ... the extent of the monopolist's profit that the 
railroads could reap by raising their prices, and ... the 
amount of traffic [they] would lose by raising prices").10

     Finally, Koch contends that the Board's methodology--
testing whether a firm is market dominant by asking whether 
it can increase its net revenues by raising its prices--is 
irrational.  Given that this methodology is consistent with the 

__________
     10  Our opinion in Salt River is not to the contrary.  Although 
we affirmed an ICC finding of lack of market dominance even 
though the alternatives "may not [have] exert[ed] effective market 
pressure" on the defendant railroad's rates, we did so because the 
complainant shipper used the railroad "only under exceptional and 
unpredictable circumstances."  762 F.2d at 1064 & n.14.  We con-
cluded that in enacting the market dominance inquiry of 49 U.S.C. 
s 10707, Congress did not intend to include a situation in which a 
carrier had only "transitory market power" over a shipper.  Id. at 
1062.  Here, CF is not merely an occasional user of Koch's pipeline, 
and the latter's exertion of market power cannot be characterized 
as "transitory."

market dominance guidelines, which are not themselves ques-
tioned by Koch, a challenge to its rationality is misplaced.11  
In any event, we do not find the methodology irrational.  To 
the contrary, it represents an accepted method of measuring 
market power, based on the recognition that although a firm 
in a competitive market cannot raise its prices without a net 
loss of revenue, a firm with market power can.12  See IIA 
Phillip E. Areeda & Herbert Hovenkamp, Antitrust Law:  An 
Analysis of Antitrust Principles and Their Application p 501, 
at 85 (1995) ("A defendant firm has market power if it can 
raise price without a total loss of sales.  Market power ... is 
large when a firm can profit by raising prices substantially 
without losing too many sales.");  id. p 503a, at 93;  see also 
Landes & Posner, 94 Harv. L. Rev. at 937;  Richard A. Posner 
& Frank H. Easterbrook, Antitrust:  Cases, Economic Notes 
& Other Materials 348-49 (2d ed. 1981).13  Of course, pre-

__________
     11  See Aluminum Co., 761 F.2d at 751 ("It is not possible for 
petitioners in this proceeding to challenge the validity of [the ICC's 
market dominance guidelines].  The time for direct review of the 
Commission's guidelines has long passed." (citing 28 U.S.C. 
s 2344)).

     12  Although techniques exist for measuring market power more 
directly, they involve data not typically available to courts or 
regulators, and data which the parties agree are not part of the 
record in this case.  See William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, 
Market Power in Antitrust Cases, 94 Harv. L. Rev. 937, 939-43 
(1981) (noting that market power can be measured directly with 
knowledge of firm marginal cost or elasticity of demand).

     13  In the closely related area of merger analysis, the Depart-
ment of Justice defines the scope of the relevant product market by 
asking whether a hypothetical profit-maximizing firm that is the 
only seller of the product could profitably impose a "small but 
significant and nontransitory increase in price."  See U.S. Dep't of 
Justice, Horizontal Merger Guidelines s 1.11 (1992);  see also IIA 
Areeda p 536, at 195-96 (noting that a product is a market of its 
own if a firm controlling all of its output could profit from a 
significant price increase).

 Koch cites antitrust cases that it regards as inconsistent with the 
proposition discussed in the text, but those cases are inapposite.  

cisely how high a firm can raise its prices without reducing 
net revenues is an important consideration.  But the amount 
by which Koch increased its rates here--an average of 20%--
is well above the standard usually employed to signal a 
substantial degree of market power.  See IIA Areeda p 552a, 
at 223 (suggesting use of 5% or 10% differential);  cf. Merger 
Guidelines s 1.11 (utilizing 5% price-increase test).

     Koch correctly points out that the ability to increase reve-
nues by raising prices is not always indicative of market 
power.  As Koch notes, "a firm in a fully competitive market 
that is pricing below market levels would expect to earn 
greater revenues by raising its prices to meet its competi-
tors."  Br. for Pet'r Koch ("Koch Br.") at 16.  But the normal 
assumption in examining assertions of market power is that 
the current price is at least the competitive price.  See IIA 
Areeda p 537b, at 200.  Koch questions the validity of that 
assumption in this case, pointing to the fact that it had not 
raised its prices in eight years prior to 1996.  But Koch is a 
for-profit institution, not an eleemosynary one, and it has 
provided no reason to believe that it priced below market for 
eight years, rather than calculated that those prices were the 
most the market would bear.  See IIA  Areeda p 501, at 85 
(noting that rational profit-maximizing firm has no reason to 
sell for less than market price).14

__________

Blue Cross holds that high prices or high profits alone do not 
necessarily evidence monopoly power, see Blue Cross & Blue Shield 
United of Wisc. v. Marshfield Clinic, 65 F.3d 1406, 1411-12 (7th 
Cir. 1995), but the STB used neither as an index of market 
dominance here.  Brooke Group held that industry-wide price in-
creases do not necessarily evidence conscious parallelism in an 
oligopolistic market, Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson 
Tobacco Corp., 509 U.S. 209, 237 (1993), a point not at issue in this 
case.

     14  Although it is true that during 1988-95 Koch's prices were 
potentially subject to rate regulation by the ICC, the Commission 

                                B

     Koch also contends that the STB, in making its market 
dominance finding, improperly rejected certain studies Koch 
submitted.  Koch first takes issue with the Board's rejection 
of its "matching" study.  In that study, Koch identified 
retailers that had received anhydrous ammonia shipped by 
both barge and pipeline during the same year.  Koch argued 
that those retailers could meet all of their ammonia needs 
from barges, and thus that the tonnage needed to serve those 
retailers would be diverted from pipeline to barge.  Such a 
diversion, Koch argued, would constrain the pipeline's rates.  
The Board rejected Koch's matching study as unreliable 
because Koch included retailers whose costs for shipping by 
barge were greater than for pipeline when the total costs of 
barge shipping--including the cost of trucking the anhydrous 
ammonia from the barge river terminals to the areas served 
by inland pipeline terminals--were included in the calculation.  
Final Order at 13-14 & n.36.  The cost differential indicated 

__________
never imposed regulation and Koch never tried to raise its rates.  
Koch asserts that its pre-increase rates were substantially below 
those of "its competitor pipeline [MAPCO] and barge competitors."  
Koch Br. at 16-17.  But the Board rejected that contention because 
"[s]uch comparisons, especially to carriers that largely serve differ-
ent markets or bear different transportation characteristics and 
operating costs, are not particularly instructive."  Final Order at 16 
n.43.  Indeed, Koch's contention assumes the answer to the ques-
tion at issue:  Are the MAPCO pipeline and barge carriers really 
Koch's competitors?  The Board found, and Koch has not chal-
lenged here, that the MAPCO pipeline is not an intramodal compet-
itor because it does not serve complainants' Louisiana production 
facilities, and that it does not pose geographic competition except at 
one terminal.  As for the barges, the STB concluded that the fact 
that their rates were substantially above those of Koch showed not 
that Koch's rates were sub-market, but rather that barge transport 
is an ineffective competitive alternative to pipeline.  As explained in 
Part II.B infra, we find that conclusion to be a reasonable one. 

to the Board that barges were not serving as a competitive 
alternative to pipeline transport for those retailers, but in-
stead were meeting different needs--such as providing addi-
tional anhydrous ammonia when sufficient supplies were un-
available by pipeline.  Id.;  see IIA Areeda p 534b at 180 
("The absence of close price relationships among products 
presumptively indicates that they are in separate markets.").

     Koch claims that the STB improperly rejected its matching 
study because the Board arbitrarily viewed as noncompetitive 
any barge shipping that was more costly than Koch's pipeline.  
It is, of course, well-accepted that a significant cost differen-
tial may render one product an ineffective restraint on the 
pricing of another, even if the two could otherwise serve as 
substitutes for one another.  Market Dominance, 365 I.C.C. 
at 134 (stating that evidence of product competition should 
show that shipper can obtain feasible substitutes "without 
substantially greater cost, transportation or otherwise").15  
As Koch itself notes, "the Board's market dominance analysis 
ask[s] whether complaining shippers ha[ve] feasible competi-
tive alternatives such that they could switch a sufficient 
amount of traffic to protect themselves from an unreasonable 
price increase if they wished."  Koch Br. at 24 (emphasis 
added).  If barge costs were significantly above those of 
pipeline, switching to barge would not protect the shippers 

__________
     15  See Arizona Pub. Serv. Co., 742 F.2d at 650-51 (holding that 
in light of significant cost difference, fact that complainant received 
oil by both trucks and railroad did not make trucks an effective 
competitive alternative);  Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Ry. v. ICC, 
580 F.2d 623, 636 (D.C. Cir. 1978) ("Shippers must be able to make 
the choice to use an alternative service without absorbing substan-
tial economic loss.");  see also Salt River, 762 F.2d at 1059 (noting 
that market dominance guidelines require findings on the relative 
costs of potential alternatives, and that without evidence of relative 
costs, the "mere possibility" that shipper "could" use alternative 
carrier does not render alternative an effective competitor);  IIA 
Areeda p 534b, at 180 (noting that "substantial differences in pro-
duction, transportation, or other costs among ... products prevent 
one from operating as an effective competitive check on the prices 
of the other").

from Koch's "unreasonable price increase."  Accordingly, 
Koch concedes that "at some point an alternative will be so 
costly or impracticable that it is simply not feasible."  Id. at 
26.

     The trouble with the STB's analysis, Koch contends, is that 
the Board regarded barge shipping as noncompetitive if it 
cost even one cent more than pipeline.  Id. at 10, 24.  Koch 
bases this contention on a single sentence in the STB's 
opinion, in which the Board stated that Koch's matching 
study had improperly indicated matches "where total barge 
costs were higher than total pipeline costs."  Final Order at 
13.  By "higher," Koch contends, the Board must have meant 
higher by as little as one cent.

     But the footnote to the cited sentence makes clear that 
Koch has misread the STB's test.  See Final Order at 13 n.36.  
In that footnote, the Board provides an example to explain 
what it regarded as the flaw in Koch's study:  a case in which 
Koch claimed a "match" notwithstanding that the total barge-
delivered costs were $43.41 per ton, while pipeline-delivered 
costs were only $36.80--a difference of approximately 18%.  
Although a small difference in the price charged by an 
alternative carrier would not prevent it from constraining 
Koch's prices, a difference of 18% is well-recognized as having 
that effect.  Cf. IIA Areeda p 537b, at 200, p 552a, at 223 
(suggesting 5% or 10% difference as significant).

     Koch also attacks the STB for rejecting its "restatement" 
of CF's Alternative Inbound Study.  In that restatement, 
Koch identified 137,000 tons of anhydrous ammonia that it 
said could be diverted from pipeline to barge.  See Final 
Order at 12.  The Board rejected Koch's figures, in part 
because they failed to account for storage costs CF would 
have to pay at terminals it did not own.  Id. at 14 & n.38.  
Koch argues that in so doing, the Board "ignored unrefuted 
evidence" that shifting the anhydrous ammonia to the next-
closest CF storage terminals would still be less costly than 
pipeline.  Koch Br. at 27.  But Koch's evidence was not 
unrefuted;  rather, it was vigorously disputed by CF's wit-
nesses.  Compare Verified Reply and Rebuttal Statements of 

C. Phillip Baumel on Behalf of Koch Pipeline Co., J.A. at 238-
42, 370-74, with Verified Opening and Rebuttal Statements of 
Fred Mugica on Behalf of CF Industries, Inc., J.A. at 216-18, 
494-95.  Although Koch may regard CF's responses as con-
stituting ineffective refutation, the Board acts within its au-
thority when it chooses between contending accounts of the 
evidence, see Burlington N. R.R., 114 F.3d at 213, and this 
court has no power "to substitute its judgment for that of the 
agency," id. at 210-11 (quoting Citizens to Preserve Overton 
Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402, 416 (1971)).

                               III

     We next turn to the STB's conclusion that Koch's 1996 rate 
increases were unreasonable.  Although the Board announced 
in its initial order that it would apply Constrained Market 
Pricing (CMP) principles, Koch contends that it failed to do 
so.  While the components of Koch's argument are interrelat-
ed, it is most convenient to consider them in three parts:  (1) 
that the Board should have determined rate reasonableness 
using a standard consistent with the stand-alone cost (SAC) 
constraint of CMP;  (2) that instead, the Board used original 
cost ratemaking (OCR), a discredited methodology;  and (3) 
that in so doing, the Board failed to account for the expendi-
tures Koch would eventually have to make to replace the 
pipeline.

     In reviewing the STB's determination of rate reasonable-
ness issues, we again apply the deferential standards of the 
Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A), (E), and 
uphold Board decisions as long as they are supported by 
substantial evidence and are not arbitrary or capricious.  See 
McCarty Farms, Inc. v. STB, 158 F.3d 1294, 1300 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).  "Because Congress has expressly delegated to the 
Board responsibility for determining whether a [carrier's] ... 
rate is reasonable, the Board is at the zenith of its powers 
when it exercises that authority, and [is] therefore entitled to 
particular deference."  Burlington N. R.R., 114 F.3d at 210 
(internal quotations omitted).  Moreover, as with the market 

dominance guidelines, we note Koch's declaration that it does 
not challenge the rate guidelines themselves, but only their 
asserted misapplication in this case.

                                A

     The purpose of CMP is "to ensure that a carrier does not 
use its market dominance to charge its captive ... shippers 
more than they should have to pay for efficient ... service."  
Coal Rate Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 524;  see Consolidated 
Rail, 812 F.2d at 1457 (affirming Coal Rate Guidelines).  To 
accomplish this, CMP imposes four separate constraints on 
rates, two of which are relevant here:  "revenue adequacy" 
and SAC.  Coal Rate Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 521.16  The 
first constraint, revenue adequacy, examines the existing 
carrier on a system-wide basis to determine the revenues it 
needs to "provide a rate of return on net investment equal to 
the current cost of capital (i.e., the level of return available on 
alternative investments)."  Id. at 535.  The SAC constraint, 
by contrast, limits a carrier's rates to those necessary to 
generate "the revenue that a hypothetical new, optimally 
efficient carrier would need to meet in order to serve the 
complaining shippers" alone.  Final Order at 7;  see Coal Rate 
Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 542;  McCarty Farms, 158 F.3d at 
1301.  SAC is intended to ensure that a shipper "not bear the 
costs of any facilities or services from which it derives no[ ] 
benefit."  Coal Rate Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 528.17

__________
     16  The other two are market efficiency and phasing.  1 I.C.C.2d 
at 521;  see Consolidated Rail, 812 F.2d at 1450-51.

     17  The governing statute directs that, when prescribing a rate, 
"the Board shall consider, among other factors--

     (1) the effect of the prescribed rate ... on the movement of 
     traffic by that carrier;
     
     (2) the need for revenues that are sufficient ... to let the 
     carrier provide that transportation or service;  and
     
     In this case, CF and Farmland elected to rely on the 
revenue adequacy constraint. Holding that revenue adequacy 
and SAC provide "alternative methodologies for examining 
the reasonableness of a carrier's rates," and that "complain-
ants may use any methodology that is consistent with CMP," 
Final Order at 7, the Board employed the revenue adequacy 
approach and found Koch's 1996 rate increases unnecessary 
to ensure adequate revenues, id. at 27.  In so doing, the STB 
rejected the relevance of Koch's SAC evidence, which pur-
portedly would have justified the company's rate increases.  
Id. at 22.

     Koch contends that the STB should have accepted its SAC 
model, or at least refused to employ a revenue adequacy 
methodology that yielded different results.  The Board's con-
clusion to the contrary, however, is consistent with the agen-
cy's rate guidelines.  Those guidelines state that SAC and 
revenue adequacy are "separate constraining factors" on the 
maximum rates a carrier may charge, Coal Rate Guidelines, 
1 I.C.C.2d at 521, and that "[c]arriers do not need ... and 
... are not entitled to any higher revenues" than the revenue 
adequacy standard permits, id. at 535.  Moreover, the guide-
lines expressly contemplate that "the rate to an individual 
shipper may vary depending upon which of the two CMP 
approaches is used," and that it is the complaining shipper 
who may "decid[e] which approach to pursue."  Id. at 534 
n.35.  See Consolidated Rail, 812 F.2d at 1451 (noting that 
the guidelines provide that the constraints "may be used 
individually or in combination to analyze whether the rate 

__________
     (3) the availability of other economic transportation alterna-
     tives.
     
49 U.S.C. s 15503(b).  It also states that "[i]n prescribing [a] rate 
... the Board may utilize rate reasonableness procedures that 
provide an effective simulation of a market-based price for a stand 
alone pipeline."  Id. s 15503(a) (emphasis added).

[increase] is unreasonably high" (quoting Coal Rate Guide-
lines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 548)).18

     In sum, the Board's determination that Koch could not 
charge rates higher than those permitted by the revenue 
adequacy constraint, and therefore that Koch's SAC evidence 
was not relevant even if it would have yielded a different 
result, was a reasonable reading of the agency's rate guide-
lines and is not subject to reversal by this court.  See Auer v. 
Robbins, 519 U.S. 452, 461 (1997).

                                B

     Koch also attacks the Board's rate-reasonableness analysis 
on the ground that it assertedly employed OCR principles, 
which limit the carrier to a return based on the depreciated 
cost paid by the original owner of the capital assets.  See 
generally Ashley Creek Phosphate Co., No. 40131, 1992 WL 
52672, at *1 n.4, *8 (I.C.C. Mar. 12, 1992) ("OCR uses original 
cost as of the actual installation date of the assets as the basis 
for computing the capital costs.").19  Koch devotes a consider-
able part of its argument to pointing out the flaws in the OCR 
approach, but we need not consider those flaws because the 
STB did not use original cost in the analysis it undertook in 
this case.  The Board relied, instead, on "[a]quisition-cost 

__________
     18  The Board's position is not inconsistent with our decisions in 
Burlington and PEPCO.  In Burlington, we remanded a ratemak-
ing because the ICC had returned to a pre-CMP standard without 
explanation.  See Burlington N. R.R. v. ICC, 985 F.2d 589, 599 
(D.C. Cir. 1993).  In PEPCO, we upheld the ICC's use of SAC in 
determining the reasonableness of the rates of a railroad with 
inadequate revenues, but noted that where the other CMP con-
straints are applicable (they were not applicable in PEPCO), 
"stand-alone cost is not the only ceiling on rates."  Potomac Elec-
tric Power Co. v. ICC, 744 F.2d 185, 193-94 (D.C. Cir. 1984).

     19  See also Railroad Revenue Adequacy--1988 Determination, 
6 I.C.C.2d 933, 935 n.3 (1990) (stating that "original" or "predeces-
sor" cost "represents the cost of the asset when it was first 
dedicated to public service, plus any subsequent improvements, less 
depreciation and retirements").

valuation--the amount [Koch] paid in an arm's-length trans-
action" to acquire the pipeline.  Final Order at 24.

     Although it may appear that Koch and the STB are talking 
past one another, a footnote to Koch's brief discloses the 
source of the disconnect.  Koch Br. at 36 n.9.  There, Koch 
asserts that the $77.2 million figure the STB used as Koch's 
initial investment in the pipeline was not Koch's true acquisi-
tion cost, but rather the previous owner's depreciated original 
cost as of the date Koch bought the pipeline.  Koch argues 
that by using that figure to determine revenue adequacy, the 
STB effectively employed an OCR analysis.  Id. at 36.

     This argument cannot prevail.  As the STB explains, the 
$77.2 million figure was the figure Koch itself assigned to its 
pipeline assets on a form Koch filed with the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission (FERC) shortly after the acquisition.  
See Final Order at 23 n.61;  1988 FERC Form 6 (reproduced 
in Br. for CF Before STB, Ex. 1 at 111).  The form's 
instructions required the use of acquisition cost.20  Moreover, 
Koch submitted no other figure for its investment base to the 
STB, notwithstanding the Board's direction in its initial order 
that the parties' evidence "should include ... pipeline invest-
ment."  Initial Order at 7.21  Nor has Koch suggested an 
alternative figure on this appeal.  Accordingly, the STB 
reasonably concluded that it could "properly use Koch's own 

__________
     20  The instructions define the entry for "carrier property" as 
"[t]he cost of property owned that is devoted to transportation 
service," and define cost as "the amount of money actually paid for 
property or services."  See 18 C.F.R. Pt. 352, def. 11, instr. 2-3.  
The instructions further state that, "[i]n accounting for a 'pur-
chase,' " i.e. an acquisition of a "distinct operating system" involving 
a price over $250,000, "the assets shall be recorded on the books of 
the acquiring carrier at cost as of the date of acquisition."  Id., 
instr. 3-11 (emphasis added).

     21  Indeed, the same order advised Koch that CF anticipated 
that revenue adequacy would be "an important and relevant reason-
ableness cap in this case," Initial Order at 6, and as we discuss in 
the next section, the revenue adequacy constraint uses acquisition 
cost as the measure of a carrier's pipeline investment.

$77.2 million valuation as a reliable estimate of its cost of 
acquiring--and the value of its initial investment in--the 
pipeline."  Final Order at 25.

                                C

     Finally, Koch argues that the Board should have used 
replacement cost, rather than either acquisition or original 
cost, as the baseline for its revenue adequacy constraint.  
Koch defines replacement cost as "the current cost of replac-
ing assets (or constructing them anew)."  Koch Br. at 30.

     Much of Koch's argument in favor of replacement cost 
relies on the fact that (a variant of) replacement cost is 
utilized in SAC analysis.  SAC uses replacement cost, howev-
er, because "the theory of SAC ... assumes that a new 
entrant can potentially enter the market today[;  thus,] asset 
value must be based on the cost of acquiring assets today (at 
their current value)."  Coal Rate Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 
544-45 (emphasis added).  Revenue adequacy analysis, by 
contrast, is intended to determine whether the revenues of an 
existing company are sufficient to "provide a rate of return 
on [that company's] net investment equal to the current cost 
of capital."  Id. at 535.  Hence, the considerations that com-
pel the use of replacement cost in the SAC constraint do not 
apply to the independent constraint of revenue adequacy.

     Koch also contends that the STB should have used replace-
ment cost because it best simulates competitive pricing.  If 
rates of return are not calculated based on the cost of 
replacing the pipeline, Koch asserts, it will not be able to 
compete equally with other firms for available financing in 
order to replace its current facilities.  The Board, however, 
believes that as long as a carrier is permitted revenues 
adequate to "cover all costs and provide a rate of return on 
investment equal to the current cost of capital," it will be able 
to "compete equally with other firms for available financing in 
order to maintain, replace and, if necessary, expand its facili-
ties and services."  Final Order at 21.  In the Board's view, 
the use of acquisition cost as the investment base ensures 
such revenue, and it is therefore unnecessary also to "re-

quir[e] captive pipeline shippers to provide in advance a 
revenue stream to pay for investments not yet made and 
assets that are not in place."  Id. at 27-28.22

     Our role is not to choose the optimal method of pipeline 
ratemaking, but only to ensure that the STB's choice is a 
rational one.  We cannot say that the Board has acted 
irrationally here.23  Moreover, Koch's attack on the economic 
implications of eschewing reliance on replacement cost meth-
odology is largely beside the point.  As Koch has stressed, it 
does not challenge the regulations that govern the Board's 
approach to ratemaking, but instead contends that they were 
not followed.  This circumscribes our role even further, as we 
must uphold the Board's interpretation of its regulations as 
long as that interpretation is reasonable.  See Auer, 519 U.S. 
at 461;  Thomas Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala, 512 U.S. 504, 512 
(1994).

     Koch correctly notes that during the 1980s, the ICC active-
ly "consider[ed] using a replacement cost methodology in 
valuing assets in future revenue adequacy determinations."  
Standards for Railroad Revenue Adequacy, 364 I.C.C. 803, 
818 (1981).  But while the Commission regarded replacement 
cost as "conceptually the best method available," id. at 820, in 
the end it concluded that replacement cost methodology 
"cannot be practically implemented in a manner that we can 

__________
     22  Koch quotes the Board's decision in CSX Corp. for the 
proposition that "carriers cannot attract and retain capital unless 
they are given the opportunity to be compensated for the real value 
of the property, not just the book value."  Koch Br. at 30 (quoting 
CSX Corp., No. 33388, 1998 WL 456510 at *40 (S.T.B. July 23, 
1998)).  But the "book value" rejected by the STB in CSX was the 
"predecessor book value," 1998 WL 456510 at *40, not the railroad's 
own acquisition cost--which, in fact, the Board ultimately relied 
upon in that case.  Id. at *38.

     23  Our decision in City of Los Angeles v. United States Dep't of 
Transp., 103 F.3d 1027, 1032-33 (D.C. Cir. 1997), is not to the 
contrary.  In that case, we vacated a DOT decision to set fees in 
reliance on original cost rather than fair market value, because the 
Department mistakenly thought it was statutorily required to use 
original cost.  The STB had no such misconception in this case.

be confident would produce accurate and reliable results."  
Standards for Railroad Revenue Adequacy, 3 I.C.C.2d 261, 
277 (1986).

     In promulgating the 1990 guidelines cited by the STB in 
this case, the ICC again considered the appropriate invest-
ment base for analysis of revenue adequacy.  See Railroad 
Revenue Adequacy, 6 I.C.C.2d at 940.  After notice and 
comment, the Commission rejected the railroads' argument 
that "the soundest valuation of assets from an economic 
perspective is current replacement cost," id. at 937, and their 
further argument that original "predecessor costs are closer 
to that measure than are acquisition costs," id. Responding to 
the same concerns Koch raises here, the ICC concluded "that 
railroad assets would be replaced as long as competitive 
returns are allowed on new and existing investments, [and 
that]....  if investors can reasonably expect competitive 
returns, capital can be attracted when it is needed, making 
advance funds accumulation unnecessary."  Id. at 939 (adopt-
ing view of Railroad Accounting Principles Board).  Accord-
ingly, the Commission announced that it would "use acquisi-
tion costs in valuing railroad investment bases in this and 
subsequent revenue adequacy determinations."  Id. at 939.24  
This court affirmed that decision in Association of American 
Railroads v. ICC, 978 F.2d 737, 741 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  It is 

__________
     24  Koch contends that the Board's Railroad Revenue Adequacy 
standards were intended to apply only to the annual revenue 
adequacy calculations the STB performs for railroads, and not to 
"the ratemaking context."  Koch Br. at 32 n.7.  But the Board's 
interpretation to the contrary is a reasonable reading of the regula-
tions.  See Coal Rate Guidelines, 1 I.C.C.2d at 535 (using Railroad 
Revenue Adequacy standards to define the revenue adequacy con-
straint of the CMP methodology).  Nor, as the STB explained, does 
Arkansas & Missouri Railroad, 6 I.C.C.2d 619, 627 (1990), aff'd sub 
nom. Missouri Pac. R.R. v. ICC, 23 F.3d 531 (D.C. Cir. 1994), 
compel the use of replacement cost in revenue adequacy determina-
tions.  Final Order at 25 n.64.  In that case, the ICC used replace-
ment cost because "an arm's length purchase price" cost could not 
be determined as a consequence of the way in which the purchase 

therefore clear that the Board reasonably interpreted its rate 
guidelines as using acquisition rather than replacement cost 
as the investment base upon which to determine revenue 
adequacy.  See Final Order at 24 (citing Railroad Revenue 
Adequacy, 6 I.C.C.2d at 940).

     We conclude that, in assessing the legality of Koch's rate 
increase, the STB employed a reasonable ratemaking method-
ology consistent with the Board's guidelines and precedents.  
That being the case, Koch's challenge to the reversal of its 
rate increase must fail.

                                IV

     We now briefly address CF and Farmland's charge that the 
STB improperly denied CF's motion to amend its complaint 
to include a challenge to Koch's pre-increase rates.  "Leave 
to amend any document is a matter of the Board's discretion," 
and we find no abuse of that discretion here.  49 C.F.R. 
s 1104.11.

     The STB denied CF's motion on the ground that it was 
"untimely--having been filed almost 2 years after the initial 
complaint and 4 months after the close of discovery."  Final 
Order at 2 n.4.25  The Board had warned in its initial order 
that, "[b]ecause 49 U.S.C. s 15901(c) requires that this inves-
tigation be concluded within three years after its initiation," it 
was "critical that th[e] investigation be conducted in an 
orderly and timely fashion."  Initial Order at 4.  Under those 
circumstances, it was reasonable for the Board to reject an 
amendment that would have substantially expanded the scope 
of the proceedings.

     CF contends that no such expansion was required here--
indeed, that no amendment was formally required--because 
its original complaint encompassed a request for relief from 
__________
agreement had been structured.  6 I.C.C.2d at 626;  see 23 F.3d at 
534.

     25  The Board also denied permission to amend on the ground 
that CF was estopped from challenging the rates in effect prior to 
1996 by a settlement agreement with Koch's predecessor.  In light 
of our affirmance of the Board's determination with respect to 
untimeliness, we do not address the STB's alternative rationale.

pre-increase rates.  That complaint, however, stated that CF 
had filed "in order to seek a directive from the Board 
requiring Koch Pipeline to maintain its rates at current 
levels" and to recover damages "in an amount equal to any 
rate increase."  Compl. p 6.  Although CF notes that the 
complaint also "requested all 'just and proper' relief," Br. for 
Pet'rs CF & Farmland at 22 (quoting Compl. at 21), that kind 
of boilerplate request was insufficient to put the Board or the 
defendant on notice that a pre-increase reduction was also on 
the table.26

     CF further contends that the denial of leave to intervene 
was inconsistent with STB precedent.  But the Board has 
frequently expressed concern with the timing and extent of 
amendments, see, e.g., Grain Land Coop, No. 41687, 1999 WL 
1117130, at *4 (S.T.B. Dec. 8, 1999) (permitting second 
amendment because it was "simply a clarification" of first);  
Seapac Servs. Inc., No. 40534, 1992 WL 88109, at *1 (I.C.C. 
May 4, 1992) (noting that amendment would not "unduly 
broaden" or "unduly delay" proceeding), and has denied 
amendment in circumstances similar to those here, see South-
West R.R. Car Parts Co., No. 40073, 1988 WL 225131 (I.C.C. 
Dec. 1, 1988) (denying amended complaint's untimely claims).  
Accordingly, we conclude that the Board did not abuse its 
discretion in denying CF's motion to amend its complaint.

                                V

     Koch's challenge to the final decision of the Board is 
essentially a narrow one, questioning not the STB's regula-

__________
     26  Farmland suggests that its petition to intervene should be 
treated differently, but that petition likewise sought to bar Koch 
from "charging any increase in rates established on or about April 
1, 1996," Pet. p 34, and sought as damages the difference between a 
reasonable rate "and the rate paid by Farmland ... during the 
period beginning on April 1, 1996," Id. p 29.  Moreover, in granting 
Farmland's petition, the Board relied on the fact that "Koch did not 
oppose Farmland's intervention because the subject matter of 
Farmland's complaint is substantially similar to that of the com-
plaint brought by CF."  CF Indus., Inc., No. 41685, slip. op. at 1 
(S.T.B. July 25, 1996).

tions but rather their application in a single ratemaking.  We 
conclude that the STB's finding that Koch was market domi-
nant was a reasonable application of the Board's market 
dominance guidelines, and that the Board's rollback of Koch's 
1996 rate increase was a reasonable application of its rate-
making guidelines.  At the same time, we hold that the Board 
did not abuse its discretion in denying CF's request to amend 
its complaint to seek still further rate reductions.

     The petitions for review are therefore

                                                                      Denied.

                                                                