                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 13, 1999    Decided March 17, 2000 

                           No. 98-1570

                 Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc. 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
                   for Enforcement of an Order 
              of the National Labor Relations Board

     Maurice Baskin argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Sharon Block, Attorney, National Labor Relations Board, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the brief were 
Linda Sher, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Fred L. Cornnell, 

Attorney.  John D. Burgoyne, Deputy Associate General 
Counsel, entered an appearance.

     Marsha S. Berzon argued the cause for amicus curiae 
American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial 
Organizations.  With her on the brief were Jonathan P. Hiatt 
and James B. Coppess.

     Before:  Sentelle, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner illegally fired several 
workers in retaliation for attempting to organize a union.  
Finding multiple unfair labor practices, the National Labor 
Relations Board ordered its traditional remedy, reinstatement 
with backpay, for all discharged employees.  When the Board 
learned that one of these employees was an undocumented 
alien, it denied him reinstatement and terminated his backpay 
as of the date the employer discovered he was unauthorized 
to work.  Challenging even this reduced award, the employer 
claims that awarding any backpay to undocumented workers 
conflicts with immigration law.  Because the Supreme Court 
has held that undocumented workers are protected by the 
National Labor Relations Act, and because the limited reme-
dy awarded here is within the Board's discretion and furthers 
the purposes of both labor and immigration law, we deny the 
petition for review and grant the cross-application for en-
forcement.

                                I

     This case lies at the intersection of two statutory schemes:  
labor and immigration.  Enacted in 1935, the National Labor 
Relations Act encourages collective bargaining, promotes in-
dustrial peace, and protects workers' rights of association, 
self-organization, and representation.  See, e.g., Phelps Dodge 
Corp. v. NLRB, 313 U.S. 177, 182-85 (1941).  The statute 
vests the NLRB with broad discretion to enforce the Act and 
to remedy unfair labor practices.  See 29 U.S.C. s 160(c).  

Not limited to "the correction of private injuries" or the 
"adjudication of private rights," the Board "acts in a public 
capacity to give effect to the declared public policy of the 
Act."  Phelps Dodge, 313 U.S. at 192-93.  "Making the 
workers whole for losses suffered on account of an unfair 
labor practice is part of the vindication of the public policy 
which the Board enforces."  Id. at 197.  Awards of backpay 
not only make discriminatees whole, but "also achieve a public 
purpose by deterring future similar unlawful practices, and 
by depriving employers of any competitive advantage they 
may have secured by acting unlawfully."  Local 512, Ware-
house and Office Workers' Union v. NLRB, 795 F.2d 705, 718 
(9th Cir. 1986) ("Felbro").

     Like the NLRA, the nation's immigration laws preserve 
jobs and safeguard American workers' wages and employ-
ment conditions.  See INS v. National Ctr. for Immigrants' 
Rights, 502 U.S. 183, 194 & n.8 (1991);  Sure-Tan, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 467 U.S. 883, 893 (1984).  Until 1986, the Immigration 
and Nationality Act was primarily concerned "with the terms 
and conditions of admission to the country and the subse-
quent treatment of aliens lawfully in the country."  Sure-Tan, 
467 U.S. at 892 (quoting DeCanas v. Bica, 424 U.S. 351, 359 
(1976)).  The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 
focused new immigration control efforts on employers.  The 
Act makes it unlawful to employ anyone known to be an 
unauthorized alien, requires employers to verify and docu-
ment the work eligibility of new hires, and authorizes sanc-
tions against employers who violate the Act.  See 8 U.S.C. 
s 1324a.

     The NLRB and the courts have sought to ensure that labor 
and immigration laws operate in tandem.  They have held 
that all employees, regardless of immigration status, have the 
right to organize and are entitled to protection from unfair 
labor practices.  In Sure-Tan, for example, the Supreme 
Court affirmed a Board decision that extended the protec-
tions of the NLRA to undocumented workers.  In addition to 
relying on the text of the Act, which broadly defines covered 
employees, the Court pointed to the common policies driving 
both labor and immigration law:

     Application of the NLRA [to undocumented workers] 
     helps to assure that the wages and employment condi-
     tions of lawful residents are not adversely affected by the 
     competition of illegal alien employees who are not subject 
     to the standard terms of employment.  If an employer 
     realizes that there will be no advantage under the NLRA 
     in preferring illegal aliens to legal resident workers, any 
     incentive to hire such illegal aliens is correspondingly 
     lessened.  In turn, if the demand for undocumented 
     aliens declines, there may then be fewer incentives for 
     aliens themselves to enter in violation of the federal 
     immigration laws.
     
467 U.S. at 893-94.  According to the Court, protecting 
undocumented aliens from unfair labor practices not only is 
"clearly reconcilable with," but indeed "serves the purposes 
of" the immigration laws.  Id. at 894;  see also NLRB v. 
Kolkka, 170 F.3d 937, 940 (9th Cir. 1999).  At the same time, 
the Court emphasized that while the NLRA protects undocu-
mented workers, the Board's remedies for unfair labor prac-
tices must not conflict with immigration law.  See Sure-Tan, 
467 U.S. at 902.

     Petitioner Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc. manufactures 
custom-formulated polyvinylchloride pellets for use by cus-
tomers who produce pharmaceutical, construction, and house-
hold products.  In May, 1988, JosE Castro began working in 
Hoffman's production plant earning minimum wage as a 
compounder, an operator of large blending machines that mix 
and cook the plastic formulas ordered by customers.  When 
the United Rubber, Cork, Linoleum and Plastic Workers of 
America, AFL-CIO began an organizing drive at Hoffman's 
factory, Castro, along with several other employees, distribut-
ed union authorization cards to coworkers.  After what the 
Board later described as "coercive and restraining" interroga-
tion of union supporters, Hoffman laid off each employee who 
had engaged in organizing activities, including Castro.  Hoff-
man Plastic Compounds, Inc., 306 N.L.R.B. 100 (1992).

     When Hoffman received notice from the NLRB that the 
Union had filed a representation petition, it made some 

attempt to recall the discharged workers.  A March 10, 1989 
letter from Hoffman to Castro stated "[i]t looks like we'll 
need a few men soon" and asked him to contact his former 
supervisor "no later than 4 P.M., Monday, March 13, 1989."  
Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc., 326 N.L.R.B. No. 86 
(1998).  Castro never responded.

     After one of the discharged employees filed charges with 
the Board, an Administrative Law Judge found that Hoffman 
had engaged in multiple unfair labor practices.  The Board 
adopted the ALJ's findings, concluding not only that the 
company had unlawfully interrogated employees about their 
union activities and sympathies, but that "in order to rid itself 
of known union supporters, [Hoffman] discriminatorily select-
ed union adherents for layoff" in violation of Sections 8(a)(1) 
and (3) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. 158(a)(1), (3).  Hoffman 
Plastic, 306 N.L.R.B. at 100.  The Board ordered Hoffman to 
cease and desist from such unfair labor practices, to post a 
notice at the work site, and to reinstate and make whole those 
union supporters it had illegally fired.

     When a dispute arose as to the proper computation of 
backpay, a compliance proceeding was held before another 
ALJ.  Castro appeared at the hearing, testifying through an 
interpreter.  When Hoffman's attorney began to question 
Castro about his citizenship and authorization to work in the 
United States, the Board's General Counsel objected.  The 
ALJ sustained the objection, but not before Castro had stated 
that he was a Mexican national and that the birth certificate 
he had used to gain employment at Hoffman was borrowed 
from a friend.  On the basis of this admission, the ALJ 
recommended neither reinstatement nor backpay for Castro.  
See Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc., 314 N.L.R.B. 683, 685 
(1994).

     While the ALJ's recommendation was under consideration 
by the NLRB, the Board decided another case involving 
undocumented discriminatees, A.P.R.A. Fuel Oil Buyers 
Group, 320 N.L.R.B. 408 (1995), enforced 134 F.3d 50 (2d Cir. 
1997).  There, the Board modified its standard remedy of 

reinstatement with backpay to account for the fact that the 
illegally fired workers lacked documentation.  The Board 
conditioned its reinstatement order on the discriminatees' 
ability to verify their eligibility to work.  It also ordered that 
the backpay period terminate either when the discriminatees 
were lawfully reinstated or when they failed to produce the 
necessary employment eligibility documents within a reason-
able period of time.

     Issuing its Second Supplemental Decision and Order in this 
case, the Board adapted the remedy it had developed in 
A.P.R.A. Fuel to Castro's situation, denying reinstatement 
due to his undocumented status and awarding only limited 
backpay.  See Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc., 326 
N.L.R.B. No. 86 (1998).  To determine the backpay period, 
the Board first considered whether Hoffman's "[i]t looks like 
we'll need a few men soon" letter amounted to a specific and 
unequivocal offer of reinstatement that would toll backpay.  
Answering this question in the negative, the Board nonethe-
less allowed Hoffman the benefit of the after-acquired evi-
dence defense and terminated the backpay period as of June 
14, 1993, the date Hoffman learned that Castro had misrepre-
sented his immigration status.

     Hoffman now petitions for review of the Board's final 
order.  The company does not challenge the Board's findings 
that it illegally discharged known union organizers and com-
mitted other unfair labor practices.  It contests only Castro's 
limited backpay award, arguing that 1) Sure-Tan holds that 
undocumented aliens may never be awarded backpay;  2) 
IRCA prohibits backpay awards to undocumented workers;  
and 3) the Board misapplied the after-acquired evidence rule 
and violated the equal protection guarantee of the Fifth 
Amendment by giving undocumented workers preferential 
treatment.  Cross-petitioning for enforcement, the NLRB, 
supported by amicus AFL-CIO, responds that the award of 
limited backpay to Castro is prohibited by neither Sure-Tan 
nor IRCA and falls well within the Board's broad remedial 
discretion.  Indeed, the Board contends, the limited backpay 
award furthers the purposes of both labor and immigration 
law.

     Before considering these issues, we register our disagree-
ment with Hoffman's characterization of this case as a dispute 
between "an innocent employer" and an employee who has no 
legal right to be in this country and who obtained his job 
through fraud.  To be sure, the Board did find the evidence 
insufficient to conclude that Hoffman violated IRCA by hiring 
Castro knowing him to be an unauthorized alien.  At the 
same time, however, the Board found that Hoffman had 
committed multiple unfair labor practices by interrogating, 
intimidating, and ultimately discharging union supporters.  
Hoffman neither contests these findings nor disputes that it 
failed to comply with the Board's order to reinstate Castro 
before his ineligibility for employment became known, when 
to do so would have ended the company's backpay liability 
without violating IRCA.  See 8 C.F.R. s 274a.2(b)(viii)(A)(3), 
(5) (exempting employer from re-verifying an employee's 
eligibility for continuing employment after a temporary layoff 
or reinstatement after unjustified suspension or wrongful 
termination).  And while it is true that Castro lied when 
falsely attesting to his work eligibility on the I-9 form and 
when identifying himself as "JosE Castro" in his sworn testi-
mony at the compliance proceeding, the Supreme Court has 
held that a discriminatee's dishonesty does not preclude an 
award of backpay to remedy unfair labor practices.  See ABF 
Freight System, Inc. v. NLRB, 510 U.S. 317 (1994).  More-
over, Castro's use of another's birth certificate to obtain 
employment did not violate IRCA at that time.  See Immigra-
tion Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-649, s 544, 104 Stat. 4978, 
5059 (1990), codified at 8 U.S.C. s 1324c(a)(3) (amending 
IRCA to prohibit the use of documents issued to a person 
other than the possessor).  Thus the precise issue before us is 
this:  Did Castro's undocumented status--as opposed to his 
lying about it--render him entirely ineligible to obtain back-
pay as a remedy for Hoffman's serious and undisputed viola-
tions of the National Labor Relations Act?

                                II

     We begin with Hoffman's argument, embraced by our 
dissenting colleague, that this case is controlled by a single 

sentence from the Supreme Court's opinion in Sure-Tan v. 
NLRB:  "[I]n computing backpay, the employees must be 
deemed 'unavailable' for work (and the accrual of backpay 
therefore tolled) during any period when they were not 
lawfully entitled to be present and employed in the United 
States."  Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 903.  This sentence, Hoffman 
claims, "plainly prohibits" the NLRB from awarding even 
limited backpay to undocumented workers victimized by un-
fair labor practices.  Read literally and divorced from its 
context, the sentence could well be interpreted to support 
that view.  But determining whether particular Supreme 
Court language amounts to binding precedent is not so sim-
ple.  The Court itself has warned against "dissect[ing] the 
sentences of the United States Reports as though they were 
the United States Code."  St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 
509 U.S. 502, 515 (1993).  Instead, we must read the allegedly 
controlling sentence in context, taking account of the facts of 
the case, the issues presented, and the Court's reasoning and 
holding.  "The Court's every word and sentence cannot be 
read in a vacuum;  its pronouncements must be read in light 
of the holding of the case and to the degree possible, so as to 
be consistent with the Court's apparent intentions and with 
other language in the same opinion."  Aka v. Washington 
Hosp. Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 1291 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (en banc).  
With this perspective in mind, and with the Court's entire 
backpay discussion at our fingertips (see Appendix A)--the 
sentence on which Hoffman relies appears in the penultimate 
paragraph--we turn to the task of elucidating Sure-Tan and 
determining whether it controls this case.

     The employer in Sure-Tan attempted to invalidate a union 
election by notifying the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service that several employees were undocumented.  In re-
sponse, the INS arrested five of the workers, all of whom 
agreed to return to Mexico to avoid deportation.  "By the end 
of the day, all five employees were on a bus ultimately bound 
for Mexico."  Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 887.

     An ALJ found that the employer had violated the NLRA 
by constructively discharging its undocumented workers in 
retaliation for their union support.  Because the ALJ thought 

that the discriminatees' return to Mexico rendered reinstate-
ment "at best an unlikely prospect," he recommended holding 
the reinstatement offers open for six months to permit them 
to return lawfully.  And since their absence from the country 
left the discriminatees "unavailable for employment" and 
therefore ineligible for backpay under standard NLRB policy, 
the ALJ suggested a minimum award of four weeks pay to 
each discriminatee to provide some measure of compensation 
for the discharged employees and to deter the employer.  
Sure-Tan, Inc., 234 N.L.R.B. 1187, 1192 (1978).

     Although the Board agreed that the company had violated 
the NLRA, it rejected the ALJ's recommended minimum 
remedy as "unnecessarily speculative" because no evidence 
supported his assumption that the discriminatees were not 
already back in the country and once again available for work.  
Id. at 1187.  The Board instead ordered its usual remedy of 
reinstatement with backpay, leaving for a future compliance 
proceeding the determination of each employee's availability 
for work and the calculation of backpay.  Id.  In doing so, the 
Board reiterated two standard rules:  "[t]he backpay period 
runs from the discriminatory loss of employment to the bona 
fide reinstatement offer," and discriminatees "found to be 
unavailable for work (including unavailability because of en-
forced absence from the country) will have their backpay 
tolled accordingly."  Sure-Tan, Inc., 246 N.L.R.B. 788, 788 
(1979).  One dissenting member urged the Board to "clarify" 
that reinstatement offers should be available only to discrimi-
natees who reenter the country lawfully.  Id. at 791.  A 
second dissenter urged that the backpay period run only from 
the date of the constructive discharge to the date the discri-
minatees left the country.  Id.

     The Seventh Circuit upheld the Board's decision and en-
forced its order, with a few modifications.  To guard against 
the possibility that the discriminatees "might be motivated to 
reenter the United States unlawfully to claim reinstatement 
and backpay," NLRB v. Sure-Tan, Inc., 672 F.2d 592, 603 
(7th Cir. 1982), the court directed that the reinstatement 
offers be made conditional upon legal re-entry, that they be 
sent in Spanish by verified delivery to the discriminatees' 

addresses in Mexico, and that they remain open for at least 
four years to afford the workers an opportunity to return 
lawfully and reclaim their jobs.  See id. at 606.  Using 
language later adopted by the Supreme Court and now relied 
on by Hoffman, the court also modified the Board's order by 
stating that "in computing backpay discriminatees will be 
deemed unavailable for work during any period when not 
lawfully entitled to be present and employed in the United 
States."  Id.  Sharing the ALJ's concern that the discrimina-
tees, having left the country immediately after their discharge 
with no prospect of lawful return, might receive no backpay 
at all, thus leaving them uncompensated and the employer 
undeterred, and echoing the ALJ's original suggested mini-
mum backpay award, the court directed the Board to modify 
the order to include a minimum award of six months' backpay 
to each discharged worker.  Six months, the court said, 
represented an estimate of the minimum time "during which 
the discriminatees might reasonably have remained employed 
without apprehension by INS, but for the employer's unfair 
labor practice."  Id.

     The Supreme Court agreed with the Board and the Sev-
enth Circuit that undocumented workers are protected by the 
NLRA.  It also agreed that the employer, by notifying the 
INS of the workers' immigration status, had committed an 
unfair labor practice.  Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 895-96.  Then, 
turning to the question of remedy, and repeatedly emphasiz-
ing the broad deference due the NLRB, the Court affirmed 
the Board's original order in all respects.  Even a cursory 
review of the Court's discussion--readers might want to 
pause and read it for themselves (see Appendix A)--reveals 
that 1) whether undocumented workers are eligible to receive 
backpay was not an issue before the Court and 2) the only 
backpay issue the Court considered was whether the six-
month minimum award imposed by the Seventh Circuit was 
an unduly speculative estimate "not sufficiently tailored to the 
actual, compensable injuries suffered by the discharged em-
ployees."  Id. at 901.  At the very outset of its discussion, the 
Court states:  "Petitioners attack those portions of the Court 
of Appeals' order which modified the Board's original order 

by providing for an irreducible minimum of six months' 
backpay for each employee and by detailing the language, 
acceptance period, and verification method of the reinstate-
ment offers."  Id. at 898 (emphasis added).  Notice that the 
Court nowhere says that the employer argued, as does Hoff-
man, that the discriminatees were ineligible to receive back-
pay simply because they were undocumented.  Notice also 
that the Court describes the sentence on which Hoffman 
places so much emphasis as merely repeating a limitation on 
backpay imposed by the Seventh Circuit, an issue that was 
neither challenged nor briefed by either the Board or the 
employer:

     Conditioning the offers of reinstatement on the employ-
     ees' legal reentry and deeming the employees "unavail-
     able" during any period when they were not lawfully 
     present are requirements that were in fact imposed by 
     the Court of Appeals in this case, and hence fully accept-
     ed by the Board....  The Board has clearly indicated its 
     agreement with these portions of the Court of Appeals' 
     remedial order by specifically noting that petitioners do 
     not challenge these parts of the order [and] by limiting 
     its own argument to the minimum backpay award issue 
     alone....
     
Id. at 903 n.12.  See also id. at 898 n.8;  Del Rey Tortilleria, 
Inc. v. NLRB, 976 F.2d 1115, 1123 (7th Cir. 1992) (Cudahy, J., 
dissenting).  The sentence on which Hoffman relies was not 
even an issue before the Court.

     Moreover, in setting aside the Seventh Circuit's six-month 
minimum award, the Court made clear that, contrary to 
Hoffman's argument, undocumented workers may receive 
backpay.  To begin with, the Court said that it "generally 
approve[s] the Board's original course of action in this case by 
which it ordered the conventional remedy of reinstatement 
with backpay, leaving until the compliance proceeding more 
specific calculations as to the amounts of backpay, if any, due 
these employees."  Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 902.  The Court 
explained that the discriminatees could receive backpay de-
spite their illegal status so long as the amount reflected the 

actual time they might have continued working but for the 
employer's unfair labor practice.  The Court did not fault the 
Seventh Circuit for awarding backpay to undocumented 
workers, nor for basing the award on the "minimum time 
during which the discriminatees might reasonably have re-
mained employed without apprehension by INS, but for the 
employer's unfair labor practice."  Id. at 899 (internal quota-
tion marks omitted).  Instead, the Court held that the Sev-
enth Circuit erred by picking the six-month period out of thin 
air.  The "main deficiency" in the Seventh Circuit's order, the 
Court explained, was not that it awarded backpay to undocu-
mented aliens, but that the amount of backpay awarded was 
"develop[ed] in the total absence of any record evidence as to 
the circumstances of the individual employees," thus violating 
the "cardinal" proposition "that a backpay remedy must be 
sufficiently tailored to expunge only the actual, and not 
merely speculative, consequences of the unfair labor prac-
tices."  Id. at 899-900 & n.9.  The Court continued:

     [T]he Court of Appeals "estimated" an appropriate peri-
     od of backpay without any evidence whatsoever as to the 
     period of time these particular employees might have 
     continued working before apprehension by the INS and 
     without affording petitioners any opportunity to provide 
     mitigating evidence.  In the absence of relevant factual 
     information or adequate analysis, it is inappropriate for 
     us to conclude, as does Justice Brennan, that the Court 
     of Appeals had estimated the proper minimum backpay 
     award "with a fair degree of precision."
     
Id. at 901 n.11.  If as Hoffman argues undocumented workers 
may never be awarded backpay, the Court would not have 
mentioned "the proper minimum backpay award," "the period 
of time these particular employees might have continued 
working before apprehension by the INS," or "affording 
petitioners any opportunity to provide mitigating evidence."  
Nor would there have been any need for more "relevant 
factual information or adequate analysis," much less for a 
compliance proceeding to determine the amount of backpay 
actually due.

     In light of the fact that Sure-Tan does not bar undocu-
mented workers from receiving backpay, what are we to 
make of the sentence on which Hoffman and our dissenting 
colleague place so much emphasis?  The answer is that the 
Court intended the sentence to guide the Board on remand in 
dealing with the unique circumstances of the Sure-Tan em-
ployees.  Recall that the Sure-Tan discriminatees, unlike 
Castro, had left the country.  Having approved the Board's 
general order of reinstatement with backpay, and having 
remanded for compliance proceedings to calculate the amount 
of backpay due, the Court went on to agree with the Seventh 
Circuit that whatever specific remedy the Board might for-
mulate must not encourage the discriminatees to re-enter the 
country illegally.  The INA's "central concern," the Court 
pointed out, was regulating "admission to the country."  Id. 
at 892.  The Court therefore added the paragraph in which 
Hoffman's sentence appears:

     [A]s the Court of Appeals recognized, the implementation 
     of the Board's traditional remedies at the compliance 
     proceedings must be conditioned upon the employees' 
     legal readmittance to the United States.  In devising 
     remedies for unfair labor practices, the Board is obliged 
     to take into account another equally important Congres-
     sional objective--to wit, the objective of deterring unau-
     thorized immigration that is embodied in the INA.  By 
     conditioning the offers of reinstatement on the employ-
     ees' legal reentry, a potential conflict with the INA is 
     thus avoided.  Similarly, in computing backpay, the 
     employees must be deemed "unavailable" for work (and 
     the accrual of backpay therefore tolled) during any 
     period when they were not lawfully entitled to be present 
     and employed in the United States.
     
Id. at 902-03 (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted).  Notice that the first sentence refers to 
"the employees' legal readmittance to the United States."  Id. 
at 903.  The second sentence mentions "deterring unautho-
rized immigration."  Id.  The third again refers to "the 
employees' legal reentry."  Id.  So when in the final sentence 

the Court mentions employees "not lawfully entitled to be 
present and employed in the United States," it must be 
referring only to those particular Sure-Tan employees who 
had left the country and could not lawfully return.

     Indeed, the sentence makes sense only because the Sure-
Tan discriminatees had left the country.  As the Court itself 
pointed out, although the employees were illegally present in 
the United States while working for the company, it was not 
unlawful for the company to have employed them.  Id. at 
892-93.  Because their employment was not prohibited, it 
cannot be said that they were "not lawfully entitled to be 
present and employed in the United States."  Not until the 
discriminatees left the country--at which point they could not 
have been reinstated without reentering in violation of immi-
gration law--did they become "not lawfully entitled to be 
present and employed in the United States."  And for the 
same reason, not until they left the country did the discrimi-
natees lose their "legal availability for work."  Id. at 904.

     To sum up, in light of Sure-Tan's reasoning and its holding 
that undocumented workers are protected by the NLRA and 
may in fact receive properly tailored awards of backpay, we 
must reject Hoffman's interpretation of the sentence.  Read-
ing it to bar all backpay to undocumented workers would 
expand a snippet of dicta well beyond the unique facts of 
Sure-Tan to create a blanket rule that, in addition to conflict-
ing with Sure-Tan itself, would undermine the purposes of 
both immigration and labor law.  See infra at 21-23.  What 
we said in Aka, where we also refused to adopt "an unquali-
fiedly literal reading" of an isolated passage from a Supreme 
Court opinion, applies here as well:  Hoffman's interpretation 
"would not carry out the Court's true purpose." 156 F.3d at 
1291.  Read properly, the sentence simply reminds the Board 
that the remedies it fashions for unfair labor practices must 
not encourage violations of immigration law.

     Two of the three Circuits that have addressed this issue 
agree with our interpretation of Sure-Tan.  In Felbro, the 
Ninth Circuit stated:  "In Sure-Tan, the Supreme Court did 

not address the issue whether undocumented workers re-
maining at work in the United States throughout the backpay 
period are entitled to backpay awards.  Sure-Tan barred 
from backpay only those undocumented workers who were 
unavailable for work in the backpay period because they were 
outside the United States without entry papers."  795 F.2d at 
722.  To be sure, in a later case also upholding an award of 
backpay to undocumented workers, the Ninth Circuit added a 
footnote speculating whether the enactment of IRCA might 
"change[] the mix of policy considerations underlying the case 
law which supports our conclusion that undocumented em-
ployees may recover backpay."  EEOC v. Hacienda Hotel, 
881 F.2d 1504, 1517 n.11 (9th Cir. 1989).  As we explain in the 
following section, however, IRCA's enactment did not alter 
the labor and employment law protections afforded undocu-
mented workers.  The Ninth Circuit, moreover, has never 
repudiated Felbro's and Hacienda Hotel's holdings that back-
pay can be awarded to undocumented workers.  Indeed, the 
Ninth Circuit and its district courts have consistently reaf-
firmed that undocumented workers continue to be protected 
by labor and employment laws after IRCA and have contin-
ued to award them backpay.  See, e.g., Kolkka, 170 F.3d 937;  
Contreras v. Corinthian Vigor Ins. Brokerage, Inc., 25 F. 
Supp. 2d 1053 (N.D. Cal. 1998);  Escobar v. Baker, 814 F. 
Supp. 1491, 1498 (W.D. Wash. 1993);  EEOC v. Tortilleria 
"La Mejor," 758 F. Supp. 585 (E.D. Cal. 1991). Likewise, in 
A.P.R.A. Fuel, the Second Circuit held that Sure-Tan bars 
awards of backpay only to those undocumented employees 
who are unavailable for work because they are outside the 
country and unable to lawfully reenter.  See A.P.R.A. Fuel, 
134 F.3d at 54-55.  But see Del Rey Tortilleria, 976 F.2d at 
1120-21 (interpreting Sure-Tan as imposing a blanket prohi-
bition on backpay awards to undocumented workers).

                              * * *

     Hoffman next argues that even if Sure-Tan does not bar 
backpay to undocumented aliens, the Immigration Reform 
and Control Act of 1986 does.  IRCA, it will be recalled, 
"establishe[d] penalties for employers who knowingly hire 

undocumented aliens, thereby ending the magnet that lures 
them to this country."  H.R. Rep. No. 99-682(I) at 45-46 
(1986), reprinted in 1986 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5649-50 (emphasis 
added).  In addition to employer sanctions, see 8 U.S.C. 
s 1324a(a), IRCA establishes procedures by which employers 
must verify employee eligibility to work, see 8 U.S.C. 
s 1324a(b), and makes it unlawful for employers to discrimi-
nate against authorized workers on the basis of citizenship or 
national origin, see 8 U.S.C. s 1324b.  Because undocumented 
workers "live in fear, afraid to seek help when their rights are 
violated, when they are victimized by criminals, employers or 
landlords," IRCA established amnesty procedures to legalize 
the status of undocumented workers illegally present in the 
country, allowing them "to contribute openly to society and 
... help[ing] to prevent the exploitation of this vulnerable 
population in the work place."  H.R. Rep. 99-682(I) at 49, 
1986 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 5653.

     According to Hoffman, "the plain intent of IRCA" was to 
prevent the Board from awarding undocumented workers 
backpay.  The Board interprets IRCA differently.  It argues 
that far from barring backpay awards, IRCA preserves the 
NLRA's "protections and remedies for undocumented aliens 
as one of many useful tools in a multifaceted strategy" to 
reduce illegal immigration by aiming at its "economic roots."

     Two principles guide our consideration of this issue.  First, 
while the Board's formulation of remedies for NLRA viola-
tions merits the highest level of deference, see ABF Freight, 
510 U.S. at 324, we owe no deference to its interpretation of 
IRCA.  See, e.g., New York Shipping Ass'n v. Federal Mari-
time Comm'n, 854 F.2d 1338, 1365 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (agency 
interpretation of a statute it does not administer is entitled to 
no deference).  Second, in enforcing the NLRA, the Board 
may not

     ignore other and equally important Congressional objec-
     tives.  Frequently the entire scope of Congressional 
     purpose calls for careful accommodation of one statutory 
     scheme to another, and it is not too much to demand of 
     an administrative body that it undertake this accommo-
     
     dation without excessive emphasis upon its immediate 
     task.
     
Southern Steamship Co. v. NLRB, 316 U.S. 31, 47 (1942).  If 
a conflict requires the Board "to accommodate the policies of 
another statutory regime within the framework of the legisla-
tion it administers," it "must fully enforce the requirements of 
its own statute, but must do so, insofar as possible, in a 
manner that minimizes the impact of its actions on the 
policies of the other statute."  New York Shipping, 854 F.2d 
at 1367.  "[A]n agency, faced with alternative methods of 
effectuating the policies of the statute it administers, (1) must 
engage in a careful analysis of the possible effects those 
alternative courses of action may have on the functioning and 
policies of other statutory regimes, with which a conflict is 
claimed;  and (2) must explain why the action taken mini-
mizes, to the extent possible, its intrusion into policies that 
are more properly the province of another agency or statuto-
ry regime."  Id. at 1370.  This is precisely what the Board 
has done.

     To begin with, we agree with the Board that nothing in 
IRCA bars awards of limited backpay to remedy unfair labor 
practices against undocumented workers.  Hoffman itself ac-
knowledges that IRCA neither amends nor repeals the 
NLRA or any other labor law.  The House Judiciary Com-
mittee Report, moreover, expressly states that IRCA's em-
ployer sanctions provisions are not intended to

     be used to undermine or diminish in any way labor 
     protections in existing law, or to limit the powers of 
     federal or state labor relations boards, labor standards 
     agencies, or labor arbitrators to remedy unfair practices 
     committed against undocumented employees for exercis-
     ing their rights before such agencies or for engaging in 
     activities protected by existing law.  In particular, the 
     employer sanctions provisions are not intended to limit in 
     any way the scope of the term "employee" in Section 2(3) 
     of the [NLRA], as amended, or of the rights and protec-
     tions stated in Sections 7 and 8 of that Act.
     
H.R. Rep. 99-682(I) at 58, 1986 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 5662.  The 
Judiciary Committee relied on Sure-Tan to support its view 
that continued protection of undocumented workers under the 
labor laws is fully consistent with IRCA's goals:

     As the Supreme Court observed in Sure-Tan, application 
     of the NLRA [to undocumented workers] "helps to as-
     sure that the wages and employment conditions of lawful 
     residents are not adversely affected by the competition of 
     illegal alien employees who are not subject to the stan-
     dard terms of employment."
     
Id. (internal citation omitted).  Echoing this view, the House 
Education and Labor Committee Report states that no provi-
sion of the law should

     limit the powers of State or Federal labor standards 
     agencies such as the Occupational Safety and Health 
     Administration, the Wage and Hour Division of the De-
     partment of Labor, the Equal Employment Opportunity 
     Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, or 
     Labor arbitrators, in conformity with existing law, to 
     remedy unfair practices committed against undocu-
     mented employees for exercising their rights before such 
     agencies or for engaging in activities protected by these 
     agencies.  To do otherwise would be counter-productive 
     of our intent to limit the hiring of undocumented employ-
     ees and the depressing effect on working conditions 
     caused by their employment.
     
H.R. Rep. No. 99-682(II) at 8-9 (1986), reprinted in 1986 
U.S.C.C.A.N. 5758 (emphasis added).  Not only does this 
legislative history make clear that IRCA imposed no limits on 
labor law protections for undocumented workers, but the 
statute itself authorized supplemental appropriations to the 
Department of Labor for expanded enforcement of existing 
labor standards and practices "in order to deter the employ-
ment of unauthorized aliens and remove the economic incen-
tives for employers to exploit and use such aliens."  Pub. L. 
No. 99-603, s 111(d), 100 Stat. 3359 (1986).  If as Hoffman 
argues IRCA limited labor law protection for undocumented 

workers, it hardly seems likely that IRCA would have simul-
taneously authorized additional funds to enforce the labor 
laws.

     In formulating remedies for unfair labor practices commit-
ted against undocumented workers, moreover, the Board has 
not "ignore[d] other and equally important Congressional 
objectives."  Southern Steamship, 316 U.S. at 47.  To the 
contrary, it has "fully enforce[d] the requirements of its own 
statute [the NLRA] in a manner that minimizes the impact of 
its actions on the policies of the other statute [IRCA]."  New 
York Shipping, 854 F.2d at 1367.  In its first post-IRCA case, 
A.P.R.A. Fuel, the Board observed that the NLRA and IRCA 
share "virtually identical policy objectives with respect to the 
American workplace," and concluded that it "can best achieve 
this mutuality of purpose and effect by vigorously enforcing 
the NLRA, including providing traditional Board remedies, 
with respect to all employees, to the extent that such enforce-
ment does not require or encourage unlawful conduct by 
either employers or individuals."  A.P.R.A. Fuel, 320 
N.L.R.B. at 415, 411.  "To do otherwise," the Board ex-
plained, "would increase the incentives for some unscrupulous 
employers to play the provisions of the NLRA and IRCA 
against each other to defeat the fundamental objectives of 
each, while profiting from their own wrongdoing with relative 
impunity.  Thus, these employers would be free to flout their 
obligations under the Act, secure in the knowledge that the 
Board would be powerless fully to remedy their violations."  
Id. at 415.  Taking account of these common statutory goals, 
the Board in A.P.R.A. Fuel ordered its usual remedy of 
reinstatement with backpay but imposed two limitations to 
avoid any conflict with the policies underlying IRCA:  it 
conditioned reinstatement on compliance with IRCA's em-
ployment eligibility verification requirements and terminated 
backpay when the discriminatees either are lawfully reinstat-
ed or, after a reasonable period of time, fail to produce the 
required employment documents.  See id. (citing NLRB v. 
Future Ambulette, Inc., 903 F.2d 140, 145 (2d Cir. 1990) 
(conditioning reinstatement of a driver whose license had 
been suspended on his presentation of a valid driver's license 

within a reasonable period of time and placing a time limit on 
backpay liability to prevent the employer from being tempted 
to rehire the driver before he obtained a valid license)).  
According to the Board, this remedy--conditional reinstate-
ment combined with limited backpay--best reconciles the 
goals of the NLRA and IRCA.  See A.P.R.A. Fuel, 320 
N.L.R.B. at 416;  see also Regal Recycling, Inc., 329 N.L.R.B. 
No. 38 (1999);  County Window Cleaning Co., 328 N.L.R.B. 
No. 26 (1999);  Intersweet, Inc., 321 N.L.R.B. 1 (1996).

     Courts and administrative agencies agree that IRCA does 
not limit labor law protections afforded undocumented work-
ers.  Enforcing the Board's A.P.R.A. Fuel remedy, the Sec-
ond Circuit held "without hesitation that IRCA did not dimin-
ish the Board's power to craft remedies for violations of the 
NLRA, provided that the Board's remedies do not conflict 
with the requirements of IRCA."  NLRB v. A.P.R.A. Fuel 
Oil Buyers Group, Inc., 134 F.3d 50, 56 (2d Cir. 1997).  
Withholding backpay from undocumented workers would, the 
court explained, undermine the purposes of both IRCA and 
the NLRA.  It would conflict with IRCA because "precluding 
the remedy would increase the incentives for employers to 
hire undocumented aliens," which would, in turn, increase the 
incentives that encourage illegal immigration.  Withholding 
backpay would also frustrate collective bargaining rights of 
lawful U.S. workers under the NLRA, the court found:

     [T]he lack of a backpay remedy would make undocu-
     mented workers an easy target for employers resisting 
     union organization, and, thus, frustrate the rights of 
     lawful U.S. workers under the NLRA.  An employer 
     could intimidate United States citizens and other lawful 
     residents by targeting undocumented workers for anti-
     union discharges.  Or, alternatively, legal workers might 
     be reluctant to organize in the first instance if the Board 
     were unable to issue any remedy against illegal actions 
     taken by employers against undocumented workers who 
     support the union.
     
Id. at 58;  see also, e.g., Kolkka, 170 F.3d at 941 (holding that 
IRCA does not limit the rights of undocumented workers to 
vote in union elections);  Patel v. Quality Inn South, 846 F.2d 
700, 704 (11th Cir. 1988) (applying the FLSA to undocu-
mented aliens to further IRCA's goal of "eliminating employ-
ers' economic incentives to hire" them);  Contreras, 25 
F. Supp. 2d at 1059-60 (continuing after IRCA to apply the 
FLSA to undocumented workers and to award them punitive 
damages, noting that "[t]he Ninth Circuit has taken the 
broader view of the Sure-Tan holding, upholding awards of 
back pay to undocumented aliens for wrongful employment 
practices if, during their time of discharge, the workers 
remained in the U.S. available for work, and the back pay 
period could be calculated with certainty"), Escobar, 814 
F. Supp. at 1498 (holding that undocumented workers can 
recover damages for violations of the Migrant and Seasonal 
Agricultural Workers Protection Act, as amended by IRCA);  
EEOC v. Switching Systems Div. of Rockwell Int'l Corp., 783 
F. Supp. 369, 374 (N.D. Ill. 1992) ("Title VII's protections 
extend to aliens who may be in this country either legally or 
illegally.") (post-IRCA);  Tortilleria "La Mejor," 758 F. Supp. 
585 (holding that Title VII continues to apply to undocu-
mented workers after IRCA);  EEOC Enforcement Guidance 
on Remedies Available to Undocumented Workers Under 
Federal Employment Discrimination Laws, No. 915.002 
(1999) (adopting the A.P.R.A. Fuel analysis and remedy for 
undocumented workers whose rights under Title VII, the 
Americans with Disabilities Act, the Rehabilitation Act, the 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, or the Equal Pay Act 
are violated).

     In contrast to the Board's limited backpay policy, Hoff-
man's position would undermine both IRCA and the NLRA.  
If employers are exempt from paying backpay to undocu-
mented workers, they will favor undocumented over docu-
mented workers, thus increasing the incentives for unlawful 
immigration, precisely what IRCA is intended to prevent.  As 
the Supreme Court said in Sure-Tan, "[i]f an employer 
realizes that there will be no advantage under the NLRA in 
preferring illegal aliens to legal resident workers, any incen-

tive to hire such illegal aliens is correspondingly lessened.  In 
turn, if the demand for undocumented aliens declines, there 
may then be fewer incentives for aliens themselves to enter in 
violation of the federal immigration laws."  467 U.S. at 893-
94.  Denying backpay would likewise subvert the common 
policy underlying both IRCA and the NLRA, i.e., maintaining 
wages and working conditions for authorized employees.  
Sure-Tan made this point as well:  "Application of the NLRA 
helps to assure that the wages and employment conditions of 
lawful residents are not adversely affected by the competition 
of illegal alien employees who are not subject to the standard 
terms of employment."  Id. at 893.  Finally, excusing employ-
ers from paying backpay to undocumented workers would 
undermine the collective bargaining rights of all employees, 
including authorized workers.  Sure-Tan put it this way:

     If undocumented alien employees were excluded from 
     participation in union activities and from protections 
     against employer intimidation, there would be created a 
     subclass of workers without a comparable stake in the 
     collective goals of their legally resident co-workers, 
     thereby eroding the unity of all the employees and 
     impeding effective collective bargaining.  Thus, the 
     Board's categorization of undocumented aliens as pro-
     tected employees furthers the purposes of the NLRA.
     
Id. at 892 (internal citation omitted).  Elaborating in A.P.R.A. 
Fuel, the Board explained that because "undocumented aliens 
are extremely reluctant to complain to the employer or to any 
of the agencies charged with enforcing workplace standards," 
they make easy targets for an employer's "unprincipled effort 
to stave off ... union representation."  A.P.R.A. Fuel, 320 
N.L.R.B. at 414.  Employers resisting unions could simply 
fire undocumented workers who try to organize and then 
raise "the unlawful immigration status of their discharged 
employees in retaliation for protected activities;"  employers 
might even "consider the penalties of IRCA a reasonable 
expense more than offset by the savings of employing undoc-
umented workers or the perceived benefits of union avoid-
ance."  Id. at 415.  This also harms the collective bargaining 

rights of authorized workers, the Board found, because "the 
continuous threat of replacement with powerless and desper-
ate undocumented workers would certainly chill the American 
and authorized alien workers' exercise of their Section 7 
rights."  Id. at 414.

     For all these reasons, we hold that the Board has fully 
satisfied its obligation to "accommodat[e] one statutory 
scheme to another."  Southern Steamship, 316 U.S. at 47.  
The Board crafted its limited backpay remedy to avoid con-
flict with IRCA and to promote the purposes of both statutes.  
The remedy reduces employer incentives to prefer undocu-
mented workers (IRCA's goal), reinforces collective bargain-
ing rights for all workers (the NLRA's goal), and protects 
wages and working conditions for authorized workers (the 
goal of both Acts).  Because these last two points reflect the 
Board's interpretation of the NLRA, we owe them considera-
ble deference.  See, e.g., Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 899 (warning 
that courts "should not substitute their judgment for that of 
the Board in determining how best to undo the effects of 
unfair labor practices").  If as Hoffman believes the Board 
has struck the wrong balance between the two statutes, its 
remedy lies in Congress, not this court.

                              * * *

     With this understanding of Sure-Tan and IRCA in mind, 
we return to the specific remedy the Board ordered in this 
case.  To repeat, it denied Castro reinstatement altogether 
and limited his backpay to the period beginning with his 
unlawful termination and ending on the date Hoffman learned 
of his undocumented status.  This remedy complies with 
Sure-Tan and IRCA in all respects.

     First, unlike the Seventh Circuit's six-month minimum 
award in Sure-Tan, the Board's award of backpay to Castro 
was not at all speculative.  The Board limited backpay to the 
period of time during which Castro could have continued 
working but for Hoffman's unfair labor practice.  This repre-
sents precisely the kind of individual tailoring demanded by 
Sure-Tan.  And unlike in Sure-Tan, the Board had no reason 

to worry that the remedy might encourage the discriminatee 
to re-enter the country illegally--Castro had never left.

     Second, the Board modified its usual A.P.R.A. Fuel remedy 
in this case to ensure that Castro's award would not conflict 
with immigration law.  Although the usual remedy includes 
reinstatement conditional on compliance with IRCA's verifica-
tion provisions, the Board denied conditional reinstatement to 
Castro because, under IRCA, Hoffman's discovery of Castro's 
ineligibility to work would have required his termination.  
For the same reason, the Board ended Castro's backpay as of 
the date Hoffman discovered his true immigration status.

     According to our dissenting colleague, requiring an employ-
er to give backpay to an employee it cannot now lawfully hire 
"boggles the mind."  See infra., Sentelle, J., dissenting.  It 
certainly would boggle the mind had the Board ordered 
reinstatement, but it rejected that option.  Instead it fash-
ioned a limited remedy, carefully crafted to promote the goals 
of the NLRA without running afoul of IRCA.  IRCA, as we 
pointed out above, does not make it unlawful for an alien to 
work;  it makes it unlawful for an employer to hire "an alien 
knowing the alien is ... unauthorized."  8 U.S.C. 
s 1324a(a)(1)(A).  Having now discovered Castro's unautho-
rized status, Hoffman can no longer employ him lawfully.  
But at the time Hoffman hired Castro, it complied with 
IRCA, and from that date until it learned he is unauthorized, 
nothing prohibited his continued employment.  It was to that 
period of Castro's lawful availability for employment that the 
Board limited the backpay award.  Far from boggling the 
mind, this remedy fully complies with Sure-Tan and avoids 
any violation of IRCA.

                               III

     Hoffman's additional arguments require little discussion.  
It claims that the Board misapplied the after-acquired evi-
dence rule.  According to Hoffman, Castro's undocumented 
status should have barred all backpay, not just backpay from 
the date Hoffman learned of Castro's status.  For this propo-
sition, Hoffman cites McKennon v. Nashville Banner Pub-

lishing Co., 513 U.S. 352 (1995), but misreads the case.  In 
McKennon, the lower court had dismissed a discharged em-
ployee's lawsuit under the Age Discrimination in Employment 
Act because the employer learned that the plaintiff had 
violated company policy by making unauthorized copies of 
sensitive documents.  The Supreme Court reversed, squarely 
rejecting the lower court's conclusion that discovery of 
"wrongdoing which would have resulted in discharge bars 
employees from any relief" for employers' unlawful acts.  Id. 
at 356.  Rejecting "[a]n absolute rule barring any recovery of 
backpay," the Court held that the typical remedy should be 
"backpay from the date of the unlawful discharge to the date 
the new information was discovered."  Id.  Consistent with 
its longstanding policy, that is precisely what the Board 
ordered in this case.  See, e.g., Marshall Durbin Poultry Co., 
310 N.L.R.B. 68, 70 (1993), enforced in pertinent part, 39 
F.3d 1312, 1317 (5th Cir. 1994);  John Cuneo, Inc., 298 
N.L.R.B. 856, 857 (1990).

     Equally without merit is Hoffman's argument that "[b]y 
awarding undocumented aliens backpay without any consider-
ation regarding whether these individuals can mitigate their 
damages, the Board treats illegal aliens more favorably than 
documented workers and by doing so, the Board violates the 
equal protection clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution."  Not only do we doubt the company's 
standing to assert the equal protection rights of third parties, 
see, e.g., Powers v. Ohio, 499 U.S. 400, 410-16 (1991), but 
Hoffman points to no evidence that the Board applies a 
different mitigation standard to undocumented workers.  In 
any event, the Board found that Castro had sought and 
obtained interim employment, thus fulfilling his duty to miti-
gate.  The Board subtracted his interim earnings of almost 
$4,000 from the backpay award.

     Finally, we think it worth repeating that Hoffman itself 
could have mitigated its backpay liability either by making a 
bona fide reinstatement offer in its letter recalling Castro a 
few weeks after it fired him, or by complying promptly with 
the Board's reinstatement order.  See supra at 7.  INS 
regulations issued pursuant to IRCA expressly permit rein-

statement after an unlawful discharge without requiring the 
employer to re-verify the employee's eligibility documents.  
See 8 C.F.R. s 274a.2(b)(viii)(A).

                                IV

     The petition for review is denied, and the cross-application 
for enforcement is granted.

                                                      So ordered.

                                 



                         


































                          APPENDIX A


                    


               [467 U.S 898-905 not available electronically.]     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, dissenting:  In May of 1988, an 
undocumented alien having illegally entered the United 
States compounded his illegality when he fraudulently used 
the name and birth certificate of Jose Castro to obtain 
employment in the production plant of Hoffman Plastic.  On 
January 31, 1989, the company laid off a number of employ-
ees supportive of a union organizing effort, including the 
employee (whose true name is still unknown) who had falsely 
represented himself to be Jose Castro.  Thereafter, an ad-
ministrative law judge, following an evidentiary hearing, 
found that Hoffman had engaged in unfair labor practices 
including the discriminatory selection of union adherents in 
the layoffs which included the illegal alien known as Castro.

     After the disclosure of the undocumented worker's illegal 
status and his fraudulent use of the birth certificate, the 
administrative law judge unsurprisingly recommended nei-
ther reinstatement nor backpay.  I find this decision by the 
administrative law judge unsurprising for multiple reasons.  
First, as it would be unlawful for Hoffman to employ the 
illegal and pay him earned wages, it defies logic--indeed it 
boggles the mind--to suppose that the employer could be 
compelled by law to pay to the illegal unearned wages which 
he could not lawfully earn and to which he would have no 
claim but for his prior successful fraud.  If this were a case of 
first impression I would find it simple.  I would hold that by 
no theory of law or equity could the federal government 
compel an employer to employ an illegal alien to do nothing 
and pay him for doing nothing when it could not lawfully 
employ him to work and pay him for working.  But this is not 
a case of first impression.  There is controlling Supreme 
Court law which makes the case an even easier one.

                             Analysis

     In Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883 (1984), the 
Supreme Court reviewed a Seventh Circuit decision which 
had modified an NLRB order applying the National Labor 
Relations Act to unfair labor practices committed against 
undocumented aliens.  See NLRB v. Sure-Tan, Inc., 672 F.2d 

592 (7th Cir. 1982).  The High Court concluded that the 
Circuit was correct in upholding the Board's position "that 
undocumented aliens are 'employees' within the meaning of 
[29 U.S.C. s 152(3)]."  467 U.S. at 891.  The Court reached 
this conclusion based on the deference owed the Board in 
"defining the term 'employee,' " a task "that 'has been as-
signed primarily to the agency created by Congress to admin-
ister the Act.' "  Id. at 891 (quoting NLRB v. Hearst Publica-
tions, Inc., 322 U.S. 111, 130 (1944));  cf. Chevron U.S.A., Inc. 
v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 842-45 (1984).  That said, the Su-
preme Court nonetheless vacated the remedial portion of the 
Seventh Circuit decision, which had ordered the Board to 
award an irreducible minimum of six months backpay to each 
of the affected employees even in the face of the employees' 
illegal entry and presence in the United States.  In vacating 
that portion of the Seventh Circuit decision, the Supreme 
Court held, "[b]y directing the Board to impose a minimum 
backpay award without regard to the employees' actual eco-
nomic losses or legal availability for work, the Court of 
Appeals plainly exceeded its limited authority under the Act."  
Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 904-05 (emphasis added).  Based on 
that italicized phrase, even if this were all the Supreme Court 
had held on the question, I would nonetheless conclude that 
Sure-Tan compels us to vacate the Board's decision overrul-
ing the logical result reached by the administrative law judge.  
But the Supreme Court did not stop there.

     The Supreme Court explicitly rejected the position taken 
by the NLRB and the majority in today's decision when it 
held, "[s]imilarly, in computing backpay, the employees must 
be deemed 'unavailable' for work (and the accrual of backpay 
therefore tolled) during any period when they were not 
lawfully entitled to be present and employed in the United 
States."  Id. at 903.  It is difficult to see how the Court could 
more clearly have decided the question oppositely to the 
Board's resolution in the decision we now review.

     Read in context, the sentence speaks even more plainly:

     Nonetheless, as the Court of Appeals recognized, the 
     implementation of the Board's traditional remedies at the 
     
     compliance proceedings must be conditioned upon the 
     employees' legal readmittance to the United States.  In 
     devising remedies for unfair labor practices, the Board is 
     obliged to take into account another equally important 
     Congressional objective--to wit, the objective of deter-
     ring unauthorized immigration that is embodied in the 
     INA.  By conditioning the offers of reinstatement on the 
     employees' legal reentry, a potential conflict with the 
     INA is thus avoided.  Similarly, in computing backpay, 
     the employees must be deemed "unavailable" for work 
     (and the accrual of backpay therefore tolled) during any 
     period when they were not lawfully entitled to be present 
     and employed in the United States.
     
Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 902-03 (emphasis added) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).  In a feat of ipse dixit, 
the logic of which escapes me, the majority today declares 
that this paragraph demonstrates that the Supreme Court's 
holding in the final sentence has nothing to do with the issues 
before us.  The Supreme Court in a rather concise paragraph 
makes it plain that it is dealing with the possibility of 
affording a backpay remedy to illegal aliens.  It further 
makes it plain that such a remedy is not an option when the 
employees are "deemed unavailable" for work and that such a 
period of deemed unavailability occurs "during any period 
when they were not lawfully entitled to be present and 
employed in the United States."  The majority refuses to 
apply this rather simple statement of law that a lack of legal 
presence in the country constitutes unavailability for employ-
ment to the anonymous person known as Castro.  The major-
ity reaches this conclusion by creating a dichotomy--never 
mentioned by the Supreme Court--between illegal aliens who 
have departed the United States without legally re-entering 
and those like the illegal alien known as Castro who may or 
may not have interrupted the continuity of their illegal stay in 
the country.  See Maj. Op. at 14-15.  Having created the 
dichotomy heretofore unrecognized by the Supreme Court, 
the majority then refuses to apply the sentence by its terms 
to persons in the newly minted subcategory, apparently be-
cause the Supreme Court did not separate out the subcatego-

ry and reaffirm the applicability of the stated principle to it.  
The majority does not recognize that neither does the Court 
ever suggest that application is limited to employees whose 
legal unavailability arises from an interrupted period of illegal 
presence as opposed to a continuous one.

     The majority accuses me of taking a sentence out of 
context from the Supreme Court's decision.  For its proposi-
tion that the quoted sentence is not applicable, the majority 
expends several pages of type and suggests ways of supplying 
emphases not present in the opinion to get around the 
apparent meaning of the Supreme Court's language that 
"employees must be deemed 'unavailable' for work (and the 
accrual of backpay therefore tolled) during any period when 
they were not lawfully entitled to be present and employed in 
the United States."  Read in context, read out of context, or 
read both ways and compared, the majority is left with no 
way of dealing with the High Court's plain statement.  I 
invite the reader to review the phrase "not lawfully entitled to 
be present and employed" in its original context.  I further 
suggest that contextual illumination for this sentence of the 
High Court's opinion is supplied in the Court's analysis of the 
Seventh Circuit decision that it was reversing.  The High 
Court described that decision as "[r]ecognizing that the dis-
charged employees would most likely not have been lawfully 
available for employment and so would receive no backpay 
award at all...."  Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 890 (emphasis 
added).  Thus, the governing factor in determining eligibility 
for backpay awards is not mere presence, but also the lawful 
entitlement to be present.

     The majority fundamentally errs in rewriting the phrase 
"not lawfully entitled to be present and employed in the 
United States" so that it has no application to a case like the 
present one in which an alien fits precisely within the situa-
tion described by that phrase:  i.e., an alien who is present in 
the United States but without legal permission to be present 
and without a legal right to be employed here.  In effect, that 
view rewrites the phrase to read "not present, and not 
lawfully entitled to be present in the United States."  It adds 
the "not present" limitation and deletes the "not lawfully 

entitled to be ... employed" requirement.  That rewriting of 
Sure-Tan leads the majority astray.

     The rewriting of Sure-Tan endorsed by the majority ap-
pears to have first occurred in Bevles Co. v. Teamsters Local 
986, 791 F.2d 1391, 1393 (9th Cir. 1986).  Before that time, 
even its critics believed that Sure-Tan meant what it said.  
See Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 911 (Brennan, J., dissenting) 
(criticizing the majority for holding that undocumented aliens 
"are effectively deprived of any remedy");  Felbro, Inc., 274 
N.L.R.B. 1268, 1269 (1985) (stating that the undocumented 
aliens in Felbro, who had remained in the country, would be 
affected by Sure-Tan);  Local 512, Warehouse & Office Work-
ers' Union v. NLRB, 795 F.2d 705, 725 (9th Cir. 1986) 
("Felbro") (Beezer, J., dissenting in part);  Terry A. Bethel, 
Recent Labor Law Decisions of the Supreme Court, 45 Md. 
L. Rev. 179, 196 (1986) ("Sure-Tan ... deprive[s] undocu-
mented employees of any effective remedy for unlawful dis-
crimination....");  Lucinda M. Cardinal, Note, Immigration 
Reform:  Solving the "Problem" of the Illegal Alien in the 
American Workforce, 7 Cardozo L. Rev. 223, 244 (1985) 
("Sure-Tan mandates that illegal aliens do not receive the 
remedies granted their legal coworkers.");  John W. Sagaser, 
Note, Rights Without A Remedy--Illegal Aliens Under the 
National Labor Relations Act, 27 B.C. L. Rev. 407, 452 (1986) 
("By denying a minimum backpay award, the Court in effect 
deprives illegal alien workers of any remedy.").  In Bevles, 
the court was reviewing an arbitrator's award;  the issue was 
whether the arbitrator's decision showed a "manifest disre-
gard of the law," and the court was not entitled to reverse 
erroneous legal conclusions.  See 791 F.2d at 1392-93 & n.2.  
In not following Sure-Tan, the court ignored the lawful 
presence requirement and considered whether the aliens in 
that case were lawfully entitled to be employed.  The court 
clearly relied on the fact that--prior to the passage of 
IRCA--it was not a criminal act for employers to hire 
undocumented aliens.  See id. at 1393.  The court also consid-
ered the effect of section 2805 of the California Labor Code, 
which prohibited employers from knowingly employing undoc-
umented aliens if it would affect lawful workers.  Because an 

unreversed state court decision had previously held section 
2805 unconstitutional, the court did not fault the arbitrator 
for disregarding it.  See id. at 1393-94.

     The focus on the lawful right to seek employment continued 
in Felbro.  The Ninth Circuit there again relied on the fact 
that it was not illegal for an employer to hire undocumented 
aliens.  Because the Sure-Tan employees could not lawfully 
reenter the United States, the court noted that they were 
"unavailable for work during the backpay period."  Felbro, 
795 F.2d at 719.  The court reasoned that being present in 
the United States did not create unavailability because 
"[t]here is no provision 'in the INA making it unlawful for an 
employer to hire an alien who is present or working in the 
United States without appropriate authorization.' "  Id. (quot-
ing Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 892-93).

     Since the passage of IRCA, both the Second and Ninth 
Circuits have registered concern over IRCA's effect on their 
misguided attempts to limit Sure-Tan.  In Rios v. Enterprise 
Ass'n Steamfitters Local Union 638, 860 F.2d 1168 (2d Cir. 
1988), the Second Circuit was careful to explain that recovery 
was only permissible because the claimants were "available 
for employment during the entire period covered by the 
backpay order, since such employment would have violated no 
immigration law."  Id. at 1173.  The court explicitly reserved 
the question of whether IRCA would affect later claims.  See 
id. at 1172 n.2.  The Ninth Circuit likewise has questioned 
the viability of its Felbro decision after IRCA.  See EEOC v. 
Hacienda Hotel, 881 F.2d 1504, 1517-18 n.11 (9th Cir. 1989).  
In a further Second Circuit case postdating the enactment of 
IRCA, that circuit continued to follow its pre-enactment 
precedent.  See NLRB v. A.P.R.A. Fuel Oil Buyers Group, 
Inc., 134 F.3d 50 (2d Cir. 1997).  However, as Judge Jacobs 
clearly demonstrated on dissent, without the slender reed of 
the employer's legal capacity to hire undocumented aliens, 
"an undocumented alien is not 'lawfully available for employ-
ment.' "  Id. at 62 (Jacobs, J., dissenting) (quoting Sure-Tan, 
emphasis supplied by Judge Jacobs).  As Judge Jacobs point-
ed out, the remedy of backpay to the alien ineligible for 
employment "is foreclosed by Sure-Tan and IRCA...."  Id.

     Like the Second Circuit in A.P.R.A. Fuel, the majority 
today offers nothing that should lead us to believe that the 
Supreme Court in Sure-Tan meant anything other than what 
it said;  and what it said disqualifies the illegal alien in this 
case from an award of backpay.

                    Conclusion

     For the reasons set forth above, I would grant Hoffman 
Plastic's petition for review of the Board's order, and deny 
the cross-petition for employment.  I respectfully dissent.

                                                                     