                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 22, 2002      Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 01-1225

              Natural Resources Defense Council and 
                       Wilderness Society, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

               Federal Aviation Administration and 
                 Janet F. Garvey, Administrator, 
                           Respondents

                        Gary J. Kauffman, 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                 Federal Aviation Administration

     Robert A. Bourque argued the cause for petitioners.  With 
him on the briefs were Johanna H. Wald, Leslie Jones, Paul 
C. Gluckow and Sharon Buccino.

     Susan Pacholski, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondents.  With her on the brief was 
Ronald Spritzer, Attorney.

     William P. Horn was on the brief for intervenor.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  The Natural Resources Defense 
Council, Inc. and The Wilderness Society (collectively 
"NRDC") petition for review of the Federal Aviation Admin-
istration's determination that the National Parks Air Tour 
Management Act of 2000, 49 U.S.C. s 40128, does not bar 
Vortex Aviation Inc.'s ("Vortex") proposed sightseeing tours 
out of the Jackson Hole Airport.  Because we conclude that 
the issues presented in the petition are unripe for judicial 
review, we dismiss the petition for lack of jurisdiction.

                                I.

     In April 2000, Congress enacted the National Parks Air 
Tour Management Act ("the Act"), which provides for the 
regulation of commercial air tour operations over national 
parks and tribal lands within or abutting national parks.  
Pub. L. No. 106-181, 114 Stat. 185 (2000).  The Act requires 
the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration 
("FAA"), in conjunction with the Director of the National 
Park Service, to "establish an air tour management plan for 
any national park or tribal land" in order to "develop ac-
ceptable and effective measures to mitigate or prevent the 
significant adverse impacts, if any, of commercial air tour 
operations upon the natural and cultural resources, visitor 
experiences, and tribal lands."  49 U.S.C. s 40128(b)(1).  
Before conducting commercial air tour operations over na-
tional parks or tribal lands, the Act requires each commer-
cial air tour operator to apply to the FAA for authority to 
conduct such operations.  Id. s 40128(a)(2)(A).

     The Act defines "commercial air tour operation" as:

     [A]ny flight, conducted for compensation or hire in a 
     powered aircraft where a purpose of the flight is sight-
     seeing over a national park, within 1/2 mile outside the 
     boundary of any national park, or over tribal lands, 
     during which the aircraft flies--
     
          (i)  below a minimum altitude ... above ground level 
               (except solely for purposes of takeoff or landing, or 
               necessary for safe operation of an aircraft ... );  or
               
          (ii) less than 1 mile laterally from any geographic 
               feature within the park (unless more than 1/2 mile 
               outside the boundary).
               
Id. s 40128(f)(4)(A).  In determining whether a particular 
proposed flight is a commercial air tour operation, the FAA 
"may consider" the following factors:  "(i) whether there was 
a holding out to the public of willingness to conduct a 
sightseeing flight for compensation or hire;  (ii) whether a 
narrative that referred to areas or points of interest on the 
surface below the route of the flight was provided by the 
person offering the flight;  (iii) the area of operation;  (iv) the 
frequency of flights conducted by the person offering the 
flight;  (v) the route of flight;  (vi) the inclusion of sightseeing 
flights as part of any travel arrangement package offered by 
the person offering the flight;  (vii) whether the flight would 
have been canceled based on poor visibility of the surface 
below the route of the flight;  and (viii) any other factors that 
the Administrator and the Director consider appropriate."  
Id. s 40128(f)(4)(B).

                               II.

     The Jackson Hole Airport, which is managed and operated 
by the Jackson Hole Airport Board pursuant to a Use Agree-
ment with the United States, is located in the State of 
Wyoming, just inside the southern border of Grand Teton 
National Park.  Vortex, which provides nonscheduled com-
mercial aviation services pursuant to FAA certification under 
Parts 119, 133, 135, and 137 of the FAA's regulations, 14 
C.F.R. pts. 119, 133, 135, 137, sought permission from the 
Board to operate charter flights, including scenic tours, out of 

the Airport.  The Board, however, expressed concerns about 
the Act's applicability to sightseeing flights out of the Airport 
and the absence of an air tour management plan for the Park 
as required by the Act.  Vortex, in turn, sought clarification 
from the FAA regarding the applicability of the Act to its 
proposed sightseeing tours out of the Airport.  The NRDC 
challenges the FAA's letter responses to Vortex's inquiries.

                                A.

     In August 1999 and again in May 2000, Vortex applied to 
the Board for permission to operate charter services, includ-
ing scenic air tours, out of the Airport.  On May 17, 2000, the 
Board approved Vortex's proposed operations, but on June 
12, 2000, concerned that Vortex's scenic air tour operations 
would violate the Act's restrictions on sightseeing tours over 
national parks, the Board rescinded its approval subject to 
Vortex's full compliance with the Act.  Although Vortex 
continued discussions with the Board, claiming that Vortex's 
proposed flights were in compliance with the Act and that, in 
any event, the Board lacked the authority to prevent Vortex's 
operations, on July 17, 2000, the Board issued a moratorium 
on the approval of all commercial scenic air tour operations 
out of the Airport pending development of an air tour man-
agement plan or "other conclusive determination" that the 
proposed flights would not violate the Act.

     On June 22, 2000, Vortex wrote to the FAA seeking 
clarification as to the applicability of the Act to Vortex's 
proposed air tour operations.  In the letter, Vortex described 
its proposed flights, stating that its scenic air tour operations 
will not be conducted over the Park and emphasizing that it 
has "NEVER proposed flights over any portion of the [P]ark.  
[Except those portions that are necessary to fly over as a 
result to approach for a landing or for departure from take-
off.]" (brackets in original).  Vortex asked the FAA to re-
spond to four questions:

          [1]  Does the Act apply to the proposed scenic flights 
               that Vortex intends on performing at the Jackson 
               
               Hole Airport for flights conducted outside the 
               Park?
               
          [2]  Does the language in [s 40128(f)(4)(A)(i), the min-
               imum altitude provision and its takeoff and land-
               ing exception,] ensure that those portions of 
               flights that cross sections of the Park for normal 
               approach to landing and departure from takeoff 
               are excluded from being considered a scenic air 
               tour over the Park when the final tour destination 
               is, in fact, outside the Park?
               
          [3]  [Does the Use Agreement] constitute the current 
               conditions of scenic air tour overflights for the 
               Park until an Air Tour Management Plan is en-
               acted and approved by the FAA in the future for 
               Grand Teton Park?
               
          [4]  If the above is the affirmative, does the Park have 
               the right to unilaterally change overflight rules in 
               the absence of FAA approval under the terms and 
               conditions of the Act?  Do the current overflight 
               rules of the Park 'stay in place' until the whole 
               process as defined in the Act take[s] place to 
               enact a change from the existing rules contained 
               in [the Use Agreement].
               
On August 13, 2000, Vortex wrote the FAA again.  Informing 
the FAA that the Board had not lifted the moratorium, 
Vortex asked for clarification of the Board's authority to 
enforce the Act, and, stating that the Board was using the 
geographic feature provision of the Act, 49 U.S.C. 
s 40128(f)(4)(A)(ii), to preclude Vortex's flights, Vortex also 
sought the FAA's views on the meaning of "geographic 
feature" as used in the Act and the effect under the Act of 
flying within one mile of a geographic feature during takeoff 
and landing.  On August 31, 2000 and October 17, 2000, the 
Board also wrote the FAA seeking its views on the meaning 
of "geographic feature" and "laterally" as used in the Act, and 
inquiring as to the Board's authority under the Act to control 
a flight's route.

     The FAA responded to these questions in three letters.  In 
the first letter, dated August 9, 2000, the FAA responded, 
through Donald P. Byrne, the Assistant Chief Counsel for the 
Regulations Division, to Vortex's first two questions, and 
concluded that the proposed flights would not violate the Act.  
In the second letter, dated September 7, 2000, the FAA, 
through Nancy D. LoBue, Assistant Chief Counsel for Air-
ports and Environmental Law in the Office of the Chief 
Counsel, addressed Vortex's third and fourth questions con-
cerning the Board's authority to impose restrictions on sight-
seeing flights out of the Airport, and declined to offer a 
definitive opinion.  However, in the third letter, dated Octo-
ber 27, 2000, the FAA, through Mr. Byrne, offered an adviso-
ry opinion on the remaining questions presented by Vortex 
and the Board in their letters of August 2002.

                                B.

     The first letter.  Regarding Vortex's first question, the 
FAA, through Mr. Byrne, stated that based on the informa-
tion provided by Vortex, Vortex's proposed scenic flights 
would not violate the Act.  He explained:

     The term "commercial air tour operation," is defined, in 
     part, as "any flight, conducted for compensation or hire 
     in a powered aircraft where a purpose of the flight is 
     sightseeing over a national park, within 1/2 mile outside 
     the boundary of any national park, or over tribal 
     lands...."  [49 U.S.C. s 40128(f)(4)(A).] According to 
     the information [Vortex] provided ... , Vortex Aviation's 
     sightseeing operations are not conducted over Grand 
     Teton National Park or within 1/2 mile of the Park's 
     boundary[;] it is only entering and exiting the Park as 
     necessary for takeoff and landing and following the take-
     off and landing routes as prescribed by the Airport 
     Board.
     
Thus, Mr. Byrne concluded, "it is clear that the National 
Park[s] Air Tour Management Act does not prohibit or limit 
Vortex Aviation's operations as long as Vortex Aviation con-
ducts its sightseeing flights outside of Grand Teton National 

Park and more than 1/2 mile outside the Park boundary."  
Regarding Vortex's second question, Mr. Byrne stated that 
Vortex would not violate the Act by descending below the 
minimum altitude set forth in the Act as long as it was solely 
for the purpose of takeoff and landing.

     The second letter.  In a second letter, the FAA, through 
Ms. LoBue, began by noting "serious concerns" about the 
Board's moratorium on commercial sightseeing flights in view 
of the fact that the Board is primarily responsible for noise 
abatement and because the Airport's federal financial assis-
tance is contingent upon the Board providing access to air-
port users "on fair and reasonable terms, without unjust 
discrimination."  However, regarding Vortex's third question, 
she concluded that it was unnecessary for the FAA to issue 
an advisory opinion concerning the Board's authority to regu-
late sightseeing overflights of the Park under paragraph (h) 
of the Use Agreement, which governs commercial scenic and 
charter flights over noise sensitive areas of the Park.  Vortex, 
she stated, "is not proposing to initiate flights over [the Park] 
(other than those necessary to land and takeoff)."  She 
explained further that "[i]f Vortex proposes to initiate such 
flights before the [Act] is implemented by regulation, then 
FAA would discuss the genesis and proper interpretation of 
paragraph (h) with the parties to the Use Agreement before 
issuing any definitive opinion."  Similarly, regarding Vortex's 
fourth question, Ms. LoBue declined to reach the legality of 
paragraph (h) of the Use Agreement because "Vortex is not 
currently conducting overflights of the Park except for land-
ings and takeoffs."

     The third letter.  On October 27, 2000, the FAA, through 
Mr. Byrne, responded to the remaining questions that Vortex 
and the Board posed.  Mr. Byrne stated that the "Board has 
no authority under the Act to prohibit scenic operations from 
taking off or landing at Jackson Hole Airport" or to otherwise 
enforce the Act by establishing flight routes.  He offered an 
interpretation of the geographic feature provision of the Act, 
providing hypothetical examples of its applicability.

                               III.

     On May 23, 2001, the NRDC petitioned for review of the 
FAA's opinion, as set forth in the three letters of August 9, 
September 7, and October 27, 2000, that the Act did not bar 
Vortex's proposed flights.  The NRDC contends that, con-
trary to the Act's express and unambiguous terms, the FAA 
misinterpreted the Act (1) by erroneously concluding that a 
flight is not a "commercial air tour operation" unless its only 
purpose is sightseeing despite the unambiguous statutory 
language that requires only that "a purpose of the flight [be] 
sightseeing," 49 U.S.C. s 40128(f)(4)(A) (emphasis added), 
and (2) by improperly interpreting the takeoff and landing 
exception of the minimum altitude provision, id. 
s 40128(f)(4)(A)(i), as an exception to the entire commercial 
air tour operation definition, including its separate geographic 
feature subsection, id. s 40128(f)(4)(A)(ii).  The NRDC also 
contends that in concluding that Vortex's proposed flights 
were not covered by the Act, the FAA failed to analyze 
Vortex's "self-serving assertion that the purpose of its flights 
while over the Park was only to takeoff and land from the 
Airport, despite clear evidence in the record ... that Vortex's 
flights also had an undeniable sightseeing purpose," as indi-
cated by Vortex's proposal to take a route that would prolong 
the flight time over the Park and thus provide "a spectacular 
view of the Park's signature geographic feature," the Tetons.  
Petitioners' Br. at 18.

     The FAA disputes the NRDC's contentions on the merits, 
pointing to "the unique circumstances of this case, where a 
major airport is located within a national park," Respondents' 
Br. at 13, but contends as a threshold matter that the court 
lacks jurisdiction because (1) the petition is untimely under 49 
U.S.C. s 46110(a);  (2) the three letters do not constitute final 
agency action under 49 U.S.C. s 46110;  (3) the issues raised 
in the petition are unripe;  and (4) the petitioners lack stand-
ing.  Because we conclude that the issues presented in the 
petition are not ripe for review, we do not address the merits 
of NRDC's petition or the FAA's additional jurisdictional 
claims.

     The basic rationale underlying the ripeness doctrine is 
preventing courts from entangling themselves in premature 
adjudication involving abstract disagreements over adminis-
trative policies.  Abbott Labs. v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 148 
(1967).  It is well established that the court's ripeness inquiry 
is twofold, requiring us "to evaluate both the fitness of the 
issues for judicial decision and the hardship to the parties of 
withholding court consideration."  Id. at 149;  see also Wyo. 
Outdoor Council v. U.S. Forest Serv., 165 F.3d 43, 48 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999).

     Under the fitness for review prong, the court considers not 
only whether the claims present purely legal questions that 
are presumptively suitable for judicial review, but also wheth-
er the courts and agency would benefit from postponing 
review until the questions at issue have taken on a more 
definite form.  Cronin v. FAA, 73 F.3d 1126, 1131 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  Thus, "the 'court's interests in avoiding unnecessary 
adjudication and in deciding issues in a concrete setting' 
militate in favor of postponing review if, for example, the 
court finds 'that resolution of the dispute is likely to prove 
unnecessary,' or 'that the court's deliberations might benefit 
from letting the question arise in some more concrete ... 
form.' "  Id. (quoting Eagle-Picher Indus., Inc. v. EPA, 759 
F.2d 905, 915 (D.C. Cir. 1985), and State Farm Mut. Auto. 
Ins. Co. v. Dole, 802 F.2d 474, 479 (D.C. Cir. 1986)) (alteration 
in original) (citations omitted).  These factors weigh against 
immediate review.

     First, the interpretation of the Act that the NRDC chal-
lenges was set forth in three letters that on their face 
demonstrate the tentativeness of the legal determination re-
garding Vortex's operations.  This is evident from the fact 
that the FAA, in determining that the Act did not bar the 
proposed flights, relied solely on Vortex's descriptions of the 
flights that it was proposing to fly out of the Airport.  In the 
first letter to Vortex, Mr. Byrne stated:

     According to the information you provided ..., Vortex 
     Aviation's sightseeing operations are not conducted over 
     Grand Teton National Park or within 1/2 mile of the Park's 
     
     boundary, it is only entering and exiting the Park as 
     necessary for takeoff and landing....  
     
          ....
     
          Given the facts as stated above, it is clear that the 
     National Park[s] Air Tour Management Act does not 
     prohibit or limit Vortex Aviation's operations as long as 
     Vortex Aviation conducts its sightseeing flights outside of 
     Grand Teton National Park and more than 1/2 mile outside 
     the Park boundary.  (emphasis added)
     
In the second letter, Ms. LoBue reaffirmed the tentative 
nature of the first letter, explaining that although it was 
unnecessary for the FAA "to issue an advisory opinion con-
cerning the authority of the Board to regulate commercial 
sightseeing overflights" because Vortex had not proposed 
sightseeing flights over the Park, the FAA would reconsider 
this decision if, in fact, Vortex "proposes to initiate such 
flights."  Finally, in the third letter, Mr. Byrne again empha-
sized the hypothetical and advisory nature of the opinion 
stated in the letters, noting that "[t]he FAA already has 
issued an interpretation stating that Vortex's proposed sight-
seeing operations are not covered by the Act if they are 
conducted outside the boundaries of Grand Teton National 
Park, regardless of the fact that Vortex lands and departs 
from Jackson Hole Airport."  (emphasis added).

     The three letters thus make clear that the FAA's determi-
nation of the applicability of the Act flowed solely from 
Vortex's description of its proposed flights.  In other words, 
the FAA's interpretation of the Act was not based upon a 
factual determination, consistent with the factors that the 
FAA may consider under the Act in determining whether a 
flight is a commercial air tour operation, see 49 U.S.C. 
s 40128(f)(4)(B), that Vortex's actual operations would be 
immune from regulation under the Act.  The FAA did not 
purport to make any findings in the letters regarding whether 
Vortex's actual flights had as a purpose sightseeing over the 
Park.  Had the FAA done so, presumably it would have 
addressed Vortex's "true" purpose and intent in light of 
Vortex's choice of flight path and flight times and Vortex's 
description of its tours on its website.  As it was, however, 

the FAA made neither findings regarding, nor mention of, 
Vortex's proposed departure routes, Vortex's flight times, or 
Vortex's description of its tours on its website, all of which 
are relevant factors in making a determination as to whether, 
in fact, a flight is a commercial air tour operation, see id.  To 
the extent the FAA rendered an interpretation of the Act 
based on Vortex's factual assertions, in essence, the FAA's 
views were based on a hypothetical factual scenario and hence 
are not appropriate for review.  Cf. Aerosource, Inc. v. Slater, 
142 F.3d 572, 579-80 (3d Cir. 1998).  Indeed, the interpreta-
tion of the Act in the three letters, while seemingly a final 
position as to the applicability of the Act to the hypothetical 
flights described by Vortex, would be consistent with a future 
determination by the FAA that Vortex's flights violate the 
Act if, for example, the NRDC's assertions are borne out by 
the evidence.

     Second, the issues raised in the NRDC's petition are not 
strictly legal in nature.  Determining the applicability of the 
Act to Vortex's actual flights requires the application of law to 
facts based on evidence that was not before the FAA and is 
not before the court.  Further, the challenges to the FAA's 
interpretation of the Act, which present legal issues, are 
intertwined with the FAA's assessment of "the facts."  For 
example, in contending that the FAA wrongly read the Act to 
be triggered only when "the only purpose" of a flight is 
sightseeing over a Park rather than when "a purpose" of a 
flight is sightseeing (as the NRDC contends the Act re-
quires), the NRDC also maintains that the FAA ignored the 
factual possibility that Vortex's flights could have a dual 
purpose that includes sightseeing over the Park.  To resolve 
the validity of the FAA's statutory construction, the court 
would have to examine the record evidence to determine 
whether the FAA's factual findings were supported and 
whether the FAA's assessment of the purpose or purposes of 
Vortex's flights was appropriate.  Again, however, the FAA 
did not purport to make findings as to whether Vortex's 
actual flights had as a purpose sightseeing over the Park but 
took as true Vortex's assertion that it was not conducting 
sightseeing tours over the Park.  Even the seemingly legal 

issues presented by the NRDC turn then on evidentiary facts 
that are not developed in the record.

     As the FAA observes, the NRDC, to advance its challenges 
to the FAA's statutory interpretation, "indulge[s] in specula-
tion regarding the probabl[e] routes of Vortex's flights, their 
likely duration and the quality of the scenery that might be 
visible from the windows of Vortex's helicopters," and relies 
on documents that were not before the FAA, including a map 
of Vortex's proposed flight path and information placed on 
Vortex's website a year after the FAA's letters were issued.  
Respondents' Br. at 25.  Further, the FAA states in its brief 
that because Vortex began operating out of the Airport in the 
summer of 2001, there is now actual evidence of Vortex's 
operations out of the Airport.  Under the circumstances, this 
is a classic case where "further factual development would 
'significantly advance our ability to deal with the legal issues 
presented' and would 'aid us in their resolution.' "  Ohio 
Forestry Ass'n, Inc. v. Sierra Club, 523 U.S. 726, 737 (1998) 
(quoting Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Envtl. Study Group, 
Inc., 438 U.S. 59, 82 (1978)).

     In light of the tentative nature of the FAA's interpretation 
of the applicability of the Act to Vortex's flights and the lack 
of a factual grounding for the NRDC's challenges, the views 
expressed in the FAA's three letters are akin to the informal 
opinion letters at issue in New York Stock Exchange, Inc. v. 
Bloom, 562 F.2d 736 (D.C. Cir. 1977), that the court conclud-
ed were unripe for review.  Id. at 741-43.  In Bloom, the 
court explained that the issues were unfit for review, in part, 
because the informal form of the Comptroller's action "re-
flected the tentative nature of his interpretative conclusion," 
in which the Comptroller "expressly reserved the possibility 
that his opinion, which extended only to the permissibility of 
the particular service proposed ..., might change if and when 
he was presented with concrete evidence" as to the applicabil-
ity of the Act.  Id. at 741.  Moreover, although the issues in 
Bloom were legal in the sense that they involved statutory 
construction, the court explained that they were not fit for 
review because a substantial part of the challenges to the 
Comptroller's opinion was the parties' disagreement with the 

Comptroller's factual assessment.  Id.  Both of these ele-
ments are present here.  Just as in Bloom, the issues are not 
fit for judicial review because, in the end, they lack sufficient 
concreteness and they would require the court to conduct a 
purely hypothetical inquiry.  Cf. Nat'l Automatic Laundry & 
Cleaning Council v. Shultz, 443 F.2d 689, 699 (D.C. Cir. 
1971).

     Turning to the hardship prong, because the issues would 
benefit from postponing review, the NRDC must demonstrate 
immediate, direct, and significant hardship to warrant imme-
diate review, Cronin, 73 F.3d at 1133, and it has failed to do 
so.  Unlike agency regulations that can force compliance 
through a fear of immediate sanction, see Abbott Labs., 387 
U.S. at 152-53, the NRDC is neither regulated by the FAA 
nor forced to change its conduct in order to avoid future 
adverse consequences as a result of the letters.  Further, any 
harm incurred by the NRDC as a result of Vortex's actual 
conducting of sightseeing flights is not a direct consequence 
of the three letters at issue as they do not authorize Vortex's 
current flights out of the Airport.  See Ohio Forestry Ass'n, 
523 U.S. at 733.  Finally, the NRDC has an alternate remedy.  
In the event Vortex's actual flights violate the Act in the 
opinion of the NRDC, the NRDC can file a complaint with 
the FAA, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. s 46101(a), whereupon the 
FAA would be required to "investigate the complaint if a 
reasonable ground appears to the ... Administrator for the 
investigation."  49 U.S.C. s 46101(a).  These factors all weigh 
against the need for immediate review.  Cf. Bloom, 562 F.2d 
at 743.

     Accordingly, because the issues presented by the petition 
are not presently fit for review and the NRDC would suffer 
no significant hardship from delaying review, we dismiss the 
petition as unripe and do not address either the remaining 
jurisdictional issues, Fourth Branch Assocs. (Mechanicville) 
v. FERC, 253 F.3d 741, 745 (D.C. Cir. 2001), or the merits, see 
Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env't, 523 U.S. 83, 94-95, 
101-02 (1998).

        