                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 5, 2002   Decided October 4, 2002 

                           No. 01-5248

                         Kenneth Currier,
                            Appellant

                                v.

                       Postmaster General, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (98cv03037)

     Joel P. Bennett argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Marina Utgoff Braswell, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Roscoe C. 
Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. Craig Lawrence, Assis-
tant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge;  Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  This is an appeal from the order 
of the district court dismissing Kenneth Currier's claim alleg-
ing employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act.  Although the district court framed the 
order as if it were granted under Fed. R. Civ. P.  12(b)(6), the 
court considered and relied on material outside the amended 
complaint.  This converted the order into one of summary 
judgment under Fed. R. Civ. P. 56, which the Postal Service 
had sought in the alternative.  "If, on a motion ... to dismiss 
for failure of the pleading to state a claim upon which relief 
can be granted, matters outside the pleading are presented to 
and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as 
one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in 
Rule 56...."  Fed. R. Civ. P.  12(b).

     Plaintiffs in employment discrimination cases, like plaintiffs 
in other cases, bear the burden of proof at trial.  At the 
summary judgment stage, Currier had to show only that 
there was a genuine issue of material fact and that the Postal 
Service was therefore not entitled to judgment as a matter of 
law.  Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986).  
The issue before us deals with Currier's reassignment when 
the Postal Service implemented a reduction in force--or 
RIF--in 1995, an act of discrimination by his lights.  There is 
no dispute that Currier retained the same pay and benefits 
after the 1995 RIF as he had before it.  Even so, he could 
make out an actionable injury if there were "materially 
adverse consequences affecting the terms, conditions, or privi-
leges" of his employment that a reasonable finder of fact 
could conclude caused him "objectively tangible harm."  
Brown v. Brody, 199 F.3d 446, 457 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  This 
calls for a comparative judgment:  what was the situation 
immediately before the alleged adverse personnel action, and 
what was the situation after it?  Currier claimed that he was 
reassigned to a "materially lower position with materially 

lower duties."  But by his own admission, the job he held 
immediately before the 1995 RIF was a "do nothing posi-
tion."1  After the RIF he became a manager for legislative 
support in government relations.  He had general budget 
duties for an office and supervised up to a dozen workers.  
He thus went from a position before the RIF with no duties 
to a position after the RIF with some duties.  No material 
facts were thus in dispute on the determinative issue:  as a 
matter of law, Currier did not experience any adverse person-
nel action, an essential element of his cause of action.  
Brown, 199 F.3d at 455.
     Currier would like us to contrast his post-RIF assignment 
with a position he held from 1982 until November 1992.  But 
that is the wrong comparison.  The proper inquiry is to 
determine how the alleged discriminatory action, which oc-
curred in 1995, affected his employment status in 1995.  
Currier's job changed in 1992, but he does not allege the 
change resulted from unlawful discrimination.  It would be 
senseless to say, for instance, that an employee's promotion 
from shop clerk to assistant supervisor in the year 2000 was 
an adverse employment action because the employee years 
ago held the position of supervisor.  To state the obvious, the 
employee must be worse off after the personnel action than 
before it;  otherwise, he has suffered no objectively tangible 
harm.
                                                                 Affirmed.

         1  The following exchange in Currier's deposition describes his 
job before the RIF:

     Q So you stayed at Merrifield.  What were your duties at 
     Merrifield?
     
     A None.
     
     Q None?
     
     A [sic] Did you work while you were out there?
     
     A No.
     
     Q What did you do all day?
     
     A Occupied an office.
Currier Dep. at 40 (July 22, 1999).

                         