                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 12, 2000   Decided January 12, 2001 

                           No. 99-1453

                        Ross Stores, Inc.,
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Joseph G. Ferguson argued the cause for the petitioner. 
James P. Valentine and Elizabeth C. Leo were on brief.

     Jill A. Griffin, Attorney, National Labor Relations Board, 
argued the cause for the respondent.  Leonard R. Page, 
General Counsel, Linda Sher, Associate General Counsel, 
Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and 

David Habenstreit, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, were on brief.

     James B. Coppess and Jonathan P. Hiatt were on brief for 
amicus curiae American Federation of Labor and Congress 
of Industrial Organizations

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part filed by 
Circuit Judge Garland.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge:  Ross Stores, 
Inc. (Ross) petitions for review of a decision and order of the 
National Labor Relations Board (Board, NLRB) finding that 
Ross violated section 8(a)(1) and (3) of the National Labor 
Relations Act (Act) when (1) it discharged an employee on 
account of his union support and (2) its supervisor informed 
the same employee that no soliciting was allowed on company 
premises.  We uphold the Board's finding as to the discharge 
because it is supported by substantial evidence and set aside 
its finding regarding the solicitation admonition because it is 
time-barred under section 10(b) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. 
s 160(b), which requires that an unfair labor practice allega-
tion be made within 6 months of its occurrence.

                                I.

     In May 1993 a group of employees at Ross's non-union 
distribution center in Carlisle, Pennsylvania began organizing 
efforts on behalf of the International Ladies Garment Work-
ers Union, Local 170, AFL-CIO (Union).  On June 1, 1993 
the Union wrote to David Morrison, a Ross vice president in 
charge of the Carlisle facility, formally advising him of the 
organization activity and identifying 15 involved employees, 
including David Jumper and Jumper's fiancee, Kathy Curtis.  

Three incidents during the organizing campaign were alleged 
below to constitute unfair labor practices by Ross.

     First, at an assembly in late May 1993 Morrison told the 
gathered employees "they did not need a union" and " 'he 
would do anything in his power to keep the union out of the 
building.' "  App. 670.

     Second, in late May or early June 1993 supervisor Michael 
Simondi observed Jumper and a coworker exit the men's 
restroom together and, when he entered the restroom, discov-
ered they had posted union literature inside.  He removed 
the postings and later admonished each of them separately 
that " 'there was no solicitation on these premises.' "  App. 
670.

     The third incident was Jumper's discharge.  On August 12, 
1993 Jumper, who had a history of tardiness and absenteeism, 
asked his supervisor if he could change his upcoming August 
16 personal birthday vacation day to August 12 so that he 
could accompany Curtis to the hospital to be treated for an 
injury she had suffered the previous day.  Jumper's supervi-
sor responded that he lacked authority to approve the switch 
and referred Jumper up the chain of command.  Two higher-
ups similarly disclaimed approval authority and Jumper was 
finally referred to human resource specialist Paula Hoch.  
Jumper met with Hoch at about 8:15 the same morning and 
explained his situation.  She told him the vacation day had to 
be scheduled in advance and, when he said he was leaving 
anyway, warned him he would then incur additional absentee 
"points."  Jumper then left.  When he arrived at work the 
next day, August 13, he was greeted by Morrison and Hoch.  
Morrison told Jumper he was being discharged in accord with 
Ross's absence policy because he had exceeded the permissi-
ble number of absentee points, which he had.

     The day he was fired, August 13, 1993, Jumper filed a 
handwritten charge with the NLRB expressing his belief that 
he had been "terminated from Ross Inc. due to union involve-
ment."  App. 1.  On March 4, 1994 Jumper filed a second, 
typewritten charge alleging three separate unfair labor prac-
tices:  Simondi's no-solicitation admonition, Morrison's com-
ments to the employees and the discharge.  On March 18, 

1994 the Board's General Counsel issued a complaint alleging 
the same three unfair labor practices.

     After a two-day hearing in February 1994 the Administra-
tive Law Judge (ALJ) issued a decision dated April 5, 1995 
finding each of the three charges proven.  In the decision the 
ALJ denied Ross's motion to dismiss the first two charges as 
time-barred under section 10(b) of the Act.

     In a decision and order issued September 30, 1999 a 
divided Board affirmed the ALJ's denial of Ross's motion to 
dismiss and the findings that Simondi's no-solicitation admo-
nition and Jumper's discharge violated, respectively, section 
8(a)(1) and section 8(a)(3) of the Act.1  The Board rejected 
the ALJ's finding that Morrison's speech violated section 
8(a)(1) because the majority found it not threatening.2

     Ross petitioned for review and the Board cross-applied for 
enforcement.

                               II.

     We address Ross's challenge to each of the two unfair labor 
practice findings separately.

                                A.

     First we consider the Board's finding that Simondi violated 
section 8(a)(1) of the Act when he instructed Jumper and a 

__________
     1 These two provisions make it an unfair labor practice for an 
employer "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the 
exercise of the rights guaranteed in section 157 of this title," 29 
U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), and "by discrimination in regard to hire or 
tenure of employment or any term or condition of employment to 
encourage or discourage membership in any labor organization," id. 
s 158(a)(3).

     2 Board Members Brame and Hurtgen dissented from the finding 
that the first two charges were not time-barred and Member 
Hurtgen further dissented from the majority holding that Jumper's 
discharge was in violation of the Act.  Board Members Fox and 
Liebman dissented from the finding that Morrison's comments did 
not constitute an unfair labor practice.

coworker that "no solicitation" was allowed on Ross's premis-
es.  Section 10(b) of the Act provides in relevant part:

     Whenever it is charged that any person has engaged in 
     or is engaging in any such unfair labor practice, the 
     Board, or any agent or agency designated by the Board 
     for such purposes, shall have power to issue and cause to 
     be served upon such person a complaint stating the 
     charges in that respect, and containing a notice of hear-
     ing before the Board or a member thereof, or before a 
     designated agent or agency, at a place therein fixed, not 
     less than five days after the serving of said complaint:  
     Provided, That no complaint shall issue based upon any 
     unfair labor practice occurring more than six months 
     prior to the filing of the charge with the Board and the 
     service of a copy thereof upon the person against whom 
     such charge is made, unless the person aggrieved there-
     by was prevented from filing such charge by reason of 
     service in the armed forces, in which event the six-month 
     period shall be computed from the day of his discharge.
     
29 U.S.C. s 160(b) (emphasis added).  No one disputes that 
the no-solicitation allegation in the complaint is time-barred 
under a literal application of this provision because Jumper's 
February 23, 1994 typewritten charge containing the allega-
tion was filed more than six months after Simondi's admoni-
tion which took place in late May 1993.  The Board conclud-
ed, however, that the incident was timely charged because it 
was closely related to Jumper's termination which was timely 
charged on August 13, 1993.  We disagree.

     The NLRB has long construed section 10(b), with judicial 
approval, to permit prosecution of an alleged violation that 
was not timely charged if it is "closely related" to the 
allegations in a timely filed charge.  To determine whether 
timely and untimely allegations are "closely related," the 
Board has developed a tripartite test:

     First, the Board will look at whether the otherwise 
     untimely allegations involve the same legal theory as the 
     allegations in the pending timely charge.  Second, the 
     Board will look at whether the otherwise untimely allega-
     
     tions arise from the same factual circumstances or se-
     quence of events as the pending timely charge. Finally, 
     the Board may look at whether a respondent would raise 
     similar defenses to both allegations.
     
Nickels Bakery of Indiana, Inc., 296 N.L.R.B. 927, 928 (1989) 
(citing Redd-I, Inc., 290 N.L.R.B. 1115, 1116 (1988)).  Here 
the Board found the separate allegations are closely related 
based on (1) the "common legal theory" of "animus in opposi-
tion to the Union's organizational campaign";  (2) the "similar 
factual circumstances" that each incident "arose in the con-
text of a single organizational campaign and was part of the 
Respondent's overall efforts to resist that campaign";  and (3) 
the "common defenses" that Ross "did not seek to unlawfully 
restrict Jumper's union activity by the manager's placing 
restrictions on Jumper's solicitation activities or by Jumper's 
subsequent discharge."  NLRB Dec. at 2-3.  We hold that 
the Board's finding of a factual nexus under the second prong 
of the test is inadequate as we held regarding similar findings 
in both Drug Plastics & Glass Co. v. NLRB, 44 F.3d 1017 
(D.C. Cir. 1995), and G.W. Galloway Co. v. NLRB, 856 F.2d 
275 (D.C. Cir. 1988).3 

     In Drug Plastics the Board's General Counsel filed a 
complaint alleging a timely charged retaliatory discharge and 
a series of uncharged anti-union acts in the months surround-
ing the discharge.  The Board found the uncharged complaint 
allegations closely related to the charged termination allega-
tion "because it found that the allegations 'arose out of the 
Respondent's overall plan to resist the Union ...;  that all the 
allegations occurred after the respondent's acknowledged 
awareness of the organizing effort ...;  that several of the 
allegations involved statements to [the discharged employee] 
...;  and that the 8(a)(1) allegations generally occurred dur-
ing the same time period as the 8(a)(3) allegation.' "  Drug 
Plastics, 44 F.3d at 1021.  The Drug Plastics court concluded 

__________
     3 Having concluded the Board incorrectly found the factual prong 
of the "closely related" test was satisfied, we do not address the 
Board's findings on the test's two other prongs.

the Board's reasoning conflicted with the Board's own deci-
sion in Nippondenso Mfg. U.S.A., 299 N.L.R.B. 545 (1990), 
which held that allegations were not "closely related" simply 
because they involved "discriminatory acts against employees 
'during, and in order to quell, a union campaign' " and "arise 
from the same circumstances and sequence of events." Nip-
pondenso, 299 N.L.R.B. at 545.  The court further concluded 
the Board's determination that the uncharged allegations 
were timely could not stand because the Board had not 
overruled Nippondenso or explained its deviation from Nip-
pondenso's holding.  Seeking to avoid a similar fate here, the 
Board below "decided to overrule Nippondenso to the extent 
that it conflicts with Nickels Bakery and other precedent ... 
consistently holding that the requisite factual relationship 
under the 'closely related' test may be based on acts that 
arise out of the same anti-union campaign."  NLRB Dec. at 2.  
To no avail.

     The Board's contention that the factual relationship prong 
can be satisfied solely on the basis that the separate acts 
arise out of the same anti-union campaign here is a deviation 
from the very precedent it cites.  As we stated in Drug 
Plastics, Nickels simply "does not support the Board's conclu-
sion."  44 F.3d at 1021.  The Board in Nickels did not even 
address whether the circumstances there supported a closely 
related finding but merely "overruled those cases holding or 
implying that the catchall 'other acts' language preprinted on 
the charge form provides a sufficient basis, on its own, to 
support any and all 8(a)(1) complaint allegations" and re-
manded to the Regional Director to apply the closely related 
test.  Nickels, 296 N.L.R.B. at 929.4  In each of the other 

__________
     4 In its original context, the quoted language simply referenced a 
footnote in Galloway which in turn "cited cases from other courts of 
appeals referring to the finding of a sufficient relation between the 
charge and complaint in circumstances involving 'acts that are part 
of the same course of conduct, such as a single campaign against a 
union,' NLRB v. Central Power & Light Co., 425 F.2d 1318, 1321 
(5th Cir. 1970), and acts that are all 'part of an overall plan to resist 
organization.' NLRB v. Braswell Motor Freight Lines, 486 F.2d 
743, 746 (7th Cir. 1973)."  Nickels, 296 N.L.R.B. at 929 n.7 (citing 
Galloway, 856 F.2d at 281 n.41).

cited cases the Board required both that the separate inci-
dents be part of the same union organizing campaign and 
that they be part of an overall employer plan to undermine 
the union activity.  See Pioneer Hotel & Gambling Hall, 324 
N.L.R.B. 918, 918 n.1 (1997);  Recycle America, 308 N.L.R.B. 
50, 50 n.2 (1992);  Pincus Elevator & Elec. Co., 308 N.L.R.B. 
684, 684 n.2, 690 (1992), enforced mem., 998 F.2d 1004 (3d Cir. 
1993);  Outboard Marine Corp., 307 N.L.R.B. 1333, 1334 
(1992), enforced, 9 F.3d 113 (7th Cir. 1993);  Well-Bred Loaf, 
Inc., 303 N.L.R.B. 1016, 1016 n.1 (1991);  Southwest Distrib-
uting Co., 301 N.L.R.B. 954, 955 (1991);  Harmony Corp., 301 
N.L.R.B. 578, 578-579 (1991);  Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 298 
N.L.R.B. 232 n.1 (1990), enforced, 943 F.2d 49 (4th Cir. 1991);  
Van Dyne Crotty Co., 297 N.L.R.B. 899, 900 (1990).5  Al-
though the Board's decision here recites the separate inci-
dents were "part of the Respondent's overall efforts to resist 
that campaign," NLRB Dec. at 2-3, the finding is unsupport-
ed in the record except by the happenstance that the unrelat-
ed two violations occurred during a single campaign and 
involved the same pro-union employee.  There is no evidence 
to otherwise connect Jumper's discharge to Simondi's appar-
ently isolated and unauthorized invocation of an overbroad 
solicitation policy.6  Nor is there any evidence that Simondi 
was involved in Jumper's discharge.  Cf. MECO Corp. v. 
NLRB, 986 F.2d 1434, 1437 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (anti-union 
comments of supervisor did not establish animus of discharge 
of union adherent where there was "no showing that [supervi-
sor] played any role in [the] discharge");  Hudson, Inc., 275 
N.L.R.B. 874, 874-75 (1985) (finding supervisor's anti-union 
remarks did not "establish the requisite element of anti-union 
animus" where he "played no part in [employer's] decision to 

__________
     5 While we point out that the decision below deviated from the 
line of cases finding it sufficient if two incidents both occur during 
the same campaign and are part of an overall union plan, we do not 
decide whether or not those cases were correctly decided.

     6 The Board declined to find that the Company's written solicita-
tion policy contained a "no-solicitation, no-distribution rule."  Board 
Dec. at 3.

lay off the employees").7

     Not only is the Board's decision unsupported by its own 
case law, it also flouts ours.  In Drug Plastics the court 
overturned the Board's "closely related" finding not only 
because it was inconsistent with Nippondenso but also be-
cause the court's opinion in Galloway "dictate[d] its reversal."  
Drug Plastics, 44 F3d at 1021.  After examining the lan-
guage, legislative history and judicial construction of section 
10(b) the Galloway court rejected the Board's position that an 
unlawful dismissal and threats to strikers were sufficiently 
related "because they occurred one day apart, involved the 
same employer, and occurred at the same plant."  856 F.2d at 
280.  The court in Galloway explained:

     It cannot be that allegations in a charge and a complaint 
     having no more in common than that they concern the 
     same employer and occur at the same location are suffi-
     ciently related to satisfy Section 10(b).  Were that the 
     rule, the Board would be free to include in a complaint 
     anything transpiring at an employer's place of business 
     without regard to the type of violation involved or when 
     it occurred.  Such a broad interpretation of the Board's 
     power clearly would clash with the limiting intent per-
     vading Section 10(b).
     
Id. at 280-81.  Nor, the court concluded, was the Board's case 
helped by the additional "link" that the alleged incidents 
"occurred only one day apart":

__________
     7 By contrast, in Pioneer Hotel, Inc. v. NLRB, 182 F.3d 939 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999), cited by the dissent, animus was inferred where both 
alleged violations were committed at the direction of top manage-
ment.  See Parsippany Hotel Management Co. v. NLRB, 99 F.3d 
413, 423 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("While it may be unreasonable to attrib-
ute to a corporation the anti-union sentiment expressed by low-level 
supervisors, see Pittsburgh S.S. Co. v. N.L.R.B., 180 F.2d 731, 741 
(6th Cir. 1950), aff'd., 340 U.S. 498, 71 S.Ct. 453, 95 L.Ed. 479 
(1951), it is eminently reasonable to assume that high-level corpo-
rate managers speak on behalf of the company when they express 
anti-union animus.").

     We cannot ... accept the proposition that mere chronol-
     ogy is sufficient to put the Board beyond Section 10(b)'s 
     restraints.  That a discharge occurred one day and a 
     strike the next day does not mean that the two events 
     had any common features.  If the strike was sparked by 
     the discharge or was staged to protest the discharge, the 
     necessary relationship would likely exist.  Similarly, if an 
     employee was fired for participating in a strike charac-
     terized in a filed charge as improper, a complaint based 
     on that charge might permissibly assert that other em-
     ployees were threatened with dismissal for taking part in 
     the same strike.  However, if the consecutive occurrence 
     of the two incidents was no more than happenstance, the 
     relationship essential to incorporation of uncharged inci-
     dents into complaints is entirely lacking.
     
856 F.2d at 281 (footnote omitted).

     We have no closer connection here than was present in 
Galloway or in Drug Plastics.  The coincidence of the two 
separate violations during the same organizing campaign does 
not of itself create a close factual relationship.  As we indicat-
ed in Galloway and Drug Plastics, some additional factual 
similarity is necessary before an allegation not timely charged 
can be exempted from the literal application of section 10(b)'s 
limitation period under the closely related test.  And there is 
none here.  To permit the Board to pursue the untimely 
charged 8(a)(1) violation based on the timely charged but, 
under Galloway, unrelated 8(a)(3) violation "would be tanta-
mount to allowing the Board to enlarge its jurisdiction beyond 
that given it by Congress."  Galloway, 856 F.2d at 279.  That 
we may not do.  We therefore grant Ross's petition with 
regard to the violation based on Simondi's admonition to 
Jumper.

                                B.

     Next we address the Board's finding that Ross violated 
section 8(a)(3) of the Act by discharging Jumper on account of 
his union activity.  Because the finding is "supported by 

substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole," we 
must accept it as "conclusive."  29 U.S.C. s 160(e), (f).

     Under the Board's established Wright Line test,

     the general counsel must first show that the "protected 
     activity was a motivating factor in the adverse employ-
     ment decision."  Frazier Indus. Co., Inc. v. NLRB, 213 
     F.3d 750, 755 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (internal quotation marks 
     omitted).  If this prima facie showing is made, the bur-
     den shifts to the employer to demonstrate that "it would 
     have made the adverse decision even had the employee 
     not engaged in protected activity."  Vincent Ind. Plas-
     tics, Inc. v. NLRB., 209 F.3d 727, 735 (D.C. Cir. 2000) 
     (citing Wright Line, Inc., 251 N.L.R.B. 1083, 1089, 1980 
     WL 12312 (1980)). In determining whether an employer 
     had a discriminatory motive, "the NLRB may 'consider[ ] 
     such factors as the employer's knowledge of the employ-
     ee's union activities, the employer's hostility toward the 
     union, and the timing of the employer's action.' "  Id. 
     (quoting Power Inc. v. NLRB, 40 F.3d 409, 418 (D.C. Cir. 
     1994)).
     
Traction Wholesale Ctr. Co. v. NLRB, 216 F.3d 92, 99 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000).  The Board below based its finding of anti-union 
animus on management's knowledge that Jumper was partici-
pating in the ongoing union organization campaign and on the 
two other incidents of anti-union animus by management:  
Simondi's admonition to Jumper and Morrison's comments to 
the employees.  Ross does not challenge the evidentiary basis 
of the Board's factual findings and we conclude they are 
sufficient to establish animus.8  The Board further found 
Ross had failed to meet its burden under Wright Line of 
showing it would have discharged Jumper even if he had not 
been a union organizer.  Specifically, the Board, like the ALJ, 
found that Ross had no rule requiring that time off be 
scheduled in advance that would support Ross's proffered 

__________
     8 While we doubt that Simondi's admonition is properly attribut-
able to Ross, see supra pp. 8-9, we do not reach the question 
because Ross has not challenged its attribution.

alternative justification for firing Jumper.  This finding too is 
supported in the record by the absence of any such rule from 
Ross's written time-off policies and by the testimony of a 
Ross employee that she had previously asked for and received 
time-off without prior approval.

     For the foregoing reasons, Ross's petition for review is 
granted as to the no-solicitation violation and denied as to 
Jumper's discharge and the Board's cross-application for 
enforcement is denied as to the former and granted as to the 
latter.

                                                            So ordered.

Karen Lecraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, writing separately:

     Although Ross does not raise the issue on appeal, I write 
separately to express my agreement with Board Members 
Hurtgen and Brame that section 8(c) of the National Labor 
Relations Act precludes considering Morrison's anti-union 
statements to employees that "they did not need a union" and 
"he would do anything in his power to keep the union out of 
the building," App. 670, as evidence of Ross's anti-union 
animus in discharging Jumper.  See Board Dec. at 8 (Hurt-
gen), 12 n.19 (Brame);  see also Lampi LLC, 327 N.L.R.B. 
No. 511, 1998 WL 856130, at *7 n.7 (1998) (Brame, dissent-
ing).  Section 8(c) provides:

     (c) Expression of views without threat of reprisal or 
     force or promise of benefit
     
          The expressing of any views, argument, or opinion, or 
     the dissemination thereof, whether in written, printed, 
     graphic, or visual form, shall not constitute or be evi-
     dence of an unfair labor practice under any of the 
     provisions of this subchapter, if such expression contains 
     no threat of reprisal or force or promise of benefit.
     
29 U.S.C. s 158(c).  Because the Board specifically found that 
"[i]n the circumstances of this case, there is no sufficient 
objective basis for finding that employees would reasonably 
tend to view Morrison's statement as a threat," Board Dec. at 
3, section 8(c) on its face plainly bars the Board not only from 
finding the speech was an unfair labor practice, which the 
Board majority acknowledged, but also from using it as 
"evidence of an unfair labor practice."  Thus, the Board's 
decision to treat Morrison's statements as "evidence of ani-
mus establishing [Ross's] discharge motive," in the face of its 
finding that the statement was "not unlawful in the context of 
this case," was in direct violation of section 8(c) and beyond 
the Board's authority.  See Medeco Security Locks, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 142 F.3d 733, 744 (4th Cir. 1998) (citing Alpo Pet 
Foods, Inc. v. NLRB, 126 F.3d 246, 252 (4th Cir. 1997));  BE 
& K Constr. Co. v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 1372, 1375-77 (11th Cir. 
1997);  Holo-Krome Co. v. NLRB, 907 F.2d 1343, 1345-47 

(2d Cir. 1990);  NLRB v. Eastern Smelting & Refining Corp., 
598 F.2d 666, 670 (1st Cir. 1979);  Florida Steel Corp. v. 
NLRB, 587 F.2d 735, 750-54 (5th Cir. 1979);  NLRB v. 
Rockwell Mfg. Co., 271 F.2d 109, 118-19 (3d Cir. 1959);  
Pittsburgh Steamship Co. v. NLRB, 180 F.2d 731, 735 (6th 
Cir. 1950);  see also International Union, United Automobile, 
Aerospace & Agricultural Implement Workers v. NLRB, 363 
F.2d 702, 707 (D.C. Cir.) (rejecting argument NLRB used 
section 8(c) protected statements as "as some evidence of the 
unfair labor practices themselves" and concluding statements 
were used only to "place[ ] ... other acts in context"), cert. 
denied, 385 U.S. 973 (1966).

     Randolph, Circuit Judge, concurring:  While I join all of 
Judge Henderson's opinion, I believe more should be said 
about the Board's treatment of s 10(b) of the National Labor 
Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 160(b),1 and the confusion this has 
caused in the Board's analysis and in some courts.

     Much of the confusion stems from a failure to distinguish 
between the two separate functions s 10(b) performs.  The 
statute first sets down a condition for the Board's exercise of 
jurisdiction.  Only after someone--an employee or a union, 
__________
     1 For ease of reference, s 10(b) is set forth in full:

          Whenever it is charged that any person has engaged in or is 
     engaging in any such unfair labor practice, the Board, or any 
     agent or agency designated by the Board for such purposes, 
     shall have power to issue and cause to be served upon such 
     person a complaint stating the charges in that respect, and 
     containing a notice of hearing before the Board or a member 
     thereof, or before a designated agent or agency, at a place 
     therein fixed, not less than five days after the serving of said 
     complaint:  Provided, that no complaint shall issue based upon 
     any unfair labor practice occurring more than six months prior 
     to the filing of the charge with the Board and the service of a 
     copy thereof upon the person against whom such charge is 
     made, unless the person aggrieved thereby was prevented from 
     filing such charge by reason of service in the armed forces, in 
     which event the six-month period shall be computed from the 
     day of his discharge.  Any such complaint may be amended by 
     the member, agent, or agency conducting the hearing or the 
     Board in its discretion at any time prior to the issuance of an 
     order based thereon.  The person so complained of shall have 
     the right to file an answer to the original or amended complaint 
     and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the 
     place and time fixed in the complaint.  In the discretion of the 
     member, agent, or agency conducting the hearing or the Board, 
     any other person may be allowed to intervene in the said 
     proceeding and to present testimony.  Any such proceeding 
     shall, so far as practicable, be conducted in accordance with the 
     rules of evidence applicable in the district courts of the United 
     States under the rules of civil procedure for the district courts 
     of the United States, adopted by the Supreme Court of the 
     United States pursuant to section 2072 of Title 28.
     
29 U.S.C. s 160(b).

for instance--has filed an unfair labor practice "charge" does 
the Board have jurisdiction to issue a "complaint" alleging 
unfair labor practices.  See NLRB v. Fant Milling Co., 360 
U.S. 301, 307 (1959).  When a "charge" is filed, the Board 
investigates it and, if there is merit to the charge, frames a 
complaint, which the General Counsel then prosecutes.  Dis-
putes occasionally arise about whether the complaint has gone 
beyond the charge.  Although s 10(b) contemplates that the 
"complaint" will "stat[e] the charges," the Supreme Court has 
held that the Board may, in formulating its complaint, take 
into account events occurring after the charge was filed, so 
long as the post-charge "unfair labor practices ... are related 
to those alleged in the charge and ... grow out of them," 
National Licorice Co. v. NLRB, 309 U.S. 350, 369 (1940);  
Fant Milling Co., 360 U.S. at 309.

     Section 10(b) also functions much like a statute of limita-
tions.  No complaint may be "based" on unfair labor practices 
occurring more than six months prior to the filing of the 
charge.  This proviso, added to s 10(b) in 1947, is at the 
heart of the case before us.  The Board's current interpreta-
tion of the proviso is that the complaint may include un-
charged unfair labor practices if they are "closely related" to 
misconduct that was timely charged.  It is this "test" which 
Judge Henderson and I find not satisfied here, but which 
Judge Garland believes was met.

     A few years after Congress added the s 10(b) proviso, 
Judge Jerome Frank, speaking for the court in NLRB v. 
Dinion Coil Co., 201 F.2d 484 (2d Cir. 1952), summarized 
several decisions as holding:

     (1) A complaint, as distinguished from a charge, need not 
     be filed and served within six months, and may therefore 
     be amended after the six months.  (2) If a charge was 
     filed and served within six months after the violations 
     alleged in the charge, the complaint (or amended com-
     plaint) although filed after the six months, may allege 
     violations not alleged in the charge if (a) they are closely 
     related to the violations named in the charge and (b) 
     occurred within six months before the filing of the 
     charge.
     
Id. at 491.  The Board adopted this formulation of the 
"closely related" test in decisions such as Redd-I, Inc., 290 
N.L.R.B. 1115, 1118 (1988).  Later Board decisions, such as 
Nickles Bakery, broke the "closely related" test down into 
three parts:

     First, the Board will look at whether the otherwise 
     untimely allegations involve the same legal theory as the 
     allegations in the pending timely charge.  Second, the 
     Board will look at whether the otherwise untimely allega-
     tions arise from the same factual circumstances or se-
     quence of events as the pending timely charge.  Finally, 
     the Board may look at whether a respondent would raise 
     similar defenses to both allegations.
     
Nickles Bakery of Indiana, 296 N.L.R.B. 927, 928 (1989).

     The most important thing to notice about Nickles Bakery is 
that in reformulating the test, the Board dropped out the 
requirement of s 10(b), as set forth in Dinion Coil Co. and 
the earlier cases, that the allegations added to the complaint 
must concern unfair labor practices occurring within six 
months of the charge.  Nonetheless, I believe that it is 
necessary for this requirement to be satisfied in each case.  
The filing of the charge serves to toll the six-month limitation 
period.  See Kelly-Goodwin Hardware, 269 N.L.R.B. 33, 36-
37 (1984).  It follows that alleged illegalities occurring more 
than six months before the charge should be barred.  In view 
of s 10(b) the Board may not reach back years before the 
charge is filed and add unfair labor practices to the complaint 
even if they are "closely related" to those alleged in the 
charge.  The Board has not been entirely clear about this and 
we have compounded the confusion by expressing approval of 
the Nickles Bakery test in Drug Plastics & Glass Co. v. 
NLRB, 44 F.3d 1017, 1018-19 (D.C. Cir. 1995), even though 
Drug Plastics did not deal with the limitations proviso of 
s 10(b).2

__________
     2 Drug Plastics dealt instead with the jurisdictional condition 
portion of the statute. The Board's complaint in Drug Plastics, filed 
on September 30, 1991, alleged unfair labor practices in February, 
April and June, 1991.  The charge upon which the complaint was 

     Our latest pronouncement on s 10(b) is Pioneer Hotel, Inc. 
v. NLRB, 182 F.3d 939, 944 (D.C. Cir. 1999), which plays a 
prominent role in Judge Garland's dissent.  One cannot tell 
from reading our opinion in Pioneer Hotel, Inc. (or the 
Board's) when the charge in that case was filed.  But the 
administrative record indicates that the unfair labor practice 
added to the Board's complaint occurred less than six months 
from the filing of the original charge.  This at least makes the 
case consistent with the Supreme Court's holding in Local 
Lodge No. 1424, Int'l Ass'n of Machinists v. NLRB, 362 U.S. 
411 (1960), commonly known as Bryan Manufacturing, a case 
the Board has too frequently ignored in recent years.

     The facts of Bryan Manufacturing are important.  A union 
and an employer executed a collective bargaining agreement 
on August 10, 1954, even though the union did not represent a 
majority of the employees.  Contained in the agreement was 
a union security clause--that is, a clause requiring all employ-
ees to join the union.  Under Board law, it was "an unfair 
labor practice for an employer and a labor organization to 
enter into a collective bargaining agreement which contains a 
union security clause, if at the time of original execution the 
union does not represent a majority of the employees in the 
unit."  362 U.S. at 413.  Charges filed with the Board about a 
year after execution of the agreement alleged the union's lack 

__________
based was filed on July 15, 1991.  The charge alleged only one 
instance of an unlawful discharge and did not mention the other six 
allegations eventually included in the complaint.  See Drug Plastics, 
44 F.3d at 1018-19.  Three of the new allegations involved activities 
within six months of the July 15 charge and three did not.  See id. 
at 1019.  While the court could have held that some of the com-
plaint allegations were time-barred by s 10(b), it did not.  Instead, 
it held that the Board lacked jurisdiction over all six additional 
unfair labor practices alleged in the complaint because it was 
"unable to connect the allegations in its complaint with the charge 
allegation."  See id. at 1022.  The court does mention the six-month 
limitation in the last line of its opinion, but only to note that the 
"period of s 10(b) has since elapsed," suggesting that any attempt 
to amend the complaint would fail because there was an inadequate 
factual nexus in the original charge.  Id.

of majority status in August 1954 "and the consequent illegal-
ity of the continued enforcement of the agreement."  Id. at 
414.  Complaints to this effect followed.  The Court held that 
the proviso in s 10(b) barred the complaints.  Although exe-
cution of the agreement was itself an unfair labor practice, it 
occurred more than six months before the charges.  As to the 
continuing enforcement of the union security clause, the only 
way to show its illegality was to prove that the union lacked a 
majority when it executed the agreement.  This meant that 
the charges were, in the language of the proviso, "based" 
upon an unfair labor practice that took place more than six 
months before the charges were filed.  In so holding the 
Court quoted with approval the dissenting opinion of one 
Board member recognizing that " 'the continuing invalidity of 
the agreement is directly related to and is based solely on its 
initial invalidity,' " 362 U.S. at 423 (italics added).  To the 
Court in Bryan Manufacturing, the direct relationship be-
tween the time-barred allegation and the timely allegation 
was a reason for barring the complaint.

     In light of the language of s 10(b) and the need to adhere 
to the Supreme Court's parsing of that language in Bryan 
Manufacturing, I believe the Board errs whenever it permits 
complaints to go forward on allegations regarding unfair 
labor practices that occurred more than six months before the 
charge.  Does that describe this case?  Not necessarily.  The 
original charge alleging a single act of unlawful discharge in 
August 1993 was filed October 21, 1993.  An amended charge 
alleging additional unfair labor practices in May and June of 
1993 was filed on March 3, 1994.  These additional allegations 
fell outside the six-month time limit imposed by s 10(b), and 
were therefore barred unless the amended charge related 
back to the original charge, much as an amended pleading in 
civil litigation may relate back to the original pleading pursu-
ant to Rule 15(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.3  

__________
     3 Rule 15(c) permits an amended pleading to relate back to the 
date of the original pleading if the claim or defense in the amended 
pleading "arose out of the conduct, transaction, or occurrence set 
forth or attempted to be set forth in the original pleading."  Fed. R. 

See Baldwin County Welcome Ctr. v. Brown, 466 U.S. 147, 
149-50 n.3 (1984) (per curiam).  So long as the Board's 
closely related test is kept within proper bounds,4 it may 
serve the same function as Rule 15(c) with respect to 
s 10(b)'s six-month limitation period.  I agree with Judge 
Henderson that in this case, the Board's test does not save 
the untimely charge.

__________

Civ. P. 15(c). The rule liberalized the practice under common law, 
reflecting the notice role played by pleadings and the interest in 
resolving claims on their merits rather than on the basis of techni-
calities.  See 6 Charles Alan Wright et al., Federal Practice and 
Procedure s 1471 (1990).

     4 The reasons Congress inserted the six-month limitations should 
guide the Board.  Like other statutes of limitations, see 3M Co. v. 
Browner, 17 F.3d 1453, 1457 (D.C. Cir. 1994), the s 10(b) proviso is 
designed to bar the consideration of events "after records have been 
destroyed, witnesses have gone elsewhere, and recollections of the 
events in question have become dim and confused."  Bryan Mfg., 
362 U.S. at 419 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 80-245 at 40 (1947)).  
Statutes of limitation also provide a measure of repose, a point at 
which an entity is free to make plans without the specter of legal 
proceedings.  See 3M, 17 F.3d at 1453.  This aspect of repose is 
important in labor relations:  the s 10(b) proviso promotes labor 
peace by "stabiliz[ing] existing bargaining relationships."  Bryan 
Mfg., 362 U.S. at 419.


     Garland, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part:

     I agree that substantial evidence supports the Board's 
finding that Ross Stores discharged an employee because of 
his support for the union.  I respectfully dissent, however, 
from the conclusion that the Board's other finding--that Ross 
unlawfully admonished the same employee for soliciting for 
the union--must be set aside because the admonishment is 
not "closely related" to the discharge.

     As the court acknowledges, section 10(b) permits prosecu-
tion of an untimely charge if it is "closely related" to a timely 
charge.  See Op. at 5;  see also Pioneer Hotel, Inc. v. NLRB, 
182 F.3d 939, 944 (D.C. Cir. 1999);  Parsippany Hotel Mgmt. 
Co. v. NLRB, 99 F.3d 413, 417 (D.C. Cir. 1996);  Drug 
Plastics & Glass Co. v. NLRB, 44 F.3d 1017, 1021 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).  It is true that this circuit has previously held this test 
to require more than that the incidents arise during the same 
anti-union campaign, see Drug Plastics, 44 F.3d at 1021 
(relying on Nippondenso Mfg. U.S.A., Inc., 299 N.L.R.B. 545 
(1990)), and more than that they be close in time and involve 
the same employer and plant, see id. at 1020-21.  But there is 
considerably more than that here.1

     The Board's opinion makes clear that the two allegations 
are closely related.  Indeed, the Board expressly used the 
earlier incident--in which David Jumper's supervisor caught 
him posting union literature and admonished him against 
doing so--as part of the basis for its finding that Jumper was 
discharged because of anti-union animus.  See Ross Stores, 
329 N.L.R.B. No. 59, at 2, 4 (1999).  The incident underlying 
the untimely charge (the unlawful admonishment) was thus 
closely related to the incident underlying the timely charge 

__________
     1 Because, as discussed below, the Board's decision can be sus-
tained under the test approved in Drug Plastics, there is no need to 
consider whether the Board could adopt a more expansive test by 
overruling Nippondenso, see Op. at 7, the NLRB decision upon 
which Drug Plastics relied.  See Drug Plastics, 44 F.3d at 1021.

(the unlawful discharge):  the former provided, and proved, 
the motive for the latter.2

     That factual connection puts this case on a par with Pio-
neer Hotel, Inc. v. NLRB, in which we recently rejected the 
argument that an amended complaint was insufficiently relat-
ed to an original allegation under section 10(b).  See 182 F.3d 
at 945.  In Pioneer Hotel, the original allegation was that the 
employer discharged an employee for supporting the union.  
The amended allegation was that the employer had previously 
fired the same employee's supervisor for refusing an order to 
fire the employee for his union support.  The two allegations 
were factually connected, we held, because the earlier inci-
dent was "[p]art of the evidence that Pioneer fired [the 
employee] for union activism."  182 F.3d at 944-45.  Just as 
the earlier incident in Pioneer Hotel was evidence that the 
employee was fired for union activism rather than as part of a 
neutral corporate restructuring, the earlier incident in this 
case was evidence that Ross Stores fired Jumper because of 
animus rather than absenteeism.  See also NLRB v. Fant 
Milling Co., 360 U.S. 301, 304 & n.5 (1959) (holding that an 
untimely allegation of an unlawful unilateral wage increase 
was sufficiently related to a timely refusal-to-bargain charge, 
because the wage increase "largely influenced" the Board's 
finding that an unlawful refusal to bargain had occurred).

__________
     2 Although the court recognizes that "it is eminently reasonable to 
assume that high-level corporate managers speak on behalf of the 
company when they express anti-union animus," Op. at 9 n.7 
(quoting Parsippany Hotel Mgmt., 99 F.3d at 423-24), the court 
expresses doubt about attributing the supervisor's (Simondi's) ad-
monishment to the company--apparently because it believes Simon-
di was not a sufficiently "high-level" manager.  Op. at 11 n.8;  see 
id. at 8-9 & n.7.  That rationale is inconsistent with the fact that 
Simondi was Ross' operations manager.  Ross Stores, 329 N.L.R.B. 
No. 59, at 3.  Moreover, as the court notes, Op. at 11 n.8, that 
rationale is foreclosed from our consideration because Ross Stores 
never challenged the attribution.  See Parsippany Hotel Mgmt., 99 
F.3d at 418 (holding that court will not consider argument not 
raised in petitioner's opening brief).

     That factual connection also distinguishes this case from 
Drug Plastics & Glass Co. v. NLRB.  There, in concluding 
that untimely allegations of discriminatory statements were 
unrelated to a timely allegation of unlawful discharge, the 
court noted that the General Counsel's complaint made "no 
mention whatsoever" of the discharged employee "except in 
the single allegation" relating to the discharge.  44 F.3d at 
1020.  Here, by contrast, the complaint expressly noted that 
Jumper was the target of the unlawful admonition against 
soliciting for the union, and that Jumper was also the employ-
ee who had been unlawfully discharged.  Complaint pp 5, 7;  
see also FPC Holdings, Inc. v. NLRB, 64 F.3d 935, 942 n.5 
(4th Cir. 1995) (distinguishing FPC from Drug Plastics on the 
ground that, unlike the untimely allegations in Drug Plastics, 
those in FPC directly involved the same employees as did the 
original charge).3  Moreover, the Board held that the admoni-
tion allegation was closely related to the discharge allegation 
because it "alleged a coercive act manifesting specific animus 
against Jumper."  Ross Stores, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 59, at 2 
(emphasis added);  see also id. at 3 (noting that relatedness 
was established by the need to investigate Ross' "prior indica-
tions of animus toward the organizing campaign and in 
particular its dealings with Jumper regarding that cam-
paign") (emphasis added);  id. at 4 (stressing that "the over-
broad oral no-solicitation rule" was "dictated directly to 
Jumper").

__________
     3 Jumper's initial, timely-filed charge can also fairly be read as 
encompassing the solicitation incident.  In that charge, Jumper 
complained that he had been dismissed because of his "union 
involvement."  Charge Against Employer p 2 (Oct. 21, 1993).  That 
union involvement surely included the solicitation incident, in which 
Jumper was admonished after his supervisor discovered him post-
ing union literature in the men's room. See Fant Milling, 360 U.S. 
at 307 (1959) ("A charge filed with the Labor Board is not to be 
measured by the standards applicable to a pleading in a private 
lawsuit.").

     In sum, because the two charges at issue in this case are 
closely related, and are not bound together simply by "the 
coincidence of the two separate violations [occurring] during 
the same organizing campaign," Op. at 10, the admonition 
allegation is not time-barred under section 10(b).

                                    