                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 8, 2002       Decided May 31, 2002 

                      Nos. 01-5157 & 01-5158

                        Robert Lederman, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                United States of America, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv03359)

     Neal Goldfarb argued the cause for appellant/cross-
appellee.  With him on the briefs was Arthur B. Spitzer.

     Marina Utgoff Braswell, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellees/cross-appellants.  With her on the 
briefs were Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, and R. 
Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards and Tatel, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Concurring opinion filed by Senior Circuit Judge Silber-
man.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  In this interlocutory appeal, we 
consider a facial First Amendment challenge to a regulation 
banning leafleting and other "demonstration activit[ies]" on 
the sidewalk at the foot of the House and Senate steps on the 
East Front of the United States Capitol.  Finding that the 
sidewalk is a public forum and that no part of the ban is 
narrowly tailored to further a significant governmental pur-
pose, we declare the ban unconstitutional.  Because the Capi-
tol Police violated no clearly established legal rules in arrest-
ing Appellant for leafleting in violation of the ban, however, 
we conclude that the officers named in Appellant's Bivens 
claim are entitled to qualified immunity.

                                I.

     The United States Capitol Grounds extend from Union 
Station in the North to Virginia Avenue in the South, and 
from Second Street Northeast to Third Streets North- and 
Southwest, encompassing the Capitol itself as well as House 
and Senate office buildings, a power plant, press areas, and 
public open space.  See Traffic and Motor Vehicle Regula-
tions for the United States Capitol Grounds ("Capitol 
Grounds Regulations") Demonstration Areas Map.  This case 
involves only the smaller, approximately sixty-acre area of 
grass, trees, sidewalks, and a few paved plazas--designed by 
Frederick Law Olmstead in the late 1870s--that surrounds 
the Capitol.  See Architect of the Capitol, History of the U.S. 
Capitol Grounds, at http://www.aoc.gov/cc/grounds/g_ 
history.htm (last visited Apr. 22, 2002).  Although barricades 
prevent vehicles from entering this central area except 
through designated gatehouses, no barriers impede pedestri-

an access.  As a result, members of the public use the area 
extensively, commuting to work, sightseeing, posing for pic-
tures, jogging, and walking dogs.

     Federal law charges the Capitol Police Board, consisting of 
the Sergeant at Arms of the United States Senate, the 
Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives, and the 
Architect of the Capitol, with regulating "movement of all 
vehicular and other traffic ... within the ... Capitol 
Grounds."  40 U.S.C. s 212b(a).  Acting on this authority, the 
Board promulgated a regulation that restricts "demonstration 
activity" near the Capitol, delimiting areas in which such 
activity is entirely barred ("no-demonstration zones"), and 
areas in which demonstrations are allowed, subject to various 
permitting requirements ("demonstration permit zones").  
Capitol Grounds Regulations art. XIX, s 158, amend. II, & 
Demonstration Areas Map.  "[D]emonstration activity" 
means:

     [P]arading, picketing, leafleting, holding vigils, sit-ins, or 
     other expressive conduct or speechmaking that conveys a 
     message supporting or opposing a point of view and has 
     the intent, effect or propensity to attract a crowd or 
     onlookers, but does not include merely wearing Tee 
     shirts, buttons, or other similar articles of apparel that 
     convey a message.
     
Id. s 158(a), amend. II.  This definition incorporates several 
minor revisions made during the course of this litigation.  
Because these revisions do not affect our analysis, however, 
we refer only to the current version throughout the remain-
der of this opinion.

     In early 1997, the Capitol Police applied the demonstration 
ban to a lone visitor to the Capitol Grounds, appellant Robert 
Lederman, who was distributing leaflets in a "no-
demonstration zone":  the sidewalk at the foot of the Senate 
steps on the Capitol's East Front.  An artist participating in 
the annual Arts Advocacy Day, Lederman sought to publicize 
a lawsuit he and others had brought regarding artists' rights 
to sell their work on public sidewalks in New York City.  In 
addition to his leaflets, he carried a sign that read "Stop 
Arresting Artists."  Lederman v. United States, 89 F. Supp. 

2d 29, 31 (D.D.C. 2000) ("Lederman I").  Capitol Police 
officers approached Lederman and informed him that demon-
strations were not permitted on the East Front sidewalk but 
that he could continue to leaflet if he moved to the lawn on 
the far side of the paved East Front Plaza--still in the 
central part of the Capitol Grounds but approximately 250 
feet from the Capitol.  Believing that he could not reach his 
intended audience from the lawn, Lederman declined to 
move.  The officers then asked him to wait in another "no-
demonstration zone":  the identical sidewalk area at the foot 
of the House steps.  While Lederman waited there, he re-
sumed leafleting, and, after repeated warnings, appellees 
Lieutenant Loughery and Officer McQuay arrested him.

     Lederman was charged in D.C. Superior Court with violat-
ing the Capitol Police Board's demonstration ban.  Finding 
the ban "unconstitutional on its face and as applied to [Leder-
man's] conduct," the Hearing Commissioner entered an un-
published judgment of acquittal.  Id. at 31-32.  Lederman 
then filed this suit in the United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia, challenging the constitutionality of the 
demonstration ban and seeking compensatory damages for 
his arrest from various parties, including the Federal Govern-
ment (under the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. s 2674), 
the District of Columbia (under 42 U.S.C. s 1983), and Lieu-
tenant Loughery and Officer McQuay (under Bivens v. Six 
Unknown Named Agents of the Fed. Bureau of Narcotics, 
403 U.S. 388 (1971)).  To support his standing to bring a 
facial challenge to the entire ban, Lederman stated that he 
"wishe[d] to come to Washington in the future, on subsequent 
Arts Advocacy Days and on other occasions, to engage in 
constitutionally-protected demonstration activity in the no-
demonstration zone--including, but not necessarily limited to, 
leafleting and holding signs."  First Am. Compl. p 36;  see 
also Lederman Decl. p 17.

     The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment, and 
the district court issued a preliminary opinion declaring fa-
cially unconstitutional and permanently enjoining enforce-
ment of the portion of the ban that prohibits "other expres-
sive conduct or speechmaking that conveys a message ... 

and has the intent, effect or propensity to attract a crowd or 
onlookers."  Lederman v. United States, 131 F. Supp. 2d 46, 
53-55 (D.D.C. 2001) ("Lederman II") (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted).  In so ruling, the court made 
clear that its order pertained only to the East Front sidewalk 
where Lederman was arrested, not to the paved East Front 
Plaza nor to the remainder of the "no-demonstration zone" 
surrounding the Capitol.  Id. at 50-51.  The court also de-
clined to address the constitutionality of the part of the ban 
that proscribes parading, picketing, leafleting, holding vigils, 
and sit-ins.  See id. at 49, 53-54 (focusing analysis on ban on 
"other expressive conduct or speechmaking that conveys a 
message ... ").  Turning to Lederman's Bivens claim against 
Lieutenant Loughery and Officer McQuay, the district court 
held that under "clearly established" First Amendment law in 
the District of Columbia, expressive conduct on the Capitol 
Grounds is protected unless it is "more disruptive or substan-
tial than [conduct] normally engaged in by tourists."  Id. at 
57.  Although the court believed there was "a material, 
factual dispute as to whether [the officers] reasonably applied 
[this 'tourist standard'] when they arrested [Lederman]," id., 
it nevertheless concluded that because the Government failed 
to prove the officers "acted reasonably or in compliance with 
the ... standard," they could not invoke qualified immunity 
as a defense to the Bivens claim, id. at 60.

     All parties now appeal.  Lederman challenges the district 
court's failure to extend its ruling to the similar demonstra-
tion ban in "no-demonstration zones" other than the East 
Front sidewalk, as well as its refusal to invalidate the entire 
ban.  The Government defends the ban's constitutionality and 
challenges the district court's qualified immunity determina-
tion.  Considering these issues de novo, see, e.g., Sturdza v. 
United Arab Emirates, 281 F.3d 1287, 1293 (2002) (noting 
standard of review on summary judgment), we do not limit 
our analysis--as did the district court--to the portion of the 
ban that proscribes "expressive conduct or speechmaking that 
conveys a message ... and has the intent, effect or propensi-
ty to attract a crowd or onlookers."  Capitol Grounds Regula-

tions art. XIX, s 158(a), amend. II.  Given Lederman's arrest 
for leafleting and his intent to return to the Capitol Grounds 
to engage in other expressive activity on the East Front 
sidewalk, see supra p. 4, he has standing to challenge the 
entire regulation because he has established a "distinct and 
palpable" threat of future "direct injury"--arrest.  Meese v. 
Keene, 481 U.S. 465, 472 (1987) (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted).

                               II.

     As the district court rightly observed, the "degree of First 
Amendment scrutiny accorded to governmental decisions lim-
iting speech on public property depends on whether the 
property in question is a traditional public forum, a govern-
ment-designated public forum, or a non-public forum."  Led-
erman I, 89 F. Supp. 2d at 35.  To determine the constitu-
tionality of the challenged demonstration ban, therefore, we 
must decide whether the East Front sidewalk is a public 
forum.  Lederman urges that we also consider the public 
forum status of "no-demonstration zones" other than the 
sidewalk where he was arrested, but we decline to do so on 
the record before us.

     In deciding how to classify the East Front sidewalk, we 
have little maneuvering room, as courts have long recognized 
that the Capitol Grounds as a whole meet the definition of a 
traditional public forum:  They have traditionally been open to 
the public, and their intended use is consistent with public 
expression.  In Jeannette Rankin Brigade v. Chief of Capitol 
Police, a three-judge panel of the United States District 
Court for the District of Columbia, striking down a statute 
that forbade " 'parad[ing], stand[ing], or mov[ing] in proces-
sions or assemblages' " around the Capitol, concluded that the 
Grounds are "an area to which access cannot be denied 
broadly or absolutely."  342 F. Supp. 575, 583-84 (D.D.C. 
1972) (three-judge panel) (quoting 40 U.S.C. s 193g).  The 
Supreme Court summarily affirmed, making Jeannette Ran-
kin Brigade binding precedent.  409 U.S. 972 (1972).  Later, 
in Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Kerrigan 
("CCNV"), we observed that "[t]here is no doubt that the 

Capitol Grounds are a public forum."  865 F.2d 382, 383, 387 
(1989) (upholding as "a reasonable time, place or manner 
restriction" a regulation limiting the length of time during 
which demonstration "[p]rops and [e]quipment" may remain 
on the Grounds).  Clearly, therefore, the "Grounds (excluding 
such places as the Senate and House floors, committee rooms, 
etc.) have traditionally been open to the public," and "the 
primary purpose for which the Capitol was designed--legis-
lating"--is entirely consistent "with the existence of all pa-
rades, assemblages, or processions which may take place on 
the grounds."  Jeannette Rankin Brigade, 342 F. Supp. at 
584.  Indeed, in Jeannette Rankin Brigade, the district court 
observed that "the fundamental function of a legislature in a 
democratic society assumes accessibility to [public] opinion."  
Id.

     Despite this controlling case law, the Government insists 
the sidewalk is a nonpublic forum because it is " 'some special 
type of enclave.' "  Appellees' Br. at 20 (quoting United 
States v. Grace, 461 U.S. 171, 180 (1983)).  In making this 
argument, the Government relies on the differences between 
this case and Grace, in which the Supreme Court considered 
the constitutionality of a statute that prohibited " 'display [of] 
any flag, banner, or device designed or adapted to bring into 
public notice any party organization, or movement' in the 
United States Supreme Court building or on its grounds."  
461 U.S. at 172-73 (alteration in original) (quoting 40 U.S.C. 
s 13k (1949)).  The Court limited its consideration of the 
constitutional issues to the area where Grace and her fellow 
demonstrators had attempted to exercise their First Amend-
ment speech rights--the "public sidewalks surrounding the 
Court building."  Id. at 175.  Observing that "[s]idewalks ... 
are among those areas of public property that traditionally 
have been held open to the public for expressive activities," 
id. at 179, the Court concluded that the sidewalks surround-
ing the Court building were no exception.  Writing for the 
majority, Justice White elaborated:

     The sidewalks comprising the outer boundaries of the 
     Court grounds are indistinguishable from any other side-
     walks in Washington, D.C.....  There is no separation, 
     
     no fence, and no indication whatever to persons stepping 
     from the street to the curb and sidewalks ... that they 
     have entered some special type of enclave....  "Con-
     gress ... may not by its own ipse dixit destroy the 
     'public forum' status of streets and parks which have 
     historically been public forums...."
     
Id. at 180-81 (quoting United States Postal Serv. v. Green-
burgh Civic Ass'ns, 453 U.S. 114, 133 (1981) (alteration in 
original)).  Distinguishing Grace, the Government contends 
that the East Front sidewalk "is significantly different" from 
the sidewalks around the Court because the former "abuts 
the Capitol Building, is well within the Capitol Grounds, and 
does not run parallel to any city street."  Appellees' Br. at 
19-20.  Unlike in Grace, however, where the Supreme Court 
expressly declined to consider whether the Court building 
and the remainder of its grounds are a public forum, in this 
case the entire Capitol Grounds are a public forum.  As a 
result, the Government cannot prevail by establishing that 
the East Front sidewalk "is well within" those Grounds.  
Rather, to convince us the sidewalk is not a public forum, the 
Government must establish that the sidewalk differs from the 
remainder of the public Grounds in ways that make it unique-
ly "nonpublic."

     Perhaps recognizing this requirement, the Government 
next argues that "[i]t is entirely possible ... to have property 
within areas constituting a traditional public forum be consid-
ered a nonpublic forum."  Id. at 22.  As evidence that the 
East Front sidewalk warrants such an exemption, the Gov-
ernment asserts:  "[t]he sidewalk ... has never been available 
to the public for expressive activity," id. at 20;  Congress 
Members' use of the sidewalk for "quick and unimpeded 
access to the House and Senate floors" is "not consistent with 
public debate and assembly," id. at 22-23;  and finally, the 
sidewalk's function as a security perimeter around the Capitol 
is equally incompatible with public use, id. at 23-24.  We are 
unpersuaded.  To begin with, the sidewalk has never been 
available for public expression primarily because, for almost a 
century, such expression was prohibited anywhere on the 
Capitol Grounds by the very statute declared unconstitutional 

in Jeannette Rankin Brigade.  342 F. Supp. at 587-88.  If 
"time, place, or manner restrictions can[not] bootstrap them-
selves into validity by their mere existence, even if pro-
longed," Henderson v. Lujan, 964 F.2d 1179, 1183 (D.C. Cir. 
1992) (emphasis added), then unconstitutional restrictions cer-
tainly cannot, by their mere existence, bootstrap subsequent 
restrictions into validity.

     The Government's arguments regarding the limited uses of 
the East Front sidewalk are equally unconvincing.  True, we 
have recognized that an area's "specialized use[s] may out-
weigh the attributes that would otherwise mark [it] as [a] 
public forum[ ]," but the Government has failed to meet its 
"burden ... to show that the [sidewalk's] use [is] overwhelm-
ingly specialized."  Id. at 1182.  Even assuming, as did the 
district court, that the sidewalk "is used primarily by people 
coming to and from the Capitol building," Lederman II, 131 
F. Supp. 2d at 51, we do not think that use sufficiently 
"specialized" to warrant distinguishing the sidewalk from the 
remainder of the Grounds for purposes of the public forum 
analysis.  If people entering and leaving the Capitol can avoid 
running headlong into tourists, joggers, dogs, and strollers--
which the Government apparently concedes, as it has not 
closed the sidewalk to such activities--then we assume they 
are also capable of circumnavigating the occasional protester.  
That "clusters of individual demonstrators could ... impede 
access to the Capitol," Appellees' Br. at 23, is immaterial:  
Although such concerns may provide a basis for reasonable 
restrictions on the duration or size of a sidewalk demonstra-
tion, they cannot justify classifying the area as a nonpublic 
forum.  We likewise reject the proposition that demonstra-
tors of any stripe pose a greater security risk to the Capitol 
building and its occupants than do pedestrians, who may 
come and go anonymously, travel in groups of any size, carry 
any number of bags and boxes, and linger as long as they 
please.  Again, the Government could address its concern--
the presence of "groups too large to surveil individually," 
carrying "unscreened personal containers and belongings," 
id.--through reasonable time, place, or manner restrictions 
that, for example, limit the size of group demonstrations or 
the number of individual demonstrators.

     Finally, United States v. Kokinda, 497 U.S. 720 (1990), 
which the Government cites for the proposition that all side-
walks are not necessarily public forums, does not control this 
case.  For one thing, although a plurality of the Kokinda 
Court upheld the constitutionality of a U.S. Postal Service 
regulation prohibiting individuals from "soliciting alms and 
contributions" on the sidewalk leading from the Bowie, Mary-
land Post Office to the post office parking lot, id. at 722-23, 
only four Justices agreed with the Government that the 
sidewalk in question was a nonpublic forum, id. at 730.  
Moreover, analyzing the public forum issue for the Chief 
Justice and Justices White and Scalia, Justice O'Connor 
focused on the fact that the sidewalk "le[d] only from the 
parking area to the front door of the post office" and "was 
constructed solely to assist postal patrons to negotiate the 
space between the parking lot and the front door of the post 
office, not to facilitate the daily commerce and life of the 
neighborhood or city."  Id. at 727-28.  In contrast, the side-
walk at issue here wraps around the Capitol's East Front 
almost without interruption, providing pedestrian access to 
the entire front of the building in addition to the doors, 
thereby facilitating tourist access to the Capitol--a center-
piece of our democracy.

     In short, although the East Front sidewalk borders no 
public streets, it is "continually open, often uncongested, and 
constitutes not only a necessary conduit in the daily affairs of 
[the city's] citizens, but also a place where people may enjoy 
the open air or the company of friends and neighbors," 
Heffron v. Int'l Soc'y for Krishna Consciousness, Inc., 452 
U.S. 640, 651 (1981), and a place from which tourists may 
view and photograph the Capitol.  Under these circum-
stances, we agree with the district court that, like the rest of 
the Capitol Grounds, the sidewalk is a traditional public 
forum.

                               III.

     Because the East Front sidewalk is a public forum, "the 
government's ability to permissibly restrict expressive con-

duct [there] is very limited:  [It] may enforce reasonable time, 
place, and manner regulations as long as the restrictions 'are 
content-neutral, are narrowly tailored to serve a significant 
government interest, and leave open ample alternative chan-
nels of communication.' "  Grace, 461 U.S. at 177 (quoting 
Perry Educ. Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators' Ass'n, 460 U.S. 
37, 45 (1983)).  Lederman principally argues that the ban (1) 
is not narrowly tailored to controlling traffic and promoting 
security around the Capitol, and (2) fails to leave open ample 
alternative channels of communication.  Because we agree 
with the former, we do not address the latter.

     We begin with the principles that guide our narrow tailor-
ing analysis.  First, we "closely scrutinize" challenged speech 
restrictions "to determine if [they] indeed promote[ ] the 
Government's purposes in more than a speculative way."  
CCNV, 865 F.2d at 390.  Second, per se bans on expressive 
conduct are inherently suspect.  See Grace, 461 U.S. at 182 
(questioning the need for a "total ban" on carrying flags and 
banners).  Third, while the Government "must be afforded a 
reasonable measure of discretion in determining how best to 
promote" its identified interests, the Constitution does not 
tolerate "regulations that, while serving their purported aims, 
prohibit a wide range of activities that do not interfere with 
the Government's objectives."  CCNV, 865 F.2d at 390.  
Fourth, "[t]he fact that a substantially less restrictive regula-
tion [would] be equally effective in promoting the same ends 
may be relevant" to the constitutional analysis.  Id.

     The first principle presents little difficulty in this case.  We 
need not "speculat[e]" at all to assume that the demonstration 
ban discourages some people from coming to the East Front 
sidewalk to express themselves, thereby reducing pedestrian 
traffic and decreasing risks to the Capitol and its occupants.  
Thus, the Board could reasonably have concluded that the 
ban would serve those interests.

     The remaining principles, however, reveal the ban's pro-
found flaws.  To begin with, it imposes precisely the sort of 
"total" restriction on certain types of speech that the Su-
preme Court "question[ed]" in Grace.  461 U.S. at 182.  Even 

if we read the ban narrowly--assuming that the sole qualifier 
(that the activity in question must convey a message and have 
the "intent, effect or propensity" to attract more than one 
onlooker) modifies the entire list of proscribed activities, from 
"parading" to "speechmaking"--that qualifier is of no prac-
tical significance:  Demonstration activity always conveys a 
message (that is, after all, its purpose), and it has the 
"propensity" to attract more than one onlooker whenever it is 
loud or obvious enough to be heard or noticed by more than 
one passerby.  As the district court observed, "[i]t is hard to 
conceive of much expression that a reasonable officer would 
not find to be conveying a message[,] ... [and] an officer 
reasonably could determine that any expressive conduct 
meeting th[is] first definition, with the possible exception of 
private conversations, has the ... 'propensity' to attract ... 
onlookers." Lederman II, 131 F. Supp. 2d at 54.  The regula-
tion's exemption of expressive tee-shirts and buttons is equal-
ly insignificant.  As in Grace, the problem here is that certain 
types of speech (parading, picketing, leafleting, vigils, sit-ins, 
and speechmaking) are, even under a narrow reading, almost 
entirely prohibited.  That the ban permits other types of 
speech may establish that it "leave[s] open ample alternative 
channels of communication," Grace, 461 U.S. at 177 (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted), but that fact hardly 
demonstrates that the ban is narrowly tailored to its objec-
tives.

     The ban's absolute nature might be less troubling if--in 
accordance with the third principle--all listed demonstration 
activities could reasonably be expected to interfere with the 
stated objectives of traffic control and safety.  Some banned 
activities, however, cannot possibly pose that risk.  For exam-
ple, a single leafleteer standing on the East Front sidewalk 
will no more likely block traffic or threaten security than will 
photographers, star-struck tourists, and landscape painters 
complete with easels, but the Board has made no effort to 
keep any of these latter individuals away from the Capitol.  
"Freedom of expression ... would rest on a soft foundation 
indeed if government could distinguish" between demonstra-
tors and pedestrians on "a wholesale and categorical basis," 

without providing evidence that demonstrators pose a greater 
risk to identified government interests than do pedestrians.  
Police Dep't of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 101 (1972).  
We likewise doubt that "a group of congressional staffers" 
standing "outside the Capitol arguing [loudly] about the latest 
... bill" would impede traffic flow or raise security concerns, 
yet "assuming that the ban was applied literally and even-
handedly," such a group "would presumably be risking cita-
tion or arrest for engaging in 'expressive conduct.' "  Leder-
man I, 89 F. Supp. 2d at 41.

     Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the Board's virtually 
per se ban on expressive activity on the East Front sidewalk 
is the ready availability of "substantially less restrictive" 
alternatives that would "equally effective[ly]" promote safety 
and orderly traffic flow.  CCNV, 865 F.2d at 390.  For 
example, the Board could rely on existing laws that bar 
visitors to the Capitol Grounds from "utter[ing] loud, threat-
ening, or abusive language, ... engag[ing] in any disorderly 
or disruptive conduct," or "obstruct[ing] ... or ... 
imped[ing] passage through or within" the Grounds.  40 
U.S.C. s 193f(b)(4)-(5).  Alternatively, the Board could re-
quire permits for demonstrations on the sidewalk, limit the 
duration of such demonstrations, restrict the number of indi-
viduals who may demonstrate simultaneously, require that 
demonstrators present bags and other personal possessions to 
police officers for screening, or prohibit activities likely to 
attract large crowds.  We emphasize that in listing these 
alternatives, we do not intend to provide the Board with 
specific suggestions for future regulations--indeed, we are 
uncertain that every identified alternative would survive con-
stitutional scrutiny, though some surely would.  Rather, our 
list shows only that the Government could achieve its intend-
ed objectives while also permitting some demonstrations on 
the East Front sidewalk.

     Moreover, because our hypothetical alternatives, like the 
existing ban, aim at future speech, we find unconvincing the 
Government's warning that striking down the current ban will 
somehow preclude the Police Board from "enact[ing] regula-
tions to address conduct reasonably expected to occur."  Ap-

pellees' Br. at 28.  We well recognize that under established 
First Amendment doctrine, the Government may issue rea-
sonable, prospective, time, place, and manner regulations that 
restrict expressive activity on the East Front sidewalk.  We 
hold only that, as currently written, the demonstration ban 
imposes "a serious loss to speech ... for a disproportionately 
small governmental gain," White House Vigil for the ERA 
Comm. v. Clark, 746 F.2d 1518, 1544 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (Wald, 
J., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part 
on other grounds), thus violating the narrow tailoring require-
ment.

                               IV.

     This brings us to the issue of Lieutenant Loughery's and 
Officer McQuay's qualified immunity for arresting Lederman.  
"Qualified immunity shields officials from liability for dam-
ages so long as their actions were objectively reasonable, as 
measured in light of the legal rules that were 'clearly estab-
lished' at the time of their actions."  Kalka v. Hawk, 215 F.3d 
90, 94 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (quoting Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 
U.S. 800, 818-19 (1982)).  In analyzing this issue, we first 
determine whether "the facts alleged show the officer's con-
duct violated a constitutional right."  Saucier v. Katz, 533 
U.S. 194, 201 (2001).  "[I]f a violation could be made out on a 
favorable view of the parties' submissions, the next ... step is 
to ask whether the right was clearly established."  Id.  If 
existing law at the time of the violation "did not put the 
officer on notice that his conduct would be clearly unlawful, 
summary judgment based on qualified immunity is appropri-
ate."  Id. at 202.

     By finding the Police Board's demonstration ban unconsti-
tutional, we have resolved the "threshold question," id. at 201:  
Lederman's arrest violated his constitutional rights.  For 
three reasons, however, we do not believe that existing law at 
the time of the arrest "put [Lieutenant Loughery and Officer 
McQuay] on notice that [their] conduct would be clearly 
unlawful."  Id. at 202.  First, while Jeannette Rankin Bri-
gade and CCNV establish that the Capitol Grounds as a whole 

are a public forum, neither case discusses individual areas of 
the Grounds, and we agree with the Government that some 
areas within a large public forum may be nonpublic if their 
"use" is "specialized."  Henderson, 964 F.2d at 1182.  Indeed, 
the three-judge panel in Jeannette Rankin Brigade suggest-
ed that its First Amendment analysis might have produced a 
different result if the expressive conduct at issue had oc-
curred "near or in the immediate vicinity of the Capitol 
itself."  342 F. Supp. at 584 (internal quotation marks omit-
ted).  While we now explicitly hold that the First Amendment 
analysis does not, in fact, differ on the East Front sidewalk, 
we nevertheless think a reasonable police officer could have 
believed that the sidewalk's proximity to the Capitol altered 
the First Amendment balance with respect to demonstration 
activities there.

     Second, we agree with the Government that because nar-
row tailoring is "not an exact science," a reasonable officer 
should not be expected to perform that analysis prior to 
arresting an individual for violating an ostensibly lawful time, 
place, and manner restriction governing expressive activity in 
a public forum.  Appellees' Br. at 52.  As the Supreme Court 
stated in a different context prior to Harlow:

     The enactment of a law forecloses speculation by enforce-
     ment officers concerning its constitutionality--with the 
     possible exception of a law so grossly and flagrantly 
     unconstitutional that any person of reasonable prudence 
     would be bound to see its flaws.  Society would be ill-
     served if its police officers took it upon themselves to 
     determine which laws are and which are not constitution-
     ally entitled to enforcement.
     
Michigan v. DeFillippo, 443 U.S. 31, 38 (1979);  see also 
Grossman v. Portland, 33 F.3d 1200, 1210 (9th Cir. 1994) 
("[A]n officer who reasonably relies on the legislature's deter-
mination that a statute is constitutional should be shielded 
from personal liability.").  Although the demonstration ban is 
a regulation not a statute, we think a similar standard applies 
here.  While we find the ban's sheer breadth astonishing, we 

recognize that the Police Board made some attempt at tailor-
ing--it exempted expressive tee-shirts and buttons and in-
cluded the phrases regarding "convey[ing] a message" and 
"ha[ving] the intent, effect or propensity to attract a crowd or 
onlookers."  Capitol Grounds Regulations art. XIX, s 158(a), 
amend. II.  Although those qualifiers cannot begin to satisfy 
the narrow tailoring requirement, see supra pp. 11-12, we 
think their inclusion in the ban keeps it from being "so 
grossly and flagrantly unconstitutional," DeFillippo, 443 U.S. 
at 38, that the officers should have recognized its flaws.

     Third, as the Government points out, the East Front 
sidewalk "has never been available to the public for expres-
sive activity."  Appellees' Br. at 20;  see also supra pp. 8-9.  
Although the longstanding policy of prohibiting demonstra-
tions around the Capitol cannot "bootstrap" the current ban 
"into validity," Henderson, 964 F.2d at 1183, we do think that 
policy could have misled a reasonable police officer as to the 
ban's constitutionality.

     Finally, we must consider the significance of the District of 
Columbia Court of Appeals' "tourist standard," on which the 
district court relied.  See supra p. 5.  To begin with, contrary 
to Lederman's assertion, we have never "held" that the 
tourist standard "governs" the constitutionality "of arrests for 
demonstration activity on the Capitol Grounds."  Appellant's 
Br. at 38.  Rather, in Dellums v. Powell, the lone case in 
which we cited the standard, we were applying a District of 
Columbia law that District courts had "definitively construed" 
to incorporate the standard.  566 F.2d 167, 177 (D.C. Cir. 
1977) (citing United States v. Nicholson, Nos. 20210-69A et 
al. (D.C.Ct. of Gen.Sess. June 19, 1969), aff'd, 263 A.2d 56 
(D.C.App. 1970)).  Of course, that we have never incorporated 
the tourist standard into our First Amendment jurisprudence 
does not resolve the qualified immunity issue because, in 
evaluating what constitutes "clearly established statutory or 
constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have 
known," Harlow, 457 U.S. at 818, we must look not just to 
federal case law, but also to the law of the highest court in 
the state in which the case arose, see Doe v. Delie, 257 F.3d 
309, 321 n.10 (3d Cir. 2001) (reviewing federal appellate 

decisions regarding what constitutes "clearly established" 
law).

     Even if the tourist standard represents "clearly estab-
lished" law, however, two factors convince us that the stan-
dard does not bar qualified immunity for the officers in this 
case.  First, although the District of Columbia Court of 
Appeals has stated that it "impose[s] the 'tourist standard' to 
save content-neutral statutes regulating the time, place, and 
manner of expression from unconstitutionality in their appli-
cation," Berg v. United States, 631 A.2d 394, 398 (D.C. 1993), 
we have found no case in which the court has applied the 
standard to any federal law or regulation.  Even assuming 
that the appeals court would apply the standard to the 
demonstration ban and other federal laws if given the oppor-
tunity, we see no basis for requiring reasonable police officers 
to foresee that possibility.  Second, we are unpersuaded that 
Lederman's leafleting "clearly" met the standard.  Because 
District of Columbia courts have never applied the standard 
to a case involving leafleting, we think a reasonable police 
officer could conclude that leafleting, which requires some 
minimal personal interaction between the leafleteer and his 
audience, is "more disruptive" to passing pedestrians, includ-
ing Members of Congress and their staff, than the conduct of 
an average tourist.

     Overall, therefore, whether we review only the officers' 
conduct in relying on the unconstitutional demonstration ban, 
or consider also their alleged violation of the District of 
Columbia tourist standard, we cannot conclude that their 
arrest of Lederman violated his "clearly established" rights.  
The officers are therefore entitled to qualified immunity.

                                V.

     We declare the entire demonstration ban unconstitutional, 
find that Lieutenant Loughery and Officer McQuay are enti-
tled to qualified immunity for their roles in Lederman's 
arrest, and remand for entry of an injunction barring enforce-
ment of the ban and for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion.

                                                            So ordered.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge, concurring:  I concur in 
the court's opinion.  We are certainly bound by Jeannette 
Rankin Brigade v. Chief of Capitol Police, 342 F. Supp. 575 
(D.D.C. 1972) (three judge panel), aff'd, 409 U.S. 972 (1972).  
However, I think it is distinctly possible that the later Su-
preme Court case, United States v. Grace, 461 U.S. 171 
(1983), particularly the Court's implicit rejection of Justice 
Marshall's position that the whole of the Supreme Court's 
grounds are a traditional public forum, betokens a more 
sympathetic reception to the government's arguments.  To be 
sure, Jeannette Rankin Brigade was summarily affirmed, but 
the Court rarely considers itself bound by the reasoning of its 
prior opinions--which is why I have referred to it as a "non-
court court," see United States v. Moore, 110 F.3d 99, 102 
(D.C. Cir. 1997) (Silberman, J., dissenting from denial of 
rehearing en banc)--let alone a summary affirmance. (Of 
course, the Court's reluctance to offend Congress would not 
be irrelevant.)

     In light of my doubts as to how this case will be received by 
the Supreme Court if certiorari is granted, I join my col-
leagues' treatment of the Bivens claim.  However, I am 
inclined to think that under applicable immunity law each of 
the police officer's conduct should be judged as if he were the 
lawyer for the Capitol Police.

                                                 