                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                     Decided November 2, 2001

                           No. 00-5422

                         Michael Bourke, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                    Kathleen M. Hawk-Sawyer, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv02960)

                            ---------

                  On Motion for Summary Reversal

                            ---------

     Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney at the time the motion was 
filed, and R. Craig Lawrence and W. Mark Nebeker, Assis-
tant U.S. Attorneys, were on the motion for summary rever-
sal filed by appellant Kathleen M. Hawk-Sawyer.

     Michael Bourke, pro se.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge;  Henderson and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  The question presented by this 
appeal is whether a federal prisoner claiming the Bureau of 
Prisons unlawfully declared him ineligible to be considered 
for a reduction of sentence may challenge that determination 
by a petition for mandamus.  We hold that he may not;  a 
writ of habeas corpus is the exclusive remedy for such a 
claim.

     Appellee Michael Bourke was convicted in the United 
States District Court for the District of Hawaii of violating 18 
U.S.C. s 922(o)(1) (possession of a machine gun), and 21 
U.S.C. s 841(a) (possession of a controlled substance).  
Bourke is serving his sentence in a federal prison in Texas.

     Bourke sought a reduction of his sentence pursuant to 18 
U.S.C. s 3621(e)(2)(B), which authorizes the Bureau of Pris-
ons to grant a one-year reduction of sentence to a nonviolent 
offender who has successfully completed a qualified substance 
abuse program.  The BOP determined that Bourke was not 
eligible to be considered for a sentence reduction because the 
possession of a machine gun is, in its view, a crime of violence.

     Bourke filed in the United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia a petition for writ of mandamus in which 
he challenged the BOP's determination.  In response the 
Director of the Bureau argued that the case must be dis-
missed without prejudice or transferred to the United States 
District Court for the Northern District of Texas because 
Bourke is required to proceed by way of a habeas petition, 
and must therefore file his petition in the jurisdiction of his 
confinement.  The district court held that Bourke need not 
bring his claim in habeas because Bourke did not seek early 
release but merely the opportunity to be considered for early 
release.  Accordingly, the district court addressed the merits 
of Bourke's claim and granted judgment in his favor.  The 
Director appealed and moved this court for summary reversal 
on the ground that, because Bourke's sole remedy is a habeas 

petition in the jurisdiction of his confinement, the district 
court here lacked jurisdiction.

     At the time the district court rendered its decision, the law 
of this circuit was somewhat unclear regarding whether a 
federal prisoner is required to proceed by a petition for 
habeas corpus where a judgment in his favor would not 
necessarily or immediately result in his earlier release, but 
would set in motion a process that will have that consequence 
if he prevails.  In Chatman-Bey v. Thornburgh, 864 F.2d 804, 
808-10 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (en banc), this court had held that a 
federal prisoner seeking to challenge his parole eligibility 
date was required to proceed in habeas, even though success 
upon his claims would not necessarily result in his earlier 
release.  Later, however, in Anyanwutaku v. Moore, 151 
F.3d 1053, 1055-57 (D.C. Cir. 1998), we permitted a District 
of Columbia prisoner to challenge his parole eligibility date in 
a suit for damages under 42 U.S.C. s 1983.  In the latter 
case, we relied primarily upon two Supreme Court cases, 
Edwards v. Balisok, 520 U.S. 641 (1997) (holding that a state 
prisoner must bring his claim in habeas only if by prevailing 
he would necessarily "prove the unlawfulness of his conviction 
or confinement"), and Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477 (1994) 
(same).  We distinguished Chatman-Bey as involving a feder-
al prisoner--the court in Chatman-Bey had emphasized that 
"what federal habeas corpus accomplishes for federal prison-
ers [is] having federal claims adjudicated in a federal forum," 
864 F.2d at 810--and we expressly reserved the question 
whether Chatman-Bey was still valid in the light of Balisok 
and Heck.

     Shortly after the district court rendered judgment in favor 
of Bourke, however, this court upheld the continuing vitality 
of Chatman-Bey.  See Razzoli v. Federal Bureau of Prisons, 
230 F.3d 371 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  A federal prisoner had sought 
declaratory relief and damages under the Privacy Act, argu-
ing that the United States Parole Commission had wrongly 
delayed the time at which he would be eligible for parole.  
We adhered to the holding of Chatman-Bey that habeas 
corpus is the exclusive remedy for a federal prisoner chal-
lenging his parole eligibility date.  230 F.3d at 375-76.  

Moreover, this court made clear that habeas is the exclusive 
remedy for a federal prisoner bringing any claim that would 
have a "probabilistic impact" upon the duration of his custody.  
See id. at 373.

     Clearly, therefore, if Bourke is to pursue his claim he must 
seek a writ of habeas corpus.  As in Razzoli and Chatman-
Bey, the crux of the appellant's claim is that he was illegally 
denied the "chance to secure his release."  Chatman-Bey, 864 
F.2d at 809.  Although Bourke's success on this claim would 
not necessarily result in his being released any earlier, it 
would raise that possibility and thus have a "probabilistic 
impact" upon the duration of his custody.  Accordingly, the 
motion for summary reversal is granted and this matter is 
remanded to the district court either to dismiss the case 
without prejudice or to transfer it to the district court for the 
district in which the appellant and his custodian are located.  
See 28 U.S.C. ss 1404(a), 1406(a), 1631.

                                                                       So ordered.

                                                          