                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued January 11, 2002    Decided March 19, 2002 

                           No. 00-1508

                  A.J. McNulty & Company, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                       Secretary of Labor, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
         Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission

     Arthur G. Sapper argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Ronald J. Gottlieb, Attorney, U.S. Department of Labor, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the brief were 
Joseph M. Woodward, Associate Solicitor, and Ann S. Rosen-
thal, Counsel.  Charles F. James, Attorney, entered an ap-
pearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  Petitioner, a construction company, 
challenges the Occupational Safety and Health Review Com-
mission's affirmance of a series of OSHA citations based on 
the company's failure to comply with workplace safety regula-
tions.  Petitioner also challenges the Commission's classifica-
tion of several violations as "willful."  To the extent petitioner 
has preserved its challenges for review, it has failed to 
demonstrate that the Commission erred legally or that its 
decision lacks substantial evidentiary support.  The Commis-
sion's classification of some citations as willful presents a 
closer question, but because this determination is also sup-
ported by substantial evidence, we reject those challenges as 
well.

                                I.

     The Occupational Safety and Health Act imposes a general 
duty on employers to keep workplaces "free from recognized 
hazards that are ... likely to cause death or serious physical 
harm."  29 U.S.C. s 654(a)(1).  Authorized by that Act to 
promulgate and enforce workplace-safety regulations, see id. 
s 655(b), the Secretary of Labor delegated most of her 
authority to the Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion (OSHA), see 65 Fed. Reg. 50,017 (2000).  OSHA compli-
ance officers regularly inspect workplaces.  If they identify a 
violation of safety regulations, OSHA issues a citation in one 
of three categories:  "not serious," for which a fine of up to 
$7000 "may be assessed";  "serious," for which a fine of up to 
$7000 "shall be assessed";  and "willful," for which a fine of at 
least $5000 but not more than $70,000 "may" be assessed.  29 
U.S.C. s 666(a)-(c).  Employers may challenge citations, in 
which case an administrative law judge conducts a hearing 
and issues a decision.  Id. s 661(j);  29 C.F.R. s 2200.90(a) 
(2001).  Employers may appeal adverse ALJ decisions to the 
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission.  Id. 
ss 2200.91-.92.

     Petitioner A.J. McNulty & Co. specializes in "precast con-
crete construction," in which huge, precast concrete slabs are 
assembled to create walls, ceilings, and floors.  Because the 
concrete sections, known in the industry as "double-T's," 
weigh as much as forty tons and rise as high as three stories, 
cranes are needed to lower them into place.  As the crane 
operator, who sometimes can see neither the double-T nor its 
intended location, lowers the double-T into its approximate 
position, McNulty employees use ropes to guide the slab into 
its precise place.  This process is dangerous, occasionally 
requiring workers to move quickly to avoid an errant double-
T.  Once a double-T has been properly positioned, McNulty 
employees secure it by welding together steel plates embed-
ded in each piece.

     In 1993, construction project manager Whiting-Turner 
Contracting Co. began work on a ten-deck parking garage in 
White Plains, New York.  The company Whiting-Turner 
hired to perform the concrete construction in turn subcon-
tracted with McNulty to install the double-T's.  Shortly after 
work commenced, Whiting-Turner issued written safety no-
tices to McNulty complaining about the company's failure to 
protect employee safety.  These notices, which Whiting- 
Turner issues only if informal verbal notices have been ig-
nored, called attention to, among other things, McNulty's 
failure to erect guardrails to protect workers from falling off 
edges of recently-installed floor pieces.  Representatives of 
the two companies met to discuss the problem, but Whiting-
Turner once again issued written safety notices to McNulty 
for continuing to expose employees to unsafe conditions.  
After OSHA compliance officers surveyed the project, the 
Agency cited McNulty for numerous willful violations of 
workplace safety regulations that require construction compa-
nies to use guardrails or safety nets to protect workers from 
dangerous falls.  See generally 29 C.F.R. s 1926.105, id. 
s 1926.500 (1994).

     McNulty contested the citations.  Following a hearing in 
which an ALJ upheld the citations in all respects, McNulty 
sought review before the Commission.  The Commission af-

firmed the ALJ's findings, but reduced the classification of 
some citations from "willful" to "serious."

     McNulty appeals ten citations.  The issues presented are 
both numerous and complex, and McNulty's counsel did not 
help matters by submitting a confusingly organized brief that 
contained a completely uninformative statement of issues.  
See Fed. R. Appellate P. 28(a)(5) (requiring a statement of 
issues).  Prior to oral argument, we directed McNulty to 
submit a revised statement of issues, warning that we would 
decline to consider the merits of any "issue not specifically 
listed."  Order of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. 
Circuit at 1, A.J. McNulty & Co. v. Sec'y of Labor (Jan. 3, 
2002) (No. 00-1508).  Working from the company's revised 
statement of issues and following the sensible organization of 
the Secretary's brief, we consider the challenged citations in 
three categories:  (1) failure to construct guardrails around 
"floor openings" and "open-sided floors";  (2) failure to con-
struct guardrails on narrow, elevated platforms;  and (3) 
failure to tie off adequately or otherwise secure workers using 
a steel cage called a "man-basket."

                               II.

     Familiar principles of administrative law govern our review 
of the Commission's fact-finding and its application of law to 
facts.  Commission findings of fact stand if "supported by 
substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole."  
29 U.S.C. s 660(a);  see also IBP, Inc. v. Herman, 144 F.3d 
861, 866 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  Its legal determinations stand 
unless they are "arbitrary, capricious, ... or otherwise not in 
accordance with law."  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A);  see also Loew-
endick & Sons, Inc. v. Reich, 70 F.3d 1291, 1294 (D.C. Cir. 
1995).  We owe "substantial deference to an agency's inter-
pretation of its own regulations," which has "controlling 
weight unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the 
regulation."  Thomas Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala, 512 U.S. 
504, 512 (1994) (internal quotation marks and citations omit-
ted).  In OSHA cases, there are two administrative actors:  
the Secretary and the Commission.  In Martin v. Occupa-

tional Safety & Health Review Commission, the Supreme 
Court explained that because the Secretary, not the Commis-
sion, has authority to make enforcement decisions and to 
render definitive interpretations of OSHA regulations, courts 
owe "substantial deference" only to the Secretary's interpre-
tation.  499 U.S. 144, 151-57 (1991).  We treat Commission 
interpretations as "equivalent to [those made by] a 'nonpolicy-
making' district court."  Molineaux v. United States, 12 F.3d 
264, 267 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (quoting Martin, 499 U.S. at 154).

     With these standards in mind, we consider the three cate-
gories of citations.

               Floor Openings and Open-Sided Floors

     OSHA issued these citations pursuant to two regulations.  
The first requires that "[f]loor openings shall be guarded by a 
standard railing ... on all exposed sides."  29 C.F.R. 
s 1926.500(b)(1) (1994).  OSHA cited McNulty for violating 
this provision after compliance officers observed two instanc-
es in which the company failed to install guardrails along the 
open edges surrounding the spaces where double-T floor 
members remained to be installed on levels P-2 and P-5 of 
the parking structure.

     McNulty argues that the guardrail regulation is inapplica-
ble because at the time of the citation, the surfaces in 
question were not "floors" within the meaning of that regula-
tion.  Before addressing this contention, we must consider 
whether, because McNulty raised this issue only in its brief 
before the Commission and not in its petition for discretion-
ary review (known as a PDR), we lack jurisdiction under 29 
U.S.C. section 660(a):  "No objection that has not been urged 
before the Commission shall be considered by the court [of 
appeals]."  See also Power Plant Div., Brown & Root, Inc. v. 
Occupational Safety & Health Review Comm'n, 659 F.2d 
1291, 1293 & n.3 (5th Cir. Unit B 1981) ("We have previously 
characterized [29 U.S.C. s 660(a)] as a limit upon our juris-
diction."), modified and aff'd on reh'g, 673 F.2d 111 (5th Cir. 
Unit B 1982);  Athens Community Hosp. v. Schweiker, 686 

F.2d 989, 992 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (courts may raise jurisdictional 
issues sua sponte).

     Resolving this issue requires an understanding of the Com-
mission's appeal procedures as well as of section 660(a).  An 
employer wishing to challenge an ALJ decision begins the 
appeal process by filing a PDR with the Commission.  29 
C.F.R. s 2200.91(b).  The Commission may review any issue 
raised in the PDR or, on its own motion, any other issue.  See 
id. If the Commission directs review, it ordinarily requests 
briefs, hears oral argument (if it chooses), and then issues a 
final order disposing of the matter.  See id. ss 2200.93, 
2200.95.  If the Commission fails to direct review of an issue 
within thirty days of the PDR's filing, the ALJ report be-
comes the Commission's final order.  See id. s 2200.90(d).  
Either way, the Commission's final order is reviewable in the 
appropriate court of appeals, subject to the limitation that 
courts of appeals lack jurisdiction over "objection[s] ... not 
... urged before the Commission."  29 U.S.C. s 660(a).

     According to McNulty, the phrase "urged before the Com-
mission" is broad enough to include raising an objection for 
the first time in a Commission brief.  In cases where the 
Commission declines to review the ALJ decision, we and our 
sister circuits have uniformly held that courts of appeals lack 
jurisdiction over objections not raised in the PDR.  See 
Durez Div. of Occidental Chem. Corp. v. Occupational Safety 
& Health Review Comm'n, 906 F.2d 1, 5 (D.C. Cir. 1990);  see 
also, e.g., P. Gioioso & Sons v. Occupational Safety & Health 
Review Comm'n, 115 F.3d 100, 107 (1st Cir. 1997) (same).  
We know of only one case that sheds light on the precise 
issue here:  What happens when the Commission agrees to 
review an ALJ decision, and the employer, having failed to 
present an objection in its PDR, does so in its Commission 
brief?  In Trinity Industries v. Occupational Safety & 
Health Review Commission, 206 F.3d 539, 542 (5th Cir. 2000), 
the Fifth Circuit held that an employer's failure to present an 
essential objection in its PDR did not preclude judicial review 
where the employer clearly raised that objection in its Com-
mission brief.  According to the Fifth Circuit, requiring the 

employer also to have raised the objection in its PDR would 
"place form above purpose."  Id. at 542.

     In our view, the result reached by the Fifth Circuit is 
equally appropriate in this case.  To begin with, nothing in 
the phrase "urged before the Commission" suggests that an 
employer must raise every objection in its PDR;  to the 
contrary, an employer that presents an objection in its brief 
has, by any understanding of the word, "urged" it before the 
Commission.  Indeed, when Congress wants to limit judicial 
review to objections raised at a particular stage of the admin-
istrative process, it does so expressly.  For example, the 
Federal Power Act provides that "[n]o objection to the order 
of the [Federal Energy Regulatory] Commission shall be 
considered by the court ... [unless] urged before the Com-
mission in the application for rehearing."  16 U.S.C. 
s 825l(b) (emphasis added);  see also Platte River Whooping 
Crane v. Fed. Energy Regulatory Comm'n, 876 F.2d 109, 113 
(D.C. Cir. 1989) (interpreting this language to require that 
petitioners seeking review of a FERC order must first "peti-
tion for rehearing of those orders and must themselves raise 
in that petition all of the objections urged on appeal" and 
emphasizing that "[n]either FERC nor this court has authori-
ty to waive these statutory requirements").  Permitting judi-
cial review of objections raised for the first time in Commis-
sion briefs, moreover, preserves the role Congress intended 
the Commission to play in the OSHA review process.  Section 
660(a)'s review-limiting clause ensures that the Commission 
has a fair chance to consider objections to ALJ decisions prior 
to judicial review.  See Power Plant Div., Brown & Root, 659 
F.2d at 1293-94 (interpreting 29 U.S.C. section 660(a) to 
require only that "the Commission be alerted to the issues 
and have the opportunity to pass on them before a court 
begins its review of the administrative process") (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted);  cf. also United States 
v. L.A. Trucker Lines, Inc., 344 U.S. 33, 37 (1952) ("[O]rderly 
procedure and good administration require that objections to 
the proceedings of an administrative agency be made while it 
has an opportunity for correction in order to raise issues 
reviewable by the courts.").  Presenting objections in Com-

mission briefs achieves this end.  To preclude judicial review 
where McNulty has "put the Commission on notice of the 
nature or basis for its challenge," Durez, 906 F.2d at 5, simply 
because the company failed to include the objection in its 
PDR would, indeed, "place form above purpose," Trinity 
Indus., 206 F.2d at 542.

     While McNulty has successfully preserved its claim that 
the surfaces in question were not "floors" within the meaning 
of the regulation, the argument lacks merit.  Nothing in the 
regulation suggests that the term "floors" applies only to 
complete floors.  On the contrary, the regulation expressly 
"appl[ies] to temporary ... conditions where there is danger 
of employees or materials falling through floor ... openings," 
29 C.F.R. s 1926.500(a) (1994), suggesting that it applies with 
particular force to incomplete floors where yet-to-be-installed 
double-T's create additional fall hazards.  The ALJ decision 
on which McNulty primarily relies, Spancrete Northeast, Inc., 
stands for the unremarkable and irrelevant proposition that 
floors are incomplete until all double-T's are secured.  1981 
WL 19242, *3 (ALJ Feb. 18, 1981) ("In precast concrete 
construction, a 'floor' within the meaning of [the regulation] is 
only complete when all the double T's constituting a level are 
secured.").

     McNulty's related argument--that the ALJ erred by ex-
cluding certain testimony about industry understanding of the 
term "floor"--is waived.  The company's only reference to 
this argument appears in the section of its Commission brief 
discussing willfulness.  McNulty thus failed to give the Com-
mission notice that its objections to the ALJ's evidentiary 
rulings related to the company's arguments about the mean-
ing of the term "floor."

     McNulty next challenges the Commission's rejection of the 
company's "infeasibility defense" to its failure to erect guard-
rails around floor openings.  Although "[i]t is an affirmative 
defense to a charge of violating an OSHA standard that 
compliance was impossible or infeasible," Bancker Constr. 
Corp. v. Reich, 31 F.3d 32, 34 (2d Cir. 1994), an employer 
mounting such a defense must show not only the infeasibility 

of compliance, but also that it either used alternative means 
of protection or that such means were infeasible.  In this 
case, we need not consider McNulty's many arguments that 
compliance with the regulation was technically infeasible, for 
the record contains substantial, undisputed evidence support-
ing the Commission's conclusion that the company could have 
installed alternative means of fall protection.  OSHA's com-
pliance officer testified that "McNulty could have put free-
standing ... guardrails back from the edge where they would 
not have interfered with installing the floor piece."  A.J. 
McNulty & Co., 19 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) 1121, 1130 (O.S.H.R.C. 
2000).  Although McNulty claims that bolted-stanchion 
guardrails would have interfered with installation of precast 
concrete members, it never disputed, either before the Com-
mission or this Court, the compliance officer's testimony that 
free-standing guardrails were feasible.  McNulty also con-
tends that the Commission erred by imposing on it the 
burden of proving the infeasibility of alternative methods of 
fall protection.  Not only is this claim directly contrary to 
law, see Bancker Constr., 31 F.3d at 34;  cf. 29 C.F.R. 
s 1926.501(b)(2)(i) (2001) (placing burden on employer to 
demonstrate infeasibility), but it too is waived, appearing in 
neither the company's PDR nor Commission brief.

     Equally unpersuasive is McNulty's argument that the Com-
mission erred by rejecting its "greater-hazard defense" to the 
failure to install guardrails around the floor opening on level 
P-2.  Employers seeking to establish such a defense must 
prove "(1) the hazards of compliance with [the] standard are 
greater than the hazards of noncompliance, (2) alternative 
means of protection are unavailable, and (3) a variance [(a 
procedure by which an employer formally requests an excep-
tion from OSHA regulations)] was unavailable or inappropri-
ate."  Dole v. Williams Enters., 876 F.2d 186, 188 (D.C. Cir. 
1989).  According to McNulty, workers erecting guardrails 
around this particular floor opening would have been exposed 
to dangers from the potential collapse of an unsecured 
twenty-five-ton vertical wall member.  As the Secretary cor-
rectly points out, McNulty mislabels this argument an infeasi-
bility defense.  Even properly labeled, however, the defense 

fails.  McNulty points to no record evidence disputing the 
Commission's finding that even if installation of guardrails 
might have been hazardous, "McNulty could have installed 
perimeter protection before bringing the elevated wall piece 
up to the floor for installation."  A.J. McNulty, 19 O.S.H. 
Cas. (BNA) at 1133 (emphasis addded).  According to McNul-
ty, this Commission finding "ignores [other] unrebutted testi-
mony" by the company's chief compliance officer that installa-
tion of such guardrails was infeasible because "employees 
would have had to walk on a dangerously narrow flange to 
erect the guarding."  Pet'r's Opening Br. at 39.  But that 
testimony addressed only the feasibility of bolted-stanchion 
guardrails;  the Commission's decision rests on its finding 
that the company could have used free-standing guardrails 
that can be quickly installed and removed, and--as photo-
graphs in the record indicate--would not have required work-
ers to walk on the flange.

     The other regulation involved in this category of citations 
requires that "[e]very open-sided floor ... 6 feet or more 
above adjacent floor or ground level ... be guarded by a 
standard railing."  29 C.F.R. s 1926.500(d)(1) (1994).  These 
citations stem from the compliance officer's observation that 
McNulty, having yet to install walls on levels P-2 (both north 
and east sides), P-4, and P-5, had failed to erect guardrails 
around the exposed edges of those floors.

     Conceding it erected no guardrails on the north side of 
level P-2, McNulty claims that the Commission should have 
excused the failure because the violation occurred within the 
"reasonable time" it was entitled to wait before installing 
guardrails.  Pet'r's Opening Br. at 36.  We disagree.  Not 
only does the OSHA compliance officer's testimony suggest 
that McNulty could have installed temporary free-standing 
guardrails before beginning work in the area, see supra, but 
the Act nowhere grants employers an undefined "reasonable 
time" in which to bring workplaces into compliance.  In fact, 
we have expressly held that employers must install OSHA-
required fall protection before exposing employees to risk.  
See, e.g., Am. Bridge/Lashcon v. Reich, 70 F.3d 131, 134 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995).  Section 9(a) of the Act, also relied on by McNulty, 

is entirely inapplicable, for it governs the Secretary's authori-
ty to establish a reasonable "abatement period" within which 
an employer, once cited, may correct the violation in accor-
dance with OSHA regulations.  29 U.S.C. s 659(a).

     As to the east side of level P-2, McNulty offers a greater-
hazard defense, again claiming that erecting guardrails would 
have subjected workers to the possible collapse of the twenty-
five-ton vertical wall member.  But as indicated above, sub-
stantial evidence supports the Commission's finding that the 
company could have erected free-standing guardrails before 
installing the wall member.  See supra at 10.

     With respect to the citations for the open-sided edges on 
levels P-4 and P-5, McNulty offers a greater-hazard defense 
(also mislabeled an infeasibility defense).  But because 
McNulty never raised this objection either in its PDR or its 
Commission brief, the company has waived the opportunity to 
assert it here.

                       Open-Sided Platforms

     This group of citations relates to McNulty's failure to 
provide fall protection for employees working on several 
narrow, open-sided platforms, known as "picks" or "planks," 
ranging in width from twenty inches to two feet.  OSHA 
regulations require that platforms located "6 feet or more 
above adjacent floor or ground level ... be guarded by a 
standard railing."  29 C.F.R. s 1926.500(d)(1) (1994).  After a 
compliance officer observed several instances where McNulty 
used picks without guardrails, OSHA issued three citations.  
McNulty challenges only one:  the citation for its failure to 
install rails on a pick spanning an "exhaust shaftway" on level 
P-2.

     The company first argues that the platform regulations are 
inapplicable for two reasons:  picks are temporary, whereas 
the regulation applies only to "surfaces that are part of a 
structure," Pet'r's Opening Br. at 40, and picks are not 
platforms at all, but rather scaffolds subject to OSHA regula-
tions that prescribe specific safety standards for scaffolds, see 

generally 29 C.F.R. s 1926.451 (1994) (establishing safety 
requirements for scaffolds).  The first contention is without 
merit.  As the Commission persuasively points out, not only 
does the regulation expressly cover "temporary ... condi-
tions," id. s 1926.500(a), but controlling circuit and Commis-
sion precedent makes clear that the regulation applies to 
temporary, narrow platforms such as the one at issue here, 
see Donovan v. Williams Enters., 744 F.2d 170, 176 (D.C. Cir. 
1984) (noting that guardrail regulations apply to temporary 
platforms);  Armstrong Steel Erection, Inc., 17 O.S.H. Cas. 
(BNA) 1385, 1388-89 (O.S.H.R.C. 1995) (stating that tempo-
rary planks constitute "runway" requiring guardrails).

     Responding to McNulty's second argument--that picks are 
scaffolds, not platforms--the Secretary argues that section 
660(a) deprives us of jurisdiction to consider the objection 
because the company failed to raise it before the Commission.  
Insisting that it did, McNulty argues that the issue "is 
identical to the reasoning" in cases cited in its Commission 
brief.  Pet'r's Opening Br. at 40.  This argument is doubly 
flawed.  First, merely citing a case falls well short of 
"put[ting] the Commission on notice of the nature of or basis 
for [a] challenge," Durez, 906 F.2d at 5, particularly where, as 
here, McNulty cited the case for the unrelated proposition 
that the guardrail regulation does not govern temporary 
structures.  As the Seventh Circuit explained, "simply citing 
a case below in one context and then, on appeal, arguing that 
the same case stands for something else does not preserve an 
argument."  Modern Drop Forge Co. v. Sec'y of Labor, 683 
F.2d 1105, 1115 n.19 (7th Cir. 1982).  Second, the primary 
case on which McNulty now relies, Armstrong Steel, 17 
O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) at 1388-89, appears neither in its PDR 
nor Commission brief.

     McNulty also presents an infeasibility defense to this cita-
tion, arguing in excruciating detail that it could not have 
placed guardrails on a pick as narrow as the one at issue 
here.  As the Commission points out, however, "an employer 
claiming that a platform was too narrow for guardrails must 
establish that it could not have substituted a wider one."  A.J. 
McNulty, 19 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) at 1133.  The record, more-

over, supports the Commission's finding that "[n]one of 
McNulty's witnesses testified that a wider platform could not 
have been substituted for the narrow one being used."  Id.  
Put another way by the Secretary, even if installing guard-
rails on picks was infeasible, "McNulty had no right to use its 
equipment as it found it."  Resp't's Br. at 53-54 (internal 
quotation marks omitted).  See also Cleveland Consol., Inc. v. 
Occupational Safety & Health Review Comm'n, 649 F.2d at 
1160, 1166 n.11 ("An employer has a duty to plan a method of 
construction that enables him to comply with OSHA regula-
tions if possible.").

                            Man-Basket

     The "man-basket" at issue here was "a cage with horizontal 
rungs down which the employee would climb to reach and 
stand to bolt precast pieces together.  The device was hung 
on a concrete wall."  Pet'r's Opening Br. at 47.  After a 
compliance officer observed a McNulty employee "accessing[,] 
egressing, and working from" a man-basket without securing 
himself with a safety belt, OSHA cited the company for two 
violations of a regulation requiring that "when workplaces are 
more than 25 feet above the ground," "[s]afety nets shall be 
provided ... where the use of ladders, scaffolds, catch plat-
forms, temporary floors, safety lines, or safety belts is im-
practical."  29 C.F.R. s 1926.105(a) (1994).  The Commission 
affirmed these violations, though it reduced their severity 
from "willful" to "serious."

     Challenging both citations, McNulty argues that it com-
plied with the regulation because a man-basket is a scaffold 
within the meaning of the regulation, and that the scaffold 
(i.e., man-basket) provided the required fall protection.  De-
spite the Secretary's suggestion to the contrary, McNulty 
preserved this objection by raising it in its Commission brief 
(though the Commission chose not to entertain the claim).  
Moreover, the first element of the company's argument--that 
a man-basket is a scaffold--finds some support in both the 
record and OSHA regulations, see 29 C.F.R. s 1926.450(b) 

(2001) (defining "scaffold" as "any temporary elevated plat-
form (supported or suspended) and its supporting structure 
(including points of anchorage), used for supporting employ-
ees or materials or both").  Even if a man-basket is a 
scaffold, however, the citation remains valid.  Pointing out 
that a man-basket provides no protection to workers entering 
and exiting the basket, the Secretary interprets the regula-
tion to require such workers to use one of the listed alterna-
tive means of protection, such as safety belts, during these 
brief but precarious moments.  This interpretation comports 
with decisions holding that the safety-net regulation "requires 
protection against each discrete fall hazard, even if of short 
duration."  Am. Bridge/Lashcon, 70 F.3d at 134;  cf. Manga-
nas Painting Co. v. Sec'y of Labor, 273 F.3d 1131, 1134 (D.C. 
Cir. 2001) (upholding Secretary's interpretation of safety net 
regulation to require effective fall protection as "reasonable 
... indeed, ... obvious").  McNulty argues that as interpret-
ed by the Secretary, the regulation requires redundant forms 
of protection:  "both safety belts and a ladder or scaffold."  
Pet'r's Opening Br. at 49.  This mischaracterizes the Secre-
tary's position.  She requires workers to use safety belts not 
while working in a man-basket, but only while entering or 
exiting it.

                               III.

     Having sustained the Commission's affirmance of the ten 
citations, we turn to McNulty's claim that the Commission 
erred in affirming as willful the Company's failure to comply 
with the two guardrail regulations.  "Although the Act does 
not define the term 'willful,' courts have unanimously held 
that a willful violation of the Act constitutes 'an act done 
voluntarily with either an intentional disregard of, or plain 
indifference to, the Act's requirements.' "  Ensign-Bickford 
Co. v. Occupational Health & Safety Review Comm'n, 717 
F.2d 1419, 1422 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (quoting Cedar Constr. Co. v. 
Occupational Safety & Health Review Comm'n, 587 F.2d 
1303, 1305 (D.C. Cir. 1978)).  According to McNulty, the 

Commission may find willfulness only where the employer 
exhibits reckless disregard.  All circuits that have considered 
the issue, including this one, however, have long accepted 
"intentional disregard or plain indifference" as the appropri-
ate standard for willfulness within the Act's meaning.  See 
Ensign-Bickford, 717 F.2d at 1422 (citing nine circuit court 
cases embracing the "intentional disregard or plain indiffer-
ence" standard).  McNulty points out that in McLaughlin v. 
Richland Shoe, the Supreme Court interpreted the term 
"willful" to require "reckless disregard."  486 U.S. 128, 133 
(1988).  Not only did the company waive this argument by 
failing to raise it before the Commission, but McLaughlin 
involves a different statute:  the Fair Labor Standards Act.

     Disputing neither its awareness of the guardrail regulations 
nor its failure to comply with them, McNulty claims it be-
lieved in good faith that it had successfully established an 
infeasibility defense to each violation.  "[A] good faith, rea-
sonable belief by an employer that its conduct conformed to 
the law negates a finding of willfulness."  Sec'y of Labor v. 
Keco Indus., 1987 WL 89096, *11 (O.S.H.R.C. March 27, 
1987);  see also McLaughlin v. Union Oil Co. of Cal., 869 
F.2d 1039, 1047 (7th Cir. 1989) ("A violation is not willful 
when it is based on a nonfrivolous interpretation of OSHA's 
regulations.").  Because good faith is a question of fact, see, 
e.g., R.R. Comm'n of Tex. v. United States, 765 F.2d 221, 229 
(D.C. Cir. 1985), the issue for us is whether the record 
supports the Commission's conclusion that McNulty did not 
possess a good-faith belief that it had established a legally 
sufficient infeasibility defense to the guardrail violations.

     With respect to McNulty's failure to erect guardrails on 
open-sided platforms (picks), the Commission's observation 
that the record contains "scant evidence of good faith," A.J. 
McNulty, 19 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) at 1140, seems generous.  
Ample record evidence, including McNulty's own rule requir-
ing guardrails in areas of active construction, demonstrates 
the company's heightened awareness of the need for fall 
protection on these structures.  Moreover, McNulty points to 
no evidence that it believed guardrails on these particular 
platforms to be infeasible;  on the contrary, the record sup-

ports the Commission's conclusion that the company never 
"studied the situation in advance and determined that guard-
rails would be a problem."  Id.  Finally, the record supports 
the Commission's conclusion that McNulty never "made a 
good-faith evaluation of the facts and actually found that the 
platforms could not be wider."  Id.

     Whether the Commission erred in affirming as willful 
McNulty's failure to erect guardrails around floor openings 
and open-sided edges presents a closer question, but we 
affirm this conclusion as well.  In support of its determina-
tion, the Commission cited several pieces of record evidence, 
including Whiting-Turner's safety notices regarding McNul-
ty's failure to install fall protection, McNulty's own safety 
standards requiring guardrails, and most persuasively, two 
"settlements" of the company's prior violations of the same 
fall-protection regulations at issue here.  Id. at 1139.  As we 
have held, prior citations for identical or similar violations 
may sustain a violation's classification as willful.  See, e.g., 
Cedar Constr., 587 F.2d at 1305.  According to McNulty, 
OSHA issued these prior citations under entirely different 
circumstances (steel rather than precast concrete construc-
tion), but because this point appears for the first time in the 
company's reply brief, we will not consider it.  McBride v. 
Merrell Dow & Pharms., Inc., 800 F.2d 1208, 1211 (D.C. Cir. 
1986) ("Considering an argument advanced for the first time 
in a reply brief ... is not only unfair to an appellee but also 
entails the risk of an improvident or ill-advised opinion on the 
legal issues tendered." (internal citations omitted)).

     Finally, McNulty contends that the Commission acted arbi-
trarily and capriciously by failing to take account of the 
company's reliance on various ALJ decisions that, according 
to McNulty, gave rise to an objectively reasonable belief that 
it need not comply with the guardrail regulations.  Although 
McNulty is right that the Commission failed to address the 
company's reliance on these decisions, that failure does not 
justify setting the decision aside, for we think the result 
would have been the same even if the Commission had 
considered the issue.  See Envirocare of Utah, Inc. v. Nucle-
ar Regulatory Comm'n, 194 F.3d 72, 79 (D.C. Cir. 1999) 

("[R]eversal and remand is 'necessary only when the review-
ing court concludes that there is a significant chance that but 
for the error the agency might have reached a different 
result.' " (quoting Henry J. Friendly, Chenery Revisited:  
Reflections on Reversal and Remand of Administrative Or-
ders, 1969 Duke L.J. 199, 211)).  Of the various ALJ decisions 
on which McNulty claims to have relied, only Spancrete can 
plausibly be read to create any exception to the guardrail 
regulations.  Even generously construed, however, Spancrete 
stands only for the proposition that guardrails are not re-
quired at edges actively under construction.  See Spancrete, 
1981 WL 19242 at *3.  So even if McNulty did rely in good 
faith on the purported Spancrete exception, its reliance would 
not alter the Commission's decision in light of the substantial 
record evidence supporting the Commission's conclusion that 
McNulty lacked a good-faith belief that these edges were 
actively under construction.

     The petition for review is denied.

                                        `                             So ordered.

                                                                   