                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                       Filed June 19, 2001

                           No. 00-1094

           MD/DC/DE Broadcasters Association, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

              Minority Media and Telecommunications 
                        Council, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-1198

                         On Petitions for Rehearing

                            ---------

     Before:  Ginsburg, Sentelle and Henderson, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  The respondents in this case, the 
Federal Communications Commission and the United States;  
one of the petitioners, the United Church of Christ;  and the 
intervenors, the National Organization for Women and the 
Minority Media and Telecommunications Council, have each 
petitioned for rehearing.  All but MMTC seek rehearing of 
the court's decision not to sever Option B from the Commis-
sion's EEO rule after holding that only that aspect of the 
challenged rule was unconstitutional.  The NOW seeks re-
hearing of the court's decision not to sever all references in 
the rule to minorities and thereby leave the rule intact with 
respect to women.  Only the UCC and the Intervenors seek 
rehearing of the court's underlying conclusion that Option B 
is unconstitutional.*

     The only issue about which the various petitions raise any 
points that were not fully considered in our prior opinion is 
the severability of Option B.  For the reasons set forth below, 

__________
     * Our dissenting colleague argues that the constitutional question, 
too, merits reconsideration, despite the Commission's decision not 
to seek rehearing on that issue.  In so arguing, the dissent re-
peatedly claims the Commission's only goal is "broad outreach."  As 
explained in the panel opinion, however, if the Commission's goal 
were truly broad outreach, then it could measure compliance by 
looking at a broadcaster's outreach efforts rather than -- as it 
does -- by collecting data on the race and sex of applicants and 
investigating any broadcaster producing "few or no" women and 
minorities in its applicant pools.  See Review of the Commission's 
Broadcast Equal Employment Opportunity Rules and Policies, 15 
F.C.C.R. 2329, p 120 (2000) (R&O).  On remand, of course, the 
Commission is free to revise its EEO rule to make broad outreach 
rather than the race and sex of applicants the measure of compli-
ance.

we adhere to our original conclusion that Option B is not 
severable and hence deny the petitions for rehearing.

                              * * *

     Before arguing that the panel erred in vacating the entire 
EEO rule rather than vacating Option B alone, the Commis-
sion acknowledges that severance is proper in a case where, 
as here, the agency has "state[d] its intent [that an unconsti-
tutional portion of a regulation be severed]," only "when such 
intent is rational, i.e., ... when 'the remainder of the regula-
tion could function sensibly without the stricken provision.' "  
FCC Pet. for Rehearing at 1 (quoting MD/DC/DE Broadcast-
ers, 236 F.3d at 22);  see also K-Mart Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 
486 U.S. 281, 294 (1988).*  In this case, the court recognized 
that in the rulemaking proceeding the Commission had ex-
pressed its intent as a general preference for severance.  See 
MD/DC/DE Broadcasters, 236 F.3d at 22 (citing Report & 
Order, 15 F.C.C.R. 2329, p 232 (2000) (R&O) ("If any provi-
sion of the rules ... [is] held to be unlawful, the remaining 
portions of the rules ... shall remain in effect").  The court 
concluded, however, that the rule could not, without Option B, 
sensibly serve the goals for which it was designed.

     The Commission marshals three reasons that, in its view, 
undermine our conclusion.  First, citing paragraph 113 of the 
decision under review, the Commission argues that it "clearly 
stated that Option A was sufficient by itself to achieve the 
Commission's goals."  See FCC Pet. for Rehearing at 10-11 
(emphasis supplied).  That, however, is not quite so.

     The Commission had two goals in adopting its EEO rule:  
It sought to "ensur[e] broad outreach [in recruitment] while 
affording broadcasters flexibility in designing their EEO pro-
grams."  R&O at p 78.  In paragraph 113 of the Report and 
Order, in which the Commission now claims that it "clearly 

__________
     * The dissent questions the panel's interpretation of K-Mart and 
produces a passel of arguments.  We address here all the argu-
ments raised in the petitions.

stated" that Option A alone could accomplish both its goals, 
the Commission actually said this:

     We believe that our goal of ensuring that broadcasters 
     engage in broad outreach so that all qualified job candi-
     dates are informed of employment opportunities in the 
     industry can be accomplished through compliance with 
     [Option A], without requiring the collection or reporting 
     to the Commission of applicant pool data....  However, 
     if a broadcaster wishes to avail itself of the option of 
     dispensing with the supplemental recruitment measures 
     [prescribed in Option A] and designing its own program 
     [pursuant to Option B], we do not think that it is 
     unreasonable to require it to collect applicant pool data 
     demonstrating that its outreach efforts are inclusive.
     
Id. at p 113 (emphasis added).  As can readily be seen, the 
Commission, despite its present argument to the contrary, did 
not state -- "clearly" or otherwise -- that it could achieve 
both its goals with Option A alone;  at most, it stated that it 
believed it could achieve one of its two goals, namely ensuring 
broad outreach.  It said nothing about the sufficiency of 
Option A in achieving the Commission's other goal, namely 
"affording broadcasters flexibility."

     Second, the Commission argues that in a footnote appended 
to an order denying reconsideration of the rule it implicitly 
indicated that Option A could function alone.  See Reconsid-
eration Order, 15 FCC Rcd. at 22555 n. 19.  In that footnote 
the Commission stated that if the court should hold the data 
collection requirement in Option B unconstitutional, then only 
that option should be invalidated.  The conclusory statement 
in the Reconsideration Order, however, says barely more on 
this issue than does the Report and Order under review.  
Again, for the Commission to say that it intends that the 
court sever Option B if necessary is not to say that the court's 
decision to do so would leave a sensible regulation in place.  
As we discuss further below, it would not.

     Third, counsel for the Commission argues that, even if the 
Commission did not previously make clear that in its view 

Option A could function sensibly as a freestanding EEO rule, 
it has done so now in its petition for rehearing.  In that 
petition, Commission counsel unequivocally states that "the 
Commission would have adopted the remainder of the EEO 
rule even without Option B."  The Federal Communications 
Commission is a collegial body, however;  it speaks through 
its orders, not through counsel's filings.  The dissent points 
to a press release issued by a single Commissioner in which 
she refers to the petition for rehearing as an action of "the 
Commission."  The same press release, however, cautions 
that "Release of the full text of a Commission order consti-
tutes official action."  Yet counsel points to no order taking 
the view espoused in the petition for rehearing.  Further-
more, counsel's claim is facially implausible.

     Recall that in the decision under review, the Commission 
told us that it had two goals -- ensuring broad outreach and 
affording flexibility.  It told us that Option A could satisfy the 
goal of achieving broad outreach.  And it told us that Option 
B was added in order to afford broadcasters flexibility.  For 
example, in announcing that it would not exempt stations in 
small markets from EEO obligations, the Commission ex-
plained:

     While we believe that small market stations should be 
     granted some relief from EEO requirements ... we 
     believe that such relief is already built into the new 
     broadcast EEO Rule, which affords flexibility to tailor 
     EEO programs to a station's particular circumstances, 
     including market size.  For instance, stations in small 
     markets may find that they need fewer recruitment 
     sources to achieve broad outreach than might be the case 
     in larger markets.  Also, because stations in smaller 
     markets are likely to attract fewer applicants, they may 
     find [Option B] a less burdensome method of assessing 
     the effectiveness of their outreach.
     
R&O at p 126;  see also id. at p 104.

     Throughout the Report and Order, the Commission re-
peatedly considered various proposals and evaluated them 
with respect both to their benefits in promoting outreach and 

to the effect they would have upon broadcasters' flexibility.  
See, e.g., R&O at p 88 (permitting broadcasters to engage in 
joint recruiting and noting "there is considerable value in 
allowing individual broadcasters flexibility");  id. at p 95 (re-
jecting proposal to send notice of openings to all potential 
sources of job applicants);  id. at p 97 (granting broadcasters 
flexibility in selecting form of notice);  id. at p 110 (expressing 
desire to "minimize burdens on broadcasters, especially 
smaller broadcasters");  id. at p 121 (same);  id. at p 126 
(rejecting proposal for relief in light of flexibility afforded to 
broadcasters, and emphasizing role of Option B to this end);  
id. at p 131 (rejecting proposal for relief in light of flexibility 
afforded under rule).  Thus, Option B played an integral part 
in the Commission's evaluation of the rule as a whole;  indeed, 
in the entire Report and Order the Commission never once 
considered the implications of promulgating an EEO rule 
without Option B -- except insofar as it implied that without 
Option B broadcasters would not have sufficient flexibility.*

     Finally, Commission counsel argues that vacating the rule 
in its entirety will, by forcing the Commission to repromul-
gate Option A as a new rule, simply cause the Commission 
expense and delay.  Under the Administrative Procedure Act, 
however, we cannot consider that a drawback.  As explained 
above, in the decision under review the Commission described 
its two goals and the role that the two options played in 
effectuating them.  In light of that decision, it is clear that 
severing one of the two options and thereby making the other 
mandatory would create a rule that the Commission did not 
consider and which, according to the Commission's own analy-
sis in the course of rulemaking, would not have accomplished 
the Commission's two goals as it described them.  In a 
renewed rulemaking effort the Commission may adopt other 
measures to accommodate the concerns it expressed about 
broadcasters' need for flexibility in general and about the 
burden Option A would impose upon broadcasters in small 

__________
     * The dissent does not address the Commission's reliance, in 
denying various exemptions, upon the flexibility provided in the rule 
as a whole and in particular by Option B.

markets in particular.  Or the Commission may change its 
goals.  Upon the record as it stands, however, retaining 
Option A without further consideration -- and presumably 
further notice and comment -- would leave in force a rule 
that, in view of the Commission's own stated goals, would be 
arbitrary and capricious.  Accordingly, the petition for re-
hearing is

                                                                      Denied.

                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      

      

                      Filed On: June 19, 2001

                           No. 00-1094

           MD/DC/DE Broadcasters Association, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

              Minority Media and Telecommunications 
                        Council, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-1198

                            ---------

     BEFORE:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Williams, Ginsburg, 
Sentelle, Henderson, Randolph, Rogers, Tatel, and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

                            O R D E R

     Petitioner's, respondents', and intervenors' petitions for 
rehearing en banc and the responses thereto have been 
circulated to the full court.  The taking of a vote was request-
ed.  Thereafter, a majority of the judges of the court in 

regular active service did not vote in favor of the petitions.  
Upon consideration of the foregoing, it is

     ORDERED that the petitions be denied.

                                        Per Curiam

                                        FOR THE COURT:

                                        Mark J. Langer, Clerk

      

     Circuit Judge Garland did not participate in this matter.

     A statement of Circuit Judge Tatel, joined by Chief Judge 
Edwards and Circuit Judge Rogers, dissenting from the 
denial of rehearing en banc is attached.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge, joined by Edwards, Chief Judge, and 
Rogers, Circuit Judge, dissenting from the denial of rehear-
ing en banc:  "A facial challenge ... is, of course, the most 
difficult challenge to mount successfully, since the challenger 
must establish that no set of circumstances exists under 
which the Act would be valid."  United States v. Salerno, 481 
U.S. 739, 745 (1987).  The same principle governs facial 
challenges to regulations.  See INS v. Nat'l Ctr. for Immi-
grants' Rights, Inc., 502 U.S. 183, 188 (1991).  In this case, 
the panel found that Option B could not be applied without 
harming white males and therefore declared it facially uncon-
stitutional.  Because in so ruling the panel departed from 
basic principles of judicial restraint--going beyond the rec-
ord, speculating about how the Commission will enforce the 
rule and how broadcasters might react, and refusing to defer 
to the Commission's reasonable interpretation of its own 
rule--I respectfully dissent from the denial of the three 
suggestions for rehearing en banc.  See also FCC Pet. for 
Reh'g & Suggestion for Reh'g En Banc at 3 ("The limited 
scope of our rehearing petition ... should not be misread as 
reflecting the Commission's agreement with the Court's con-
clusion that Option B pressures broadcasters to recruit wom-
en and minorities in violation of the equal protection compo-
nent of the Fifth Amendment.  The Commission disagrees 
with the Court's conclusions in that regard and would wel-
come grant of rehearing on the Court's equal protection 
analysis.").

     I agree with the panel that Adarand "requires strict scruti-
ny only of governmental actions that lead to people being 
treated unequally on the basis of their race."  MD/DC/DE 
Broadcasters Ass'n v. FCC, 236 F.3d 13, 20 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  
But I do not agree that, on its face, Option B--which is 
entirely optional--triggers strict scrutiny.  Contrary to the 
panel opinion, Option B merely requires outreach to the 
entire community, and broadcasters can accomplish such out-
reach without reducing their recruitment of white males.

     "We require," the Commission said of the entire rule, that 
broadcasters "reach out in recruiting new employees beyond 
the confines of their circle of business and social contacts to 
all sectors of their communities."  Review of the Commis-
sion's Broadcast Equal Employment Opportunity Rules and 

Policies, 15 F.C.C.R. 2329, p 3 (2000) ("R&O").  Broadcasters 
choosing Option B may "design their own outreach program 
to suit their needs, as long as they can demonstrate that their 
program is inclusive, i.e., that it widely disseminates job 
vacancies through the local community."  Id. at p 104.  The 
Commission explained further:

     [W]e believe that the objective of ensuring that minority 
     and female applicants have the opportunity to apply for 
     positions ... may be achieved without a specific require-
     ment that broadcasters in every situation use recruit-
     ment methods that specifically target those groups.  Out-
     reach that is truly broad and inclusive will necessarily 
     reach minorities and females.
     
Id. at p 77.  Moreover, Option B requires submission of racial 
data only to enable "evaluat[ion of] whether the program is 
effective in reaching the entire community."  Id. at p 104.  
Although "few or no" minority or female applicants "may be 
one indication ... that the station's outreach efforts are not 
reaching the entire community," id. at p 120, the Commission 
emphasized that having few or no female or minority appli-
cants would not be dispositive in its analysis of the adequacy 
of a broadcaster's recruitment program:

     [T]here is no requirement that the composition of appli-
     cant pools be proportionate to the composition of the 
     local workforce....  We may ultimately determine that 
     outreach efforts are reasonably designed to reach the 
     entire community, even if few females or minorities 
     actually apply for openings.  Conversely, the fact that a 
     sizeable number of females or minorities have applied for 
     openings will not necessarily establish the inclusiveness 
     of the station's efforts.  Also, we recognize that an 
     employer cannot control who applies for jobs.
     
Id.

     Broadcasters electing Option B could thus satisfy their 
obligation simply by undertaking broad, non-racially-targeted 
recruiting.  For example, advertising in a local newspaper 
read by both minorities and nonminorities could reach "the 

entire community."  Id.  No record evidence suggests that 
such advertising would reduce the number of white males 
receiving job information.  Indeed, broad outreach might 
reach more white males.

     Because there exist "circumstances ... under which" 
broadcasters can comply with Option B with no adverse effect 
on white males, the broadcasters' facial challenge should have 
failed.  See Salerno, 481 U.S. at 745.  The panel should have 
dismissed their petition, leaving them free to bring an as-
applied challenge when and if the Commission applies the 
rule in a discriminatory manner.  Instead, misinterpreting 
Option B and engaging in its own fact-finding, the panel 
found that Option B would inevitably curtail recruitment of 
white males, and so subjected it to strict scrutiny.

     To avoid the fact that broadcasters could totally ignore 
Option B, the panel said "the Commission does not argue that 
Option B creates no pressure to recruit women and minorities 
because a licensee could always elect Option A."  236 F.3d at 
20 n.*.  In its Report and Order, however, the Commission 
stated precisely that:

     [W]e note that the alternative recruitment program is 
     completely optional;  any employer who prefers not to 
     collect data concerning the race, ethnicity or gender of 
     its applicants can comply with [Option A's requirements], 
     none of which requires the collection of such data.  No 
     broadcaster or cable entity has cause to complain about a 
     program with which it is not required to comply.
     
R&O at p 224.  True, the Commission did not make this 
argument to the panel, but given that the broadcasters chal-
lenged the constitutionality of Option A as well as B, it is 
understandable that the Commission never argued that Op-
tion B is not coercive because of the presence of Option A.  
Although the Commission could have so argued in the alter-
native, the fact that it didn't still does not justify ignoring the 
Rule's plain language.

     To avoid the fact that nothing on the face of Option B 
requires that "people be[ ] treated unequally on the basis of 

their race," MD/DC/DE Broadcasters, 236 F.3d at 20, the 
panel found that Option B "pressure[s]" broadcasters to 
"focus their recruiting efforts upon women and minorities, at 
least until those groups generate a safe proportion of the 
licensee's job applications."  Id. at 19-20.  According to the 
panel, this will occur because the Commission, having "life 
and death power" over broadcasters and "a long history of 
employing[ ] 'a variety of sub silentio pressures and "raised 
eyebrow" regulation,' " id. at 19 (quoting Cmty.-Serv. Broad. 
of Mid-Am., Inc. v. FCC, 593 F.2d 1102, 1116 (D.C. Cir. 
1978)), "promises to investigate any licensee that reports 'few 
or no' applications from women or minorities."  Id.;  see also 
Supplemental Op. at 2 n.*.  Licensees, the panel found, 
"reasonably might (and prudently would) conclude" that the 
Commission's "focus upon the race and sex of applicants 
belies its statement ... that its only goal is that licensees 
recruit with a 'broad outreach.' "  MD/DC/DE Broadcasters, 
236 F.3d at 19.  The panel concluded that the Commission "is 
interested in results, not process, and is determined to get 
them."  Id.

     The panel's analysis finds no support in the record.  The 
Commission never "promise[d]" to investigate licensees that 
report few or no applications from women or minorities.  The 
only record reference to the Commission's investigative prior-
ities is its statement that:  "[E]ach year we will randomly 
select for audit approximately five percent of all licensees....  
We may also conduct an inquiry if the Commission has 
evidence of a possible violation of the EEO Rule."  R&O at 
p 145 (emphasis added).  Moreover, the Commission made 
clear that, in evaluating a broadcaster's outreach program, it 
would not view as dispositive the number of women and 
minorities in the broadcaster's applicant pool.  See supra at 
2-3 (quoting R&O at p 120).  Because broadcasters could 
thus accomplish broad outreach without race-targeted recruit-
ing, speculation that some broadcasters, imagining pressure 
from the Commission or misreading the agency's intentions, 
might go beyond what Option B requires is no reason to 
declare it facially unconstitutional.  Finally, the panel had no 
basis for suspecting the Commission's intentions.  Not only 
do the phrases "sub silentio pressures" and " 'raised eyebrow' 

regulation" describe Commission behavior occurring over two 
decades ago, see supra at 4, but nothing in the record of this 
case indicates that such behavior continues today or that the 
Commission's goal is anything other than what it declares it 
to be:  broad outreach.

     It is possible, as the panel suggested with its own hypothet-
ical, that some broadcasters might redirect recruiting efforts 
so that "prospective nonminority applicants who would have 
learned of job opportunities but for the Commission's di-
rective now will be deprived of an opportunity to compete 
simply because of their race."  236 F.3d at 21.  Yet Option B 
does not require this result, nor does record evidence support 
the panel's assumption that nonminorities will inevitably re-
ceive less job information.  Even assuming, as the panel 
speculated, that recruiting budgets are "fixed in the short 
run," id. at 20 & n.**, there is no reason to believe that 
broadcasters would not reallocate recruiting expenditures 
without depriving nonminorities of job information.  Nor does 
record evidence support the panel's assumption that "even if 
an employer increases its recruiting budget," it will necessari-
ly use those additional funds for recruiting that is "targeted 
at minorities."  Id. at 20 n.**.  In fact, the Commission 
expressly declined to require targeted recruiting.  See supra 
at 2 (quoting R&O at p 77).  Of course, community-wide 
outreach could mean that white males would face job competi-
tion from women and minorities, but not even the panel 
suggested that this would trigger strict scrutiny.

     Determining whether an outreach program crosses the line 
from expanding opportunities for minorities to disadvantaging 
nonminorities, thus triggering strict scrutiny--and if so 
whether the program survives--are difficult issues that nei-
ther we nor the Supreme Court has yet considered.  We 
should be especially careful to resolve these important ques-
tions on a fully developed record, not on the basis of appellate 
fact-finding or broadcaster paranoia.

                              * * *

     The panel's decision that Option B is not severable also 
warrants en banc review.  See FCC Pet. for Reh'g & Sugges-

tion for Reh'g En Banc.  The decision conflicts with circuit 
precedent and, like the panel's resolution of the equal protec-
tion issue, rests on the panel's rejection of the Commission's 
reasonable interpretation of its own Rule.

     Agency intent has always been the touchstone of our 
inquiry into whether an invalid portion of a regulation is 
severable.  See, e.g., Davis County Solid Waste Mgmt. v. 
EPA, 108 F.3d 1454, 1459 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  North Carolina v. 
FERC, 730 F.2d 790, 795-96 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  In this case, 
the panel acknowledged that "the Commission clearly intends 
that the regulation be treated as severable."  236 F.3d at 22 
(citing the Commission's statement that "[i]t is our intention 
... that, if any provision of the rules ... [is] held to be 
unlawful, the remaining portions of the rules not deemed 
unlawful ... shall remain in effect to the fullest extent 
permitted by law," R&O at p 232).  But relying on K Mart 
Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 486 U.S. 281, 294 (1988), the panel 
undertook an additional inquiry, asking "whether the remain-
der of the regulation could function sensibly without the 
stricken provision."  236 F.3d at 22.  Answering no, the panel 
invalidated the entire Rule.  According to the panel, "[t]he 
core of the rule, by Commission design, is to provide broad-
casters with two alternatives," id., a goal unattainable by 
Option A alone.

     K Mart concerned a different question than the one pre-
sented here.  There, the question was whether a statute's 
function would be impaired if, after invalidating a portion of 
an implementing regulation, the Court left the rest of the 
regulation in place.  486 U.S. at 294.  Here, the question is 
whether the Commission's Rule can function without Option 
B.  As in the case of any agency interpretation of its own 
regulation, this is an issue on which we owe the Commission's 
views special deference.  See Trinity Broad. of Fla., Inc. v. 
FCC, 211 F.3d 618, 625 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("[W]e accord [the 
Commission's] interpretation of its own regulations a high 
level of deference, accepting it unless it is plainly wrong.") 
(internal citation omitted).

     Regardless of whether the panel may have had cause to 
doubt whether Option A alone could have accomplished the 
Commission's goals, such doubt no longer exists.  In its 
petition for rehearing, the Commission makes it unmistakably 
clear not only that it "intended Option B to be severable from 
the remainder of the rule," see FCC Pet. for Reh'g & 
Suggestion for Reh'g En Banc at 10, but also that Option A 
alone can accomplish the agency's "core" goal of ensuring 
broad outreach.  Id. at 13.  When agencies clarify their 
intentions regarding severability through petitions for rehear-
ing, we normally correct our opinion and reinstate the valid 
portions of the regulation.  See Virginia v. EPA, 116 F.3d 
499, 500-01 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (reinstating part of a rule in 
response to EPA's petition for rehearing explaining that the 
part was severable from sections invalidated in the original 
panel decision);  Davis County Solid Waste Mgmt., 108 F.3d 
at 1455-56, 1459-60 (same).  In this case, however, the panel 
summarily rejects the Commission's clarification, attributing 
it to "counsel's" position.  See Supplemental Op. at 4-5 
("counsel for the Commission argues ... ";  "Commission 
counsel unequivocally states ... ";  "counsel's claim").  To the 
extent the panel is implying that the petition does not reflect 
the Commission's views and is thus unworthy of deference, 
that notion is flatly inconsistent with decisions of the Supreme 
Court and the law of this circuit.  In Auer v. Robbins, 519 
U.S. 452 (1997), the Supreme Court held that unless a court 
has "reason to suspect" that an interpretation of a regulation 
set forth in an agency brief does "not reflect the agency's fair 
and considered judgment," the agency's interpretation de-
serves deference.  Id. at 462;  see also Bigelow v. Dep't of 
Def., 217 F.3d 875, 876, 878 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (deferring to an 
agency interpretation of a regulation set forth for the first 
time in a brief signed only by a United States Attorney).  In 
this case, we have no basis for suspecting that the rehearing 
petition does not "reflect the [Commission's] fair and consid-
ered judgment."  The filing is signed by the Commission's 
"Acting General Counsel," the Justice Department has told us 
that it "defer[s] to the FCC on the importance of the sever-
ability issue," Resp. to Pets. for Reh'g at 7 (emphasis added), 

and Commissioner Gloria Tristani, in a press release issued 
the day the petition was filed, referred to the action of the 
"Commission."  Press Release, Commissioner Gloria Tristani, 
Re:  MD/DC/DE Broadcasters Ass'n v. FCC Pet. for Reh'g 
(Mar. 2, 2001) ("Today, the FCC petitioned the D.C. Circuit 
Court for a partial rehearing of its January 16, 2001, opinion 
invalidating our EEO outreach rules for broadcasters.  While 
I support the submission as far as it goes, I am disappointed 
the Commission declined to seek review of the entire deci-
sion.") (emphasis added).

     In addition, the panel has no reason for finding the Com-
mission's position "implausible."  Supplemental Op. at 5.  Al-
though the panel points to a few paragraphs in the Report 
and Order suggesting that Option A by itself might provide 
less flexibility than Options A and B together, there is enough 
flexibility in Option A alone to demonstrate that the Commis-
sion's statement that it would have promulgated Option A by 
itself is not "plainly wrong."  Trinity Broad., 211 F.3d at 625.  
The thirteen program choices within Option A, the Commis-
sion explained, avoided "inflexible requirements" and "en-
able[d] broadcasters to select the approaches that they be-
lieve will be most effective in their situations."  R&O at p 100.  
The Commission, moreover, emphasized that Option A would 
independently meet its outreach goals.  See id. at p 113.  
According to the Commission, it reluctantly included Option B 
in response to broadcasters' urging:  "We are willing to allow 
broadcasters to forego the supplemental recruitment mea-
sures [of Option A] and to design their own outreach program 
to suit their needs, as long as they can demonstrate that their 
program is inclusive, i.e., that it widely disseminates job 
vacancies throughout the local community."  Id. at p 104 
(emphasis added).  As the Commission argues, the "core of 
the rule" is Option A.  See FCC Pet. for Reh'g & Suggestion 
for Reh'g En Banc at 13.

     There is, in other words, no "substantial doubt" that the 
Commission would have adopted Option A "on its own."  See 
Davis County Solid Waste Mgmt., 108 F.3d at 1459.  In 
reaching a different conclusion, the panel improperly substi-
tuted its own views for the Commission's.

                                  