                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 11, 2002     Decided May 10, 2002 

                           No. 01-5335

       Sugar Cane Growers Cooperative of Florida, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

           Ann M. Veneman, in her official capacity as 
          Secretary of the United States Department of 
                      Agriculture, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (01cv01904)

     Raymond B. Ludwiszewski argued the cause for appel-
lants.  With him on the briefs were Peter E. Seley and 
Hassan A. Zavareei.

     David J. Ball, Jr., Assistant United States Attorney, ar-
gued the cause for appellees.  With him on the brief were 

Roscoe C. Howard, Jr., United States Attorney, and R. Craig 
Lawrence, Assistant United States Attorney.

     William Bradford Reynolds and John F. Bruce were on 
the brief for amicus curiae United States Beet Sugar Associ-
ation in support of appellees.

     Before:  Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  Sugar Cane Growers 
Cooperative of Florida, Florida Crystals Corporation, and 
Refined Sugars, Inc., appeal from the district court's grant of 
summary judgment holding that appellants lacked standing.  
The court dismissed their claims that the United States 
Department of Agriculture failed to comply with the Adminis-
trative Procedure Act1 and the Food Security Act of 19852 in 
implementing a payment-in-kind program for the 2001 sugar 
crop by press release.  We think appellants have demonstrat-
ed standing and because the Department did not comply with 
the APA or the Food Security Act, we reverse the district 
court's grant of summary judgment and remand to that court 
to in turn remand to the Department.

                                I.

     In the United States, sugar production, which the govern-
ment supports through a variety of programs, is about evenly 
divided between sugar cane and sugar beet production.  This 
suit involves the Department's choice of a particular method 
of support.  Appellants are self-described small-, medium- 
and large-sized sugar cane growers, processors, refiners and 
marketers, who together make up a "significant" portion of 
the total domestic sugar cane production, which mostly occurs 
in the Gulf Belt and Hawaii.  Sugar beets grow primarily in 
the North and West, and sugar beet farmers tend to harvest 

__________
     1  5 U.S.C. ss 551-559, 701-706.

     2  7 U.S.C. s 1308a.

significantly fewer acres per producer than sugar cane farm-
ers.  The Department supports sugar production through a 
program of non-recourse loans;  if the market price of sugar 
drops below the forfeiture price, producers may forfeit their 
crops to the Department in satisfaction of these loans rather 
than try to repay in cash, which effectively guarantees a 
minimum price for harvested and processed sugar.  With the 
low sugar prices over the past several years, the Department 
has accumulated more than 700,000 tons of sugar, for which it 
pays approximately $1.35 million per month in storage fees.  
The presence of that potential supply (or "overhang") may 
depress somewhat sugar prices and it exacerbates the prob-
lem of limited sugar storage, which is particularly trouble-
some for sugar beet farmers.

     The Food Security Act gives the Department authority to 
implement a payment-in-kind (PIK) program for sugar, which 
it did for sugar beet farmers in August 2000.  For the 2000 
PIK program, sugar beet farmers submitted bids to the 
Department offering to destroy (or "divert") a certain amount 
of their crops in return for sugar from USDA storage.  A 
farmer's bid is his asking price for that amount of destruc-
tion;  the price is expressed in terms of a percentage of the 
three-year average value of the crop yield for the acreage 
diverted.  Thus, a farmer bidding 80 percent would receive 
eight dollars for every acre destroyed if an average acre of 
their farm produced ten dollars worth of sugar.  In fact, the 
average bid was approximately 84 percent and resulted in the 
distribution of about 277,000 tons of government sugar and 
the diversion of approximately 102,000 acres.  Participants 
were prohibited from participating in future PIK programs if 
they increased their acreage planted with sugar beets over 
2000 levels.  The Agency did not proceed by notice and 
comment, but no party challenged that decision or the pro-
gram itself.

     Appellants claim the 2000 PIK program unfairly provided 
participants with below-harvest-cost government sugar which 
gave them a competitive advantage over appellants.  And 
they claim that the program depressed sugar prices.  Actual-
ly, the price of sugar rose, but it is not clear what caused the 

increase.  According to appellants, although initial forecasts 
predicted that the diverted acreage would lead to lower sugar 
crop volume in 2000, subsequent forecasts increased substan-
tially in the months following implementation of the PIK 
program--to 23.6 tons per acre in December 2000 from 22.8 
tons per acre before August 2000.  Appellants contend that 
the yield increase (or "yield slippage") resulted in part from 
farmers taking their lowest-yielding crops out of production 
for the PIK program.  With the yield slippage, additional 
beet sugar supplies ended up on the market, and PIK farm-
ers received more sugar through the program than they 
would have if they had produced sugar on the diverted acres.  
And the greater supplies of sugar, it is argued, necessarily 
depressed sugar prices below that which would otherwise 
have obtained.  The government insists that the program had 
a positive effect on the price of sugar, at least in part because 
it reduced the government's sugar supply and storage fees, 
ameliorating the overhang effect and storage scarcity prob-
lem.

     In January 2001, the Department met with interested 
persons (including representatives of appellants) and indicat-
ed that while it was considering a PIK program for the 2001 
sugar crop, it would not do so without notice and comment.  
The Agency also asked those present about the effectiveness 
of the 2000 PIK program and their thoughts on the desirabili-
ty and structure of a potential 2001 program.  Appellants 
claim that they were unable to comment satisfactorily because 
the data on the 2000 program was not yet available.  Before 
August 2001, Department employees had approximately a 
dozen contacts with sugar industry representatives regarding 
the possibility of a 2001 program.

     The Department announced by an August 31, 2001 press 
release, however, that it was implementing a PIK program 
for the 2001 sugar crop without using APA rulemaking.  The 
Agency followed that announcement a week later with a 
"Notice of Program Implementation" in the September 7, 
2001 Federal Register.  For the 2001 PIK program, the 
Department set a 200,000 ton limit in order to encourage 
more competitive bidding and made both beet and cane sugar 
producers eligible.  But a statutory restriction limiting pay-

ments to $20,000 per producer effectively eliminated appel-
lants' opportunity to participate because of their size.  Partic-
ularly troubling appellants, the government waived its 2000 
PIK program restriction on future eligibility by participants 
who had increased their crop acreage;  it merely included a 
similar restriction on 2001 participants.  In contrast to the 
2000 PIK program, in which the government disbursed all of 
the allotted sugar at the same time, in 2001 the Department 
indicated that it would stagger disbursement.  After announc-
ing the program, the Department received more than 6,000 
bids and accepted 4,655 bids, some as high as 87.9931 percent.  
The final data on bids is not a part of the summary judgment 
record, nor is the disbursement schedule.

     Appellants filed suit shortly after the press release ap-
peared, seeking injunctive and declaratory relief.  They ar-
gued that the Department did not comply with the APA 
because it promulgated a rule without notice-and-comment 
rulemaking;  that it violated the Food Security Act of 1985 by 
not making required findings;  and that the Department 
violated the Regulatory Flexibility Act3 because it did not 
consider the impact of the program on small businesses.  It 
was argued that the 2001 PIK program caused appellants two 
injuries:  first, it gave participants a competitive advantage by 
providing them with below-harvest-cost sugar;  second, it had 
a depressive effect on prices.

     The district court, with the agreement of the parties, 
converted appellants' motion for preliminary injunctive relief 
into a summary judgment motion.  The court concluded that 
appellants failed to establish standing on two grounds:  first, 
they had not shown an injury-in-fact;  second, they had not 
established causation because they had not demonstrated that 
the Department would have decided against implementing the 
program following notice and comment.  The court neverthe-

__________
     3  5 U.S.C. s 601 et seq.  On appeal, appellants failed to raise 
their Regulatory Flexibility Act claim--a footnote at the end of 
their opening brief does not suffice.  We therefore do not reach the 
government's argument that appellants, primarily large producers, 
lack prudential standing to raise such a claim.

less decided the merits, holding that the 2001 PIK program 
was a rule subject to notice-and-comment procedures, but the 
Department's failure to comply with those procedures was 
harmless.  Appellants' Food Security Act and Regulatory 
Flexibility Act claims were not addressed.

                               II.

     We, of course, begin with standing.  Appellants claim that 
the Department gave sugar beet farmer participants a com-
petitive advantage by giving them below-harvest-cost sugar.  
Participants will use that competitive advantage to capture 
market share and customer good will, or so the argument 
goes.  The government responds by pointing out (and appel-
lants do not dispute) that refined sugar is a commodity 
market.  In light of that, appellants have not explained how 
any cost advantage participants could gain would translate 
into a meaningful competitive advantage.4

     On the other hand, appellants are on much sounder eco-
nomic ground in claiming that the PIK program had a 
depressive effect on sugar prices--which would have clearly 
injured appellants.  They produced an affidavit from Brian 
O'Malley and studies by two independent industry analysts, 
each of which indicated that the PIK programs have harmed 
appellants.  O'Malley, who has spent over 20 years in the 
refined sugar industry, testified that Refined Sugars suffered 
at least part of its $22 million loss last year as a result of the 
government "flooding" the market with 277,000 tons of PIK 
sugar.  The Sparks Companies, Inc. concluded that the 2000 
PIK program resulted in "a substantial amount of yield 
slippage," which meant more sugar on the market and there-
by depressed prices.  Similarly, Gregory Harnish, a research 
analyst for Sparks Companies, concluded in a different report 
that the 2000 PIK program "increased free supplies of sugar 

__________
     4  We dismiss appellants' unsubstantiated argument that sugar 
beet farmers will use the PIK program to access stores of refined 
sugar cane--an argument predicated on the unproven (and dubious) 
proposition that there is a difference between refined sugar cane 
and refined sugar beet.

due to a substantial amount of slippage and the timing of 
USDA's release of PIK sugar."  And the government, in an 
internal options memorandum, acknowledged that "some ana-
lysts believe that the 2000 PIK was, at least partially, respon-
sible for the yield increase." 

     The government's response to this injury claim was to 
demonstrate that after the PIK program sugar prices went 
up, not down, so appellants could not have been injured.  This 
led the district court to conclude that appellants' injury was 
speculative.  But the government's contention is a snare 
because the relevant question is not whether sugar prices 
actually went up or down but whether the PIK program had a 
depressive effect.  A number of other factors led to reduced 
supply and thereby presumably an increased price.  For 
instance, the Federal Circuit limited the import of "foreign 
stuffed molasses," a product that was allegedly used by 
Canadian producers to export sugar into this country.  Simi-
larly, the Department adjusted the Mexican sugar quota and 
eliminated 200,000 tons of imported sugar.  The government 
does not really dispute appellants' claim that because of the 
"yield slippage" (that appellants contend the PIK program 
induced) more sugar was produced than would otherwise be 
in the market.  Indeed, the government had no response to 
appellants' particular argument that the Department's waiver 
of disqualifications for those producers who, contrary to the 
2000 restrictions had increased their acreage, would inevita-
bly lead to more sugar production.  Prior violators would 
presumably continue their practice.

     In sum, appellants have made a prima facie showing that 
the PIK program caused them injury by increasing the 
supply of U.S. sugar.  To be sure, the government suggests 
that even an increase in the direct supply of sugar would not 
have had a depressive effect on prices because the PIK 
program at least depleted sugar stores, thereby reducing 
what could be thought an ancillary supply (the overhang).  It 
seems rather doubtful to us that the amount of government 
sugar in storage would have anywhere near the effect on 
prices as would sugar available for sale.  In any event, the 
government never sought a hearing on that issue nor on its 

dispute of appellants' affidavits and studies, the credibility of 
which it attacked;  instead, like appellants, it moved for 
summary judgment.  Since appellants presented a prima 
facie claim of injury based on basic economic logic (as set 
forth and supported in the contested affidavits and studies), it 
was the government's burden, if it wanted a trial on the 
question of sugar price movements, to seek a factual hearing. 
Because it did not, we think appellants established injury.

     The district court's alternative ground that appellants lack 
standing because "it is not at all clear that the Department 
would have decided against the PIK program had it received 
[appellants'] additional comments" simply misstates the law.  
A plaintiff who alleges a deprivation of a procedural protec-
tion to which he is entitled never has to prove that if he had 
received the procedure the substantive result would have 
been altered.  All that is necessary is to show that the 
procedural step was connected to the substantive result.  In 
Defenders of Wildlife v. Lujan, 504 U.S. 555, 573 n.7 (1992), 
the Supreme Court explained that an individual living next to 
a federally licensed dam "has standing to challenge the 
licensing agency's failure to prepare an environmental impact 
statement, even though he cannot establish with any certainty 
that the statement will cause the license to be withheld or 
altered."  See also Florida Audubon Society v. Bentsen, 94 
F.3d 658, 669 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (en banc).  If a party claiming 
the deprivation of a right to notice-and-comment rulemaking 
under the APA had to show that its comment would have 
altered the agency's rule, section 553 would be a dead letter.

                               III.

     Turning to the merits, we take up first appellants' APA 
claim.  The APA sets forth several steps an agency must take 
when engaged in rulemaking:  it must publish a general notice 
of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register;  give an 
opportunity for interested persons to participate in the rule-
making through submission of written data, views, or argu-
ments;  and issue publication of a concise general statement 

of the rule's basis and purpose.  5 U.S.C. s 553(b), (c).  The 
government defends the Department's failure to engage in 
notice-and-comment rulemaking by asserting the PIK an-
nouncement was not really a rule and, even if it were, the 
failure to engage in rulemaking was a harmless error.5

     The APA defines a rule very broadly as

     the whole or a part of an agency statement of general or 
     particular applicability and future effect designed to im-
     plement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy or describ-
     ing the organization, procedure, or practice requirements 
     of an agency and includes the approval or prescription 
     for the future of rates, wages, corporate or financial 
     structures or reorganizations thereof, prices, facilities, 
     appliances, services or allowances therefor or of valua-
     tions, costs, or accounting, or practices bearing on any of 
     the foregoing.
     
5 U.S.C. s 551(4).  We have recognized that notwithstanding 
the breadth of the APA's definition an agency pronouncement 
that lacks the firmness of a proscribed standard--particularly 
certain policy statements--is not a rule.  See Syncor Int'l 
Corp. v. Shalala, 127 F.3d 90, 94 (D.C. Cir. 1997). Compare 
also Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 208 F.3d 1015, 1021-22 
(D.C. Cir. 2000), with Tozzi v. HHS, 271 F.3d 301, 312-13 
(D.C. Cir. 2001) (Silberman, J. concurring).  (Of course, gen-
eral statements of policy are exempt from notice-and-
comment procedures anyway.  5 U.S.C. s 553(b)(A)).  But 
the government does not claim that its package of announce-
ments is a policy statement.  Instead, the government argues 

__________
     5  Although the government also implies that it had good cause 
not to follow notice-and-comment rulemaking, it does not rely on 
that position, presumably because the Department did not assert it.  
Nor do we address amicus' argument that the 2001 PIK program 
was exempt from APA rulemaking requirements under 5 U.S.C. 
s 553(a)(2) because it constitutes agency action relating to "public 
property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts."  As the Department 
acknowledged, it has essentially waived that APA exemption.  See 
36 Fed. Reg. 13,804 (July 24, 1971);  Rodway v. United States Dep't 
of Agric., 514 F.2d 809, 814 (D.C. Cir. 1975).

that because the announcement of the 2001 PIK program was 
an "isolated agency act" that did not propose to affect subse-
quent Department acts and had "no future effect on any other 
party before the agency" it was not a rule.  (Quoting Daing-
erfield Island Protective Soc'y v. Babbitt, 823 F. Supp. 950, 
957 (D.D.C.), aff'd in relevant part, 15 F.3d 1159 (D.C. Cir. 
1993)).  The government would have us see its announcement 
of the PIK program as analogous to an agency's award of a 
contract pursuant to an invitation of bids or an agency's 
decision to approve an application or a proposal--in adminis-
trative law terms an informal adjudication (which is the 
technical term for an executive action).  See, e.g., United 
States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 239 n.1 (Scalia, J., 
dissenting).

     We have little difficulty--as did the district court--in re-
jecting this argument.  The August 31 press release, the 
September Questions and Answers and most notably the 
September 7 Notice of Program Implementation set forth the 
bid submission procedures which all applicants must follow, 
the payment limitations of the program, and the sanctions 
that will be imposed on participants if they plant more in 
future years than in 2001.  It is simply absurd to call this 
anything but a rule "by any other name."6

     As a variation on the government's second standing argu-
ment--that appellants have not demonstrated injury because 
they cannot show that if the Department had acted pursuant 
to section 553 the result would have been altered--the gov-
ernment alternatively claims harmless error.  We are told 
that appellants cannot identify any additional arguments they 
would have made in a notice-and-comment procedure that 
they did not make to the Department in the several informal 
sessions.  And we are reminded that the Department did 
make certain changes to the 2001 PIK program in response 

__________
     6  The government's suggestion that because participation in the 
program is "voluntary" the announcement and accompanying docu-
ments should not be considered a rule is not worth a response.  
Similarly, the notion that the government "essentially complied with 
section 553 of the APA" borders on the frivolous.

to appellants' concerns.  It is true that we have recognized 
certain technical APA errors as harmless.  For example, in 
Sheppard v. Sullivan, 906 F.2d 756, 761-62 (D.C. Cir. 1990), a 
challenge to an agency adjudication in a benefits case, we 
held that a failure to undertake formal notice and comment 
with respect to a program manual was harmless.  But, in so 
doing, we applied the standard set out in McClouth Steel 
Prods. Corp. v. Thomas, 838 F.2d 1317, 1324 (D.C. Cir. 1988), 
under which an utter failure to comply with notice and 
comment cannot be considered harmless if there is any 
uncertainty at all as to the effect of that failure.  And in 
Sheppard, we initially observed that the agency did not even 
rely on that program manual in its challenged order;  further-
more, we expressly concluded that the agency's substantive 
approach was "the only reasonable one."  Sheppard, 906 F.2d 
at 762.  See also First Am. Discount Corp. v. CFTC, 222 F.3d 
1008, 1015 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (holding that agency's failure to 
give adequate notice was harmless because the final rule was 
a logical outgrowth of the proposed rule).

     Here the government would have us virtually repeal section 
553's requirements:  if the government could skip those proce-
dures, engage in informal consultation, and then be protected 
from judicial review unless a petitioner could show a new 
argument--not presented informally--section 553 obviously 
would be eviscerated.  The government could avoid the ne-
cessity of publishing a notice of a proposed rule and perhaps, 
most important, would not be obliged to set forth a statement 
of the basis and purpose of the rule, which needs to take 
account of the major comments--and often is a major focus of 
judicial review.

     In any event, although they need not have, appellants have 
indicated additional considerations they would have raised in 
a comment procedure.  For example, they would have argued 
that the Agency should have bound itself to a gradual dis-
bursement of the sugar, rather than merely allowing itself 
that option.  And, they would have challenged the Depart-
ment's decision to waive the 2000 PIK program restriction on 
participants who had increased their acreage.

     In their final claim, appellants argue that the Department 
violated the Food Security Act because the Secretary did not 
make four required findings before implementing a PIK 
program.  See 7 U.S.C. s 1308a.  Section 1308a(a) requires 
the Secretary to consider whether an action "will reduce the 
total of the direct and indirect costs to the Federal Govern-
ment of a commodity program administered by the Secre-
tary" but "without adversely affecting income to small- and 
medium-sized producers participating in such program."  
Section 1308a(e) requires the Secretary to find that "changes 
in domestic or world supply or demand conditions have 
substantially changed after announcement of the program for 
that crop," and "without action to further adjust production, 
the Federal Government and producers will be faced with a 
burdensome and costly surplus."7

     In response, the Department directs our attention to the 
Federal Register Notice of Implementation, in which it "ex-
pressly refers" to each of the required findings, and argues 
that this reference is sufficient.  That too is absurd.  Refer-
encing a requirement is not the same as complying with that 
requirement.  The Department then turns to the post hoc 
affidavit of Thomas Hunt Shipman, the Deputy Under Secre-
tary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services.  But the 
declaration merely states that Shipman "participated" in the 
decision, not that he was the final decisionmaker.  Shipman is 
not the Secretary of Agriculture, and there is no evidence on 
either the administrative or summary judgment record that 
the Secretary delegated decisionmaking authority to Ship-
man.  The internal options memoranda the government also 
relies on suffer the same fatal defect.  The record is devoid of 
any evidence that the Secretary, or a Department employee 
with final decisionmaking authority, ever complied with sec-
tion 1308a.

__________
     7  Appellants also claim that the Department could not have 
made three of the four findings.  We need not decide that now.

     In sum, this government argument has no more substance 
than the second standing argument.

                             * * * *

     There remains the question of remedy.  Normally when an 
agency so clearly violates the APA we would vacate its 
action--in this case its "non-rule rule"--and simply remand 
for the agency to start again.  Unfortunately, because we 
denied preliminary relief in this case, the 2001 program was 
launched and crops were plowed under.  The egg has been 
scrambled and there is no apparent way to restore the status 
quo ante.  Appellants suggested that if we were to vacate, the 
Federal Court of Claims would have the responsibility of 
allocating damages.  But that seems an invitation to chaos.  
Moreover, although the government did not--and could not 
have for the first time on appeal--assert a good cause for 
omitting notice and comment, it is at least possible that the 
Department could establish good cause because of timing 
exigencies.

     Appellants insist that we have no discretion in the matter;  
if the Department violated the APA--which it did--its actions 
must be vacated.  But that is simply not the law.  Instead, 
"[t]he decision whether to vacate depends on 'the seriousness 
of the order's deficiencies (and thus the extent of doubt 
whether the agency chose correctly) and the disruptive conse-
quences of an interim change that may itself be changed.' "  
Allied-Signal, Inc. v. United States Nuclear Regulatory Com-
mission, 988 F.2d 146, 150-51 (quoting International Union 
UMW v. FMSHA, 920 F.2d 960, 966-67 (D.C. Cir. 1990)).  
We have previously remanded without vacating when the 
agency failed to follow notice-and-comment procedures.  See, 
e.g., Fertilizer Institute v. EPA, 935 F.2d 1303, 1312 (D.C. 
Cir. 1991);  see also American Medical Ass'n v. Reno, 57 F.3d 
1129 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  County of Los Angeles v. Shalala, 192 
F.3d 1005, 1023 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (remanding without vacating 
because the panel did not perceive any "rare circumstances" 
that would warrant a break from that "established adminis-
trative practice").

     Accordingly, we reverse the district court's grant of sum-
mary judgment and remand to that court to in turn remand 
to the Department.

                                                                 So ordered.

                         