                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 13, 2001    Decided June 26, 2001 

                           No. 00-5070

                   Augustine David Henderson, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    Roger A. Kennedy, et al., 
                            Appellees

                        Consolidated with 
                           No. 00-5071

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (95cv00850) 
                           (95cv01081)

     James M. Henderson, Sr. argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for appellant.

     Marina Utgoff Braswell, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellees.  With her on the brief were Wilma 
A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney at the time the brief was filed, and R. 
Craig Lawrence, Assistant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Plaintiffs Henderson and Phillips 
allege that they are evangelical Christians.  They want to sell 
t-shirts on the National Mall--a practice presently prohibited 
by a regulation of the National Park Service.  Initially they 
claimed that the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment 
guaranteed them this right.  When we ruled against that 
claim in another case, they amended their complaints to add, 
among other claims, causes of action based on the Religious 
Freedom Restoration Act and the Equal Protection compo-
nent of the Due Process Clause.  For the reasons that follow, 
we affirm the district court's grant of summary judgment in 
favor of the government.

                                I.

     The Park Service's regulation, promulgated in 1995, flatly 
prohibits the sale of goods in designated sections of the 
National Mall such as the areas immediately surrounding the 
Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument.  36 C.F.R. 
s 7.96(k)(2).  In other Mall areas, during "special events or 
demonstrations," the sale of "books, newspapers, leaflets, 
pamphlets, buttons and bumper stickers" is permitted.  Id.  
Before this regulation, t-shirts could be sold in conjunction 
with demonstrations or special events.  But "excessive com-
mercialism" had "degraded aesthetic values" and converted 
much of the Mall area into a "flea market."  National Capital 
Region Parks;  Sales, 59 Fed. Reg. 25,855, 25,857 (May 18, 
1994).  The Park Service therefore decided to ban certain 
commercial transactions from the Mall, including the sale of 
t-shirts.  National Capital Region Parks;  Special Regula-
tions, 60 Fed. Reg. 17,639 (Apr. 8, 1995).

     Lawsuits challenging the regulation included one brought 
by seven non-profit organizations that had been selling 
t-shirts on the Mall, and separate pro se complaints by 
Henderson and Phillips.  See Friends of the Vietnam Veter-
ans Memorial v. Kennedy, 899 F. Supp. 680 (D.D.C. 1995) 
("Friends I"), rev'd, 116 F.3d 495 (D.C. Cir. 1997) ("Friends 
II"), on remand, 984 F. Supp. 18 (D.D.C. 1997) ("Friends 
III"), rev'd sub nom. Henderson v. Stanton, 172 F.3d 919 
(table), 1998 WL 886989 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (unpublished opin-
ion) ("Henderson III");  Henderson III, on remand, 76 
F. Supp. 2d 10 (D.D.C. 1999) ("Henderson IV").1  The suits 
alleged that the ban on the sale of t-shirts abridged the 
freedom of speech in violation of the First Amendment.

     The International Society of Krishna Consciousness 
(ISKCON) also brought an action claiming, among other 
things, that an earlier Park Service regulation violated the 
First Amendment to the extent that it prohibited the sale of 
audio tapes and religious beads on the Mall.  Our decision, 
rendered in August 1995, sustained the regulation's ban on 
the sale of beads and audio tapes.  ISKCON of Potomac, Inc. 
v. Kennedy, 61 F.3d 949 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  Nonetheless, the 
district court later granted summary judgment in favor of the 
non-profit organizations.  Friends I, 899 F. Supp. at 688.  
The district court reasoned that message-bearing t-shirts 
were "a unique and especially effective means" of communi-
cating a viewpoint, id. at 684, and that the Park Service's 
allowing other forms of commercial activity on the Mall 
undercut the rationale of its ban.  Id. at 686.  We reversed, 
holding that the case was controlled by ISKCON, and that 
the regulation did not violate the First Amendment.  Friends 
II, 116 F.3d 495.

     After Friends II, counsel for Henderson and Phillips en-
tered an appearance, and moved for leave to file an amended 

__________
     1  Henderson I, Henderson v. Lujan, 768 F. Supp. 1 (D.D.C. 
1991), and Henderson II, Henderson v. Lujan, 964 F.3d 1179 (D.C. 
Cir. 1992), challenged different provisions of an earlier version of 
the same regulation, and are not relevant here.

complaint, seeking to add equal protection claims and claims 
under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) and 
the Administrative Procedure Act.  Friends III, 984 F. Supp. 
at 20.  The district court initially granted leave to amend, but 
reconsidered, and denied leave on the ground that the amend-
ments would be futile in light of Friends II.  Id. In 
Henderson III, an unpublished opinion, we reversed because 
the court had not explained its holding.  172 F.3d 919 (table).

     Henderson and Phillips then amended their complaints to 
add the new causes of action and to allege that they "hold[ ] 
the sincere religious belief that [they are] obliged by the 
Great Commission to preach the good news, the gospel, of 
salvation through Jesus Christ to the whole world."  The 
amended complaints also alleged that they have "a religious 
vocation to communicate by all available means the message 
of the Gospel."  As part of their religious "outreaches" on the 
National Mall, both had sold t-shirts in the past, and both 
want to continue doing so.  To that end, they sought declara-
tory and injunctive relief.  The government moved to dismiss 
or, in the alternative, for summary judgment.  Both sides 
submitted declarations in support of their pleadings.  The 
district court, apparently treating the government's motion as 
one for summary judgment, granted it.  Henderson IV, 76 
F. Supp. 2d at 16.

                               II.

                                A.

     We begin with plaintiffs' claims that the regulation's ban on 
selling t-shirts on the Mall violates their rights under the 
Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), 42 U.S.C. 
s 2000bb et seq. Congress enacted RFRA in response to 
Employment Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990).  The 
Smith Court held that the Free Exercise Clause of the First 
Amendment--"Congress shall make no law ... prohibiting 
the free exercise" of religion--did not exempt individuals 
from complying with "neutral, generally applicable" laws, 
even if the laws substantially burdened religious exercise.  
494 U.S. at 881.  In RFRA Congress sought to overturn the 
Smith decision by restoring the test set forth in Sherbert v. 

Verner, 374 U.S. 398 (1963), as the standard for Free Exer-
cise challenges to laws of general applicability.  See City of 
Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507, 512-13 (1997);  Michael W. 
McConnell, Institutions and Interpretation:  A Critique of 
City of Boerne v. Flores, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 153, 157 (1997).  
Under Sherbert, the question had been whether the law 
"substantially burdened" a religious practice and, if so, wheth-
er the burden was justified by a compelling governmental 
interest.  See, e.g., Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972). 
RFRA incorporated the "substantial burden" standard.  It 
prohibited any "branch, department, agency, instrumentality, 
[or] official" of a state or federal government or "other 
persons acting under color of law" from "substantially bur-
den[ing] a person's exercise of religion" unless the govern-
ment demonstrated that the burden "(1) is in furtherance of a 
compelling governmental interest;  and (2) is the least restric-
tive means of furthering that ... interest."  42 U.S.C. 
s 2000bb-1.  Branch Ministries v. Rossotti, 211 F.3d 137, 
144 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

     City of Boerne struck down the portion of RFRA regulat-
ing state and local governments because Congress had ex-
ceeded its power under s 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.  
521 U.S. 507.  RFRA was not "remedial, preventive legisla-
tion."  Id. at 532.  It did not enforce the Free Exercise 
Clause.  Id. at 519, 532.  Instead Congress had attempted to 
alter the Supreme Court's interpretation of that constitutional 
provision.

     An initial question in light of City of Boerne is whether the 
remainder of RFRA--the portion applicable to the federal 
government (and not enacted pursuant to the s 5 of the 
Fourteenth Amendment)--survives the Court's decision.  If 
severance of the invalid part of a statute results in legislation 
that it is evident Congress would not have enacted, then the 
entire statute should be considered invalid.  See Alaska Air-
lines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U.S. 678, 684-86 (1987);  United 
States v. Raines, 362 U.S. 17, 23 (1960).  We mentioned this 
issue at oral argument, but the government failed to argue 
the point in its brief.  And so we will leave to another day the 
question whether RFRA is severable, as the Eighth and 

Tenth Circuits believe.  See Kikumura v. Hurley, 242 F.3d 
950, 959 (10th Cir. 2001);  In re Young, 141 F.3d 854, 858-59 
(8th Cir. 1998).

     As to the validity of the regulation under RFRA, we start 
with the proposition that the regulation is neutral;  it is 
generally applicable and it does not discriminate among view-
points.  Our decision in ISKCON settled as much.  61 F.3d at 
957-58.  Under RFRA, then, the question is:  does the ban on 
selling t-shirts on the Mall "substantially burden" plaintiffs' 
exercise of their religion?  The answer is clearly no.  We are 
not aware of any religious group that has as one of its tenets 
selling t-shirts on the National Mall, even if the t-shirts bear 
a religious message.  Plaintiffs do not claim to belong to any 
such group, nor do they allege that selling t-shirts in that 
particular area of the District of Columbia is central to the 
exercise of their religion.  In their identical declarations, 
submitted in opposition to summary judgment, Henderson 
and Phillips stated only that they "hold the sincere religious 
belief that [they] are obligated by the Great Commission to 
preach the good news, the gospel, of salvation through Jesus 
Christ to the whole world ... by all available means...."  
With respect to t-shirts, they stated that in "obedience to 
[their] vocation, [they] have distributed at a price publications 
and t-shirts that [they have] written or designed, or contain-
ing content that conforms with [their] beliefs, because the 
preparation of these materials requires money;  [their] voca-
tion includes the distribution of such materials for an amount 
that covers the cost to create them and to enable [them] to 
carry out [their] vocation."

     Given these representations, plaintiffs cannot claim that the 
regulation forces them to engage in conduct that their reli-
gion forbids or that it prevents them from engaging in 
conduct their religion requires.  See Goodall by Goodall v. 
Stafford Country Sch. Bd., 60 F.3d 168, 172-73 (4th Cir. 
1995);  Cheffer v. Reno, 55 F.3d 1517, 1522 (11th Cir. 1995);  
Bryant v. Gomez, 46 F.3d 948 (9th Cir. 1995) (per curiam).  
Their declarations do not suggest that their religious beliefs 
demand that they sell t-shirts in every place human beings 
occupy or congregate.  There is no indication that they have 

followed--or attempted to follow--any such practice.  If they 
had, there is no doubt that they would have come in conflict 
with a host of federal, state and local restrictions on commer-
cial activities in many areas, including for instance the interi-
ors of government buildings open to the public.  Nor does the 
regulation "significantly inhibit or constrain conduct or ex-
pression that manifests some central tenet of [Henderson's or 
Phillips's] individual beliefs."  Wener v. McCotter, 49 F.3d 
1476, 1480 (10th Cir. 1995).  Plaintiffs have not treated selling 
t-shirts on the Mall as rising to that level of significance in 
their religion.  Further, plaintiffs have merely alleged that it 
is their vocation to spread the gospel by "all available means."  
Because the Park Service's ban on sales on the Mall is at 
most a restriction on one of a multitude of means, it is not a 
substantial burden on their vocation.  Plaintiffs can still 
distribute t-shirts for free on the Mall, or sell them on streets 
surrounding the Mall.  See Weir v. Nix, 114 F.3d 817 (8th 
Cir. 1997) (considering alternatives in determining whether 
burden was "substantial");  Bryant, 46 F.3d 948 (no "substan-
tial burden" where alternatives were available).

     We acknowledge that the Seventh Circuit, in a pre-Boerne 
state prison case arising under RFRA, listed among the tests 
for determining whether there is a substantial burden on the 
exercise of religion the question whether the governmental 
restriction forced "adherents of a religion to refrain from 
religiously motivated conduct," Mack v. O'Leary, 80 F.3d 
1175, 1178 (7th Cir. 1996) (citing Brown-El v. Harris, 26 F.3d 
68, 70 (8th Cir. 1994)).2  We are not applying that standard 
for several reasons.  First, plaintiffs did not advocate it.  
Second, our opinion in Branch Ministries relied on a narrow-

__________
     2  The full text of the court's holding is as follows:

     We hold, therefore, that a substantial burden on the free 
     exercise of religion, within the meaning of the Act, is one that 
     forces adherents of a religion to refrain from religiously moti-
     vated conduct, inhibits or constrains conduct or expression that 
     manifests a central tenet of a person's religious beliefs, or 
     compels conduct or expression that is contrary to those beliefs.
     
Mack, 80 F.3d at 1179.

er test.  211 F.3d at 142.  To our court, "substantial burden" 
in RFRA is what the Supreme Court had in mind in its pre-
Smith opinion in Jimmy Swaggart Ministries v. Board of 
Equalization, 493 U.S. 378, 384-85 (1990):  the proper free 
exercise inquiry was whether "the government has placed a 
substantial burden on the observation of a central religious 
belief or practice and, if so, whether a compelling governmen-
tal interest justifies the burden."  The idea that a restriction 
on religiously motivated conduct requires a compelling gov-
ernmental interest is inconsistent with the formulation just 
quoted.  One can conceive of many activities that are not 
central or even important to a religion, but nevertheless 
might be religiously motivated.  In fact it is hard to think of 
any conduct that could not potentially qualify as religiously 
motivated by someone's lights.  To make religious motivation 
the critical focus is, in our view, to read out of RFRA the 
condition that only substantial burdens on the exercise of 
religion trigger the compelling interest requirement.  Despite 
the language we have quoted from the Mack opinion, see 
supra note 2, we do not think this is what the Seventh Circuit 
intended.  Later in its opinion, the court of appeals indicated 
that under its test courts must "separate center from periph-
ery in religious observances," that only practices that are 
"important" (if not central) to the religion qualify, and that 
the "proper and feasible question for the court is simply 
whether the practices in question are important to the votar-
ies of the religion...."  80 F.3d at 1179-80.

                                B.

     Plaintiffs also mount an equal protection attack on the 
t-shirt sales ban.  They argue that the Park Service has not 
applied its regulations equally because there have been dem-
onstrations in which--they allege--t-shirts were sold on the 
Mall without the Park Service taking action against the 
vendors.  The contention is, in essence, one of selective 
enforcement, a claim plaintiffs have not come close to making 
out.

     The Park Service submitted the declaration of Richard 
Merryman, Chief of the Division of Park Programs, National 
Capital Parks-Central, who explained that the Service "seeks 
to monitor the activities of permittees on parkland to ensure 
permit and regulatory compliance....  Whenever violations 
are discovered ... action is taken to ensure compliance with 
permits and regulations."  Plaintiffs presented nothing in 
rebuttal.  Even if there had been lapses in enforcement, 
there was no indication that these were attributable to imper-
missible discrimination. Plaintiffs, in short, failed to adduce 
admissible evidence showing inconsistent treatment based on 
"an unjustifiable standard such as race, religion, or other 
arbitrary classification."  United States v. Armstrong, 517 
U.S. 456, 464 (1996) (citing Oyler v. Boyles, 368 U.S. 448, 456 
(1962));  see also Sanjour v. EPA, 56 F.3d 85, 92 n.9 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995);  United States v. Grace, 778 F.2d 818, 822 n.7 
(D.C. Cir. 1985).

     Plaintiffs also allege an equal protection violation because 
the Park Service permits Guest Services, Inc., a concession-
aire, to operate a number of facilities on the Mall in which it 
sells various items, including food and t-shirts.  In Friends II 
we rejected an argument, based on these kiosk sales, that "in 
areas where the Park Service already allows a certain degree 
of commercialism," the First Amendment's Free Speech 
Clause requires that it also allow t-shirt sales.  116 F.3d at 
498.  So here.  Plaintiffs have not shown that they are 
"similarly situated" to the commercial vendor.  See Cleburne 
v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 439 (1984);  
Women Prisoners of D.C. Dep't of Corrections v. District of 
Columbia, 93 F.3d 910, 924 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  The concessions 
at issue are expressly authorized by statute, 16 U.S.C. 
ss 5951-5966, they are carefully regulated to ensure that 
they do not have a negative impact on the Mall, and they are 
"limited only to those facilities and services necessary and 
appropriate for the convenience of the public."  60 Fed. Reg. 
at 17,647.  So far as the record reveals, plaintiffs have not 
applied to become concessionaires and they have not sought 
to meet any of the regulatory requirements governing conces-
sionaires.  Id.

     In essence, plaintiffs ask us to hold that equal protection 
requires the Park Service to ban t-shirt sales by all possible 
vendors, or by none.  However, "[i]t is not a requirement of 
equal protection that all evils of the same genus be eradicated 
or none at all."  Railway Express Agency v. New York, 336 
U.S. 106, 110 (1949).  Congress has decided that some conces-
sions may be appropriate to serve park visitors, and the Park 
Service has adopted a reasonable scheme to accomplish that 
end while preserving the aesthetic integrity of the National 
Mall.  The classification of which plaintiffs complain "does not 
contain the kind of discrimination against which the Equal 
Protection Clause affords protection."  Id.  The district court 
rightly held that they had not made out a colorable equal 
protection claim.

                                C.

     Plaintiffs also attempted to raise several First Amendment 
claims.  We say "attempted" because it is not clear to us what 
arguments plaintiffs were trying to convey.  For a few pages 
of their brief they characterized themselves as members of 
the press entitled to the protection of the freedom of the 
press guarantee in the First Amendment.  The argument, to 
the extent it may be considered as such, goes nowhere.  The 
Washington Post is no more entitled to sell t-shirts on the 
Mall than anyone else.  In Friends II and ISKCON, we 
applied time, place and manner analysis to determine that the 
Park Service's regulation was valid under the First Amend-
ment because it was content neutral, narrowly tailored to 
achieve a significant government interest, and left open ample 
alternative channels of communication.  Friends II, 116 F.3d 
at 497;  ISKCON, 61 F.3d at 958.  Those decisions are 
controlling here, regardless of the identity of the prospective 
t-shirt sellers.

     We also reject plaintiffs' contention that the regulation 
should receive some heightened scrutiny because they are 
presenting some sort of "hybrid claim" resting on both the 
Free Exercise Clause and the Free Speech Clause of the 
First Amendment.  For this argument to prevail, one would 

have to conclude that although the regulation does not violate 
the Free Exercise Clause, see Employment Division, 494 
U.S. 872, and although they have no viable First Amendment 
claim against the regulation, see Friends II, 116 F.3d at 498, 
the combination of two untenable claims equals a tenable one.  
But in law as in mathematics zero plus zero equals zero.  
Plaintiffs appear to recognize as much in their reply brief, 
where they admit that their "hybrid claim" "depends for its 
success on [plaintiffs] succeeding with either their free speech 
or free press claims."  At any rate, we have already rejected 
the sort of "hybrid claim" they are making here.  See 
ISKCON, 61 F.3d at 958.

     Plaintiffs' remaining arguments have insufficient merit to 
warrant discussion.  We have considered and rejected each of 
them.  Accordingly, the judgment of the district court is

                                                                 Affirmed.

              