                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued November 7, 2001     Decided July 26, 2002 

                           No. 00-1421

                 Enron Power Marketing, Inc. and 
              Virginia Electric and Power Company, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

                 Entergy Services, Inc, et al., 
                           Intervenors

              Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Jeffery D. Watkiss argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioners.

     Beth G. Pacella, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 
the brief was Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Robert C. Glinski, Thomas C. Doolan and Floyd L. Norton 
IV were on the brief for intervenors Entergy Services, Inc. 
and Tennessee Valley Authority.  Edward S. James E. Fox 
entered appearances. 

     Before:  Sentelle, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Petitioners Enron Power Mar-
keting, Inc. and Virginia Electric and Power Company peti-
tion for review of a Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
("FERC") order accepting for filing from Entergy Services, 
Inc., an attachment revising its open access transmission 
tariff, and a subsequent order denying rehearing.  Entergy 
Services, Inc., 91 F.E.R.C. p 61,151, reh'g denied, 92 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,108 (2000).  We deny the petition for review for the 
reasons that follow.

                          I. Background

     In its Order No. 888 series, FERC required that the 
wholesale transmission function be unbundled from the sale 
of electric power and required electric utilities to provide 
open access to their transmission lines in a nondiscriminatory 
fashion. Promoting Wholesale Competition Through Open 
Access Non-Discriminatory Transmission Services by Pub-
lic Utilities, Order No. 888, FERC Stats. & Regs. p 31,036, 61 
Fed. Reg. 21,540 (May 10, 1996), clarified, 76 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,009, and 76 F.E.R.C. p 61,347 (1996), on reh'g, Order No. 
888-A, FERC Stats. & Regs. p 31,048, 62 Fed. Reg. 12,274 
(Mar. 14, 1997), clarified, 79 F.E.R.C. p 61,182 (1997), on 
reh'g, Order No. 888-B, 81 F.E.R.C. p 61,248, 62 Fed. Reg. 
64,688 (1997), on reh'g, Order No. 888-C, 82 F.E.R.C. p 61,046 
(1998), aff'd, Transmission Access Policy Study Group v. 
FERC, 225 F.3d 667 (D.C. Cir. 2000), aff'd sub nom. New 
York v. FERC, 122 S. Ct. 1012 (2002) (hereinafter "Order 
888").  To this end, FERC prescribed a pro forma open 

access transmission tariff ("OATT") and required transmis-
sion owners to file tariffs consistent with or superior to the 
pro forma.  The pro forma OATT provides for both network 
integration transmission service ("NITS") and point-to-point 
transmission service.  FERC also ordered transmission own-
ers and operators to provide timely capacity, reservation, and 
scheduling information for OATT customers and transmission 
owners via an open-access same-time information system 
known by the acronym OASIS.

     Entergy Services, Inc. ("ESI") filed such an OATT tariff as 
agent for five affiliated operating companies:  Entergy Arkan-
sas Inc., Entergy Gulf States, Inc., Entergy Louisiana, Inc., 
Entergy Mississippi, Inc. and Entergy New Orleans, Inc. 
(collectively with ESI, "Entergy").  On March 21, 2000, ESI 
filed a proposed new Attachment M to that OATT.  In 
pertinent part, Attachment M provided that

     all transmission customers desiring point-to-point trans-
     mission service under Entergy's OATT must submit to 
     Entergy OASIS reservations and transmission schedules 
     that designate specific and valid sources and sinks.  For 
     a source and sink located on the Entergy transmission 
     system, Entergy explains that the source must be a 
     specific generator, and the sink must be a specific load. 
     For a source and sink off the Entergy transmission 
     system, Entergy states that the source can be the control 
     area where the generator unit is located, and the sink 
     can be the control area where the load is located.  How-
     ever, Attachment M specifies that neither a generator, 
     nor a generation-only control area will be accepted as a 
     valid sink.  Similarly, loads and load-only control areas 
     will not be accepted as valid sources.  In Attachment M, 
     Entergy also outlines the procedures to be used in the 
     event that the source and sink identified on the OASIS 
     reservation is different from the source and sink provid-
     ed in the transmission schedule.  In addition, Entergy 
     proposes to limit the scheduled amount for any point-to-
     point transmission schedule on Entergy's system to the 
     rated capacity of the generator or the maximum load.  
     
     Entergy asserts that Attachment M is intended to im-
     prove reliability and congestion management.
     
91 F.E.R.C. at 61,563 (emphasis added).  The required notice 
of this filing in the Federal Register drew objections from, 
among others, petitioners Enron and Virginia Power, who 
argued that Attachment M was in fact not necessary on 
reliability grounds and that it discriminated between Entergy 
and petitioners.  FERC rejected all objections and approved 
Attachment M.  Entergy Services, Inc., 91 F.E.R.C. p 61,151, 
reh'g denied, 92 F.E.R.C. p 61,108 (2000).  Enron and Virgi-
nia Power petitioned this court to review FERC's decision 
approving Attachment M under the standards of the Adminis-
trative Procedure Act and to set it aside as arbitrary, capri-
cious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance 
with law.  5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A).

                          II. Discussion

     The petitioners have raised two issues:  the "discrimina-
tion" or "comparability" issue and the "reliability-deference" 
issue.  We hold with FERC on each.

     A.   Comparability Issue
          
     The standard by which FERC reviews OATT filings, both 
original and revised, is whether they are consistent with or 
superior to the Order 888 pro forma OATT.  Order No. 888, 
FERC Stats. & Regs. at 31,770.  The pro forma tariff is set 
out in Appendix B to Order 888-A at 30,503-543.  Order 888 
requires transmission owners to provide transmission services 
to others and for such owners and their affiliates to take 
transmission on their own facilities on the same terms and 
conditions as those facilities are available to others.  This 
requirement of nondiscrimination or comparability is one of 
the foundations of Order 888.

     Petitioners submit that the new requirements of Attach-
ment M violate this principle of comparability.  Entergy's 
Attachment M requires that both a reservation of point-to-
point ("PTP") transmission capacity and the follow-on sched-
uling of that transmission specify both the electrical source 

from which the transmission arises and the electrical sink (or 
destination) into which the transmission will sink or disap-
pear.  Control areas, which are electric zones over whose 
boundaries with other such control areas the flow of electrici-
ty is measured and regulated, can be substituted for both 
sources and sinks, but a control area substituted for a source 
must have generation capacity and a control area substituted 
for a sink must have electrical demand located therein, or 
"native load."  Entergy will not accept a reservation or 
schedule that identifies a generation-only control area as the 
sink.  Because Entergy has both native load and generation 
capacity within its control areas, this is no limitation on 
Entergy, and petitioners assert that Entergy does reserve 
and schedule into and out of its control area.  However, 
because Enron and Virginia Power's Batesville, Mississippi, 
control area is generation only, and is a control-area island in 
an Entergy sea, Entergy will not accept Batesville as a sink 
when Enron or Virginia Power attempt to reserve and sched-
ule transmissions on Entergy facilities.  Per petitioners, this 
interferes with their ability to set up hub transactions that 
pass through Batesville, at least on paper, and other tech-
niques of energy traders in a manner that Entergy, with both 
generation capacity and customer load native to its control 
areas, does not suffer.

     In FERC's view, however, comparability of an OATT is 
tested on the basis of terms and conditions offered to custom-
ers, not on the usefulness of those terms and conditions to a 
particular customer because of that customer's capacities and 
needs.  Arguably, this rationale alone may be sufficient to 
sustain FERC's decision on this point, but in any event, the 
question under review is whether FERC's interpretation of 
its own orders survives the arbitrary and capricious standard 
imposed by the Administrative Procedure Act.  FERC's deci-
sion easily passes that test.  See, e.g., Sithe/Independence 
Power Partners v. FERC, 165 F.3d 944, 948 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  
At base, FERC's decision was that Attachment M is consis-
tent with or superior to the pro forma tariff.  It is neither 
arbitrary nor capricious for FERC to forbid the fictitious 
designation of a control area as a sink (ultimate user) site 

when the control area is only a generator.  Cf. Wisconsin 
Power and Light Co., 84 F.E.R.C. p 61,300 (1998) (disapproval 
of a generator as a point of receipt in a PTP transmission).  
Conversely, it is neither arbitrary nor capricious for FERC to 
conclude that a load-only control area (one without generating 
capacity) cannot serve as a source.  For Enron to designate 
sinks as areas without load it would appear that it had not yet 
sold the power it sought to obtain.  That is, if it had a true 
sink, why did it designate the "fictitious" one?

     Petitioners' best attempt at displaying arbitrariness and 
capriciousness in FERC's decision is to claim that the deci-
sion "reverse[s] unreasonably and without explanation two 
long standing FERC policies:  one prohibiting discrimination 
and instead requiring service comparability in access to the 
interstate transmission grid, and the other requiring defer-
ence in matters pertaining to the reliable operations of that 
grid to the 'true expert in the field,' NERC."  Petitioners' 
argument fails in its first premise.  FERC needed no expla-
nation for any reversal of policy as to discrimination, since it 
found no discrimination.  It is disingenuous of petitioners to 
claim that FERC did not explain why it was no longer 
prohibiting discrimination when it had found none as to which 
any prohibition could be lifted.

     Petitioners argue that Attachment M also discriminates in 
the matter of net scheduling.  Net scheduling refers to a 
practice, with respect to a particular electrical interface, of 
scheduling for the same time period partially offsetting in-
bound and outbound transmissions that differ arithmetically 
by no more than the capacity of the interface.  In petitioners' 
illustration, the Batesville generation only control area has a 
rated generating capacity of 840 megawatts, and so should be 
an acceptable scheduling sink for a particular time period for 
2,000 megawatts of inflow and, for the same period, an 
acceptable scheduling source for 2,840 megawatts of outflow 
because the arithmetical difference does not exceed Bates-
ville's rated 840 megawatt generating capacity, provided the 
actual interchange, when it occurs, does not exceed Bates-
ville's 840 megawatt generating capacity.  Attachment M 
prohibits this scheduling practice, in effect, by limiting accept-

able scheduling transactions by rated capacity--i.e., to the 
electric reality of power flows that petitioners' own illustra-
tion and argument conceded must ultimately be observed.  
According to petitioners, the discrimination arises because it 
is "undisputed" that Entergy net schedules for itself.  But 
this "undisputed" discrimination is illusory.  FERC's order 
adequately if briefly addresses this argument.  As FERC 
makes plain, "in its filing, Entergy commits to apply the 
proposed business practices on a nondiscriminatory basis."  
Petitioners' assertion that Entergy will discriminatorily allow 
itself net scheduling while discriminatorily burdening the 
scheduling of its customers, is no more than an assertion.  
Petitioners have offered no evidence to impeach FERC's 
conclusion.  FERC's rejection may have been a terse one, but 
petitioners' proffer required no more.  Cf. Lomak Petroleum, 
Inc. v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 206 F.3d 
1193, 1198 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (petitioner had burden but "failed 
to establish convincing inconsistencies").  FERC's treatment 
is adequate given the clarity of FERC's position on "ficti-
tious" reservation and scheduling data.  Attachment M ap-
plies the scheduling limitations to all, which satisfies compara-
bility, and the petitioners have not shown otherwise.

     B.   Reliability Deference
          
     Petitioners' second argument is also founded on a flawed 
premise.  Petitioners argue that FERC acted capriciously by 
failing, without adequate explanation, to follow its allegedly 
long-standing practice of deferring on matters of reliability to 
the North American Electric Reliability Council ("NERC"), 
an industry group formed after the massive power outage in 
the northeastern United States in 1965 to facilitate voluntary 
industry cooperation and standards on reliability issues.  This 
argument is possibly more disingenuous than the first.  As to 
discrimination, the flaw in petitioners' premise was in its 
assertion that FERC had departed from its policies when it 
had not had occasion to apply it.  As to the argument that 
FERC improperly departed from its policy of deference to 
NERC, it had no such policy in the first instance.

     In support of their objection that the real-data-only reser-
vation and scheduling requirements of Attachment M were 
not necessary on reliability grounds, petitioners offered the 
opinion of an ad hoc Policy Interpretation Task Force 
("PITF") of NERC that had addressed a similar dispute 
between an affiliate of petitioner Enron and the Tennessee 
Valley Authority ("TVA").  (TVA is not subject to FERC 
jurisdiction.)  The NERC PITF had expressed the view that 
the hub scheduling and net scheduling practices favored by 
petitioners were not inappropriate on electric-grid reliability 
grounds, provided that complete actual flow data was avail-
able sufficiently in advance to permit system-reliability analy-
sis.  Further, the PITF expressed the view that if the volume 
of "last minute" data changes and completions overwhelmed 
analytic capabilities and put system stability at risk, the 
closing of the timing window should be moved back for 
everyone on a non-discriminatory basis.  It is this opinion to 
which petitioners assert that FERC owes deference.

     This argument is without merit.  Petitioners have failed 
utterly to demonstrate any practice of FERC deference to 
NERC.  We seriously question whether there validly could 
be such a policy.  FERC is a creature of statute and has only 
those authorities delegated to it by the Congress.  Petitioners 
have offered no support for the proposition that Congress 
ever has or even could delegate authority to a federal agency 
which would then be able to essentially redelegate that au-
thority by deferring to a private body associated with the 
industry which Congress had commissioned it to regulate.  
FERC may of course consider and accept the expert opinion 
of NERC on an electric-grid reliability issue in the same 
manner that any finder of fact or policy maker may consider 
and accept the views of an expert, but that does not limit its 
authority to reject or limit reliance upon the same expert in 
future cases.  Moreover, even to the extent that FERC may 
have a practice of accepting as helpful or useful the opinions 
of NERC, NERC's reliability opinion does not appear to be 
fundamentally inconsistent with FERC's acceptance of At-
tachment M.  NERC's reliability opinion is at base a timing 
issue, and Attachment M simply takes a conservative but non-

discriminatory approach as to when it requires complete and 
real data from everyone.  There is no binding practice of 
deference by FERC to NERC, and nothing relevant to which 
FERC might defer.

                         III.  Conclusion

     FERC reasonably concluded that Entergy's Attachment M 
is consistent with or superior to FERC's own pro forma open-
access transmission tariff, and comparable in the terms and 
conditions on which point-to-point transmission service is 
offered to affiliated and unaffiliated customers alike.  Its 
determinations are not undermined by petitioners' arguments 
regarding the allegedly discriminatory effect of Attachment 
M's source and sink requirements and capacity limitations, 
and FERC owed no deference to the opinion offered in an 
unrelated matter of an ad hoc task force of the North 
American Electric Reliability Council.  Accordingly, the peti-
tion for review is

                                                                 Denied.

                               