                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 1, 2002    Decided June 11, 2002 

                           No. 01-1058

               Corporate Express Delivery Systems, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

             International Brotherhood of Teamsters, 
                      Local Union No. 886, 
                            Intervenor

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Terry L. Potter argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Richard A. Cohen, Senior Attorney, National Labor Rela-
tions Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 
the brief were Arthur F. Rosenfeld, General Counsel, John 
H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Arm-
strong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Fred L. Corn-
nell, Supervisory Attorney.

     James B. Coppess argued the cause for intervenor.  With 
him on the brief was Michael C. Murphy.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, and Edwards and 
Sentelle, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Chief Judge:  An express delivery company peti-
tions for review, and the National Labor Relations Board 
cross-applies for enforcement, of a Board order holding that 
(1) drivers who delivered packages for the Company using 
their own vehicles (owner-operators) were employees rather 
than independent contractors, and (2) the Company commit-
ted unfair labor practices against owner-operators who were 
engaged in union organizing activities.  Corp. Express Deliv-
ery Sys., 332 N.L.R.B. No. 144, at 10-11 (Dec. 19, 2000).  
Because we agree with the Board that the owner-operators 
are employees, and there is substantial evidence that the 
Company engaged in the practices alleged, we deny the 
Company's petition for review and grant the Board's applica-
tion for enforcement.

                          I. Background

     The Board found the following facts, some of which the 
Company contests.  Corporate Express Delivery Systems 
engaged two types of drivers to deliver packages in Oklahoma 
City:  those who drove company vehicles and those who 
operated their own vehicles.  In February, 1999 several own-
er-operators held a meeting to discuss forming a union.  Soon 
thereafter two company managers told certain owner-
operators the Company would close its Oklahoma City branch 
rather than deal with a union.  A third manager then fired 
three of the union organizers.  When the owner-operators 

held a second meeting, this manager drove twice around the 
meeting hall in an apparent effort to learn who was attending.

     The General Counsel of the Board charged Corporate 
Express with violating s 8(a)(1) and (3) of the National Labor 
Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (3), by threatening and 
firing employees for engaging in union activity and by moni-
toring such activity.  The Company argued principally that 
its owner-operators were independent contractors and were 
therefore not protected by the Act.  An Administrative Law 
Judge ruled that the owner-operators were employees and 
that the Company had committed the charged unfair labor 
practices.  The Board adopted the order of the ALJ, and 
Corporate Express petitioned this court for review.

                           II. Analysis

     The NLRA prohibits an employer from interfering with its 
employees' efforts to organize a union, but the Act offers no 
such protection to "independent contractors," 29 U.S.C. 
s 152(3);  see North Am. Van Lines, Inc. v. NLRB, 869 F.2d 
596, 597 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (NAVL).  Where, as here, the Board 
distinguishes an employee from an independent contractor, 
this court neither reviews its decision de novo nor affords it 
great deference.  Drawing the distinction requires an exer-
cise of judgment about both facts and law, but it "involve[s] 
no special administrative expertise that a court does not 
possess."  C.C. Eastern, Inc. v. NLRB, 60 F.3d 855, 858 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995).  Accordingly, we take a middle course and "uphold 
the Board if it can be said to have made a choice between two 
fairly conflicting views."  Id.;  see also NAVL, 869 F.2d at 
599.

     In past cases we have treated "the amount of control that 
the company has over the way in which the worker performs 
his job" as the most important among several elements useful 
in distinguishing an employee from an independent contrac-
tor.  C.C. Eastern, 60 F.3d at 858;  see also NAVL, 869 F.2d 
at 599;  Local 777, Democratic Union Org. Comm., Seafarers 
Int'l Union, 603 F.2d 862, 873 (D.C. Cir. 1978).  Thus, we 
held in C.C. Eastern that owners of tractors used to haul a 
cartage company's trailers were independent contractors pri-

marily because the company did not control the "means and 
manner" of their work;  the company did not concern itself 
with the owner-operators' hours, attire, routes, break times, 
type of vehicle, or vehicle maintenance. 60 F.3d at 858-59.

     Although the Company argues that this case is just like 
C.C. Eastern, we think the means and manner test might well 
yield the opposite result.  In the earlier case we emphasized 
the drivers' freedom to "reload the freight and deliver it in 
the order they find most efficient" and concluded that "it is 
really the driver, not the Company, who ultimately deter-
mines the order in which he will make deliveries."  Id. at 859.  
In this case, by contrast, the owner-operators "could not 
deviate from the order of stops set out on the route sheet."  
Corp. Express, 332 N.L.R.B. No. 144, at 4.  Corporate Ex-
press also required the owner-operators to carry pagers so 
they could be reached at all times, and to call in frequently 
for scheduling changes and updates.  In addition, Corporate 
Express--unlike C.C. Eastern--imposed a dress code upon 
the drivers:  "Owner operators were required to wear navy 
pants and company shirts that were either navy or white or 
striped."  Id.  On the other hand, the owner-operators serv-
ing Corporate Express were free to choose their routes, 
break times, and the type of vehicle they drove, and were 
responsible for the maintenance of their vehicle.  Under the 
means and manner test, therefore, the Board may well "have 
made a choice between two fairly conflicting views" when it 
held that the owner-operators were employees.*

     Ultimately, however, we need not answer that question 
because we uphold as reasonable the Board's decision, at the 
urging of the General Counsel, to focus not upon the employ-
er's control of the means and manner of the work but instead 
upon whether the putative independent contractors have a 

__________
     * The factors to which we have previously looked other than 
control of the means and manner of work, see C.C. Eastern, 60 F.3d 
at 858-59, are also in conflict.  The owner-operators owned their 
own vehicles, received no life or health insurance from the Compa-
ny, and were described in their contracts as "independent contrac-
tors."  At the same time, the drivers had no real entrepreneurial 
opportunities and were paid by the day, not by the project.

"significant entrepreneurial opportunity for gain or loss."  Id. 
at 6.  We agree with the Board's suggestion that the latter 
factor better captures the distinction between an employee 
and an independent contractor.  For example, as the Board 
points out, "the full-time cook is regarded as a servant [rather 
than as an independent contractor] although it is understood 
that the employer will exercise no control over the cooking."  
Restatement (Second) of Agency s 202(1) cmt. d (1957).  
Similarly, a corporate executive is an employee despite enjoy-
ing substantial control over the manner in which he does his 
job.  Conversely, a lawn-care provider who periodically ser-
vices each of several sites is an independent contractor re-
gardless how closely his clients supervise and control his 
work.  The full-time cook and the executive are employees 
and the lawn-care provider is an independent contractor not 
because of the degree of supervision under which each labors 
but because of the degree to which each functions as an 
entrepreneur -- that is, takes economic risk and has the 
corresponding opportunity to profit from working smarter, 
not just harder.

     A shift of emphasis to entrepreneurialism leads inexorably 
to the conclusion that the Board properly deemed the owner-
operators in this case employees.  Typically an entrepreneur 
not only supplies his own equipment or tools;  he may also 
hire subordinates and work for more than one party.  The 
Board found, however, that the owner-operators here were 
not permitted to employ others to do the Company's work, 
332 N.L.R.B. No. 144, at 4 ("Owner/operators could not hire 
someone to drive their route"), or to use their own vehicles 
for other jobs, id. at 6 ("[O]wner-operators may not use their 
vehicles to deliver goods for anyone other than Respondent") 
(emphasis in original).  As a result, the owner-operators 
lacked all entrepreneurial opportunity and consequently func-
tioned as employees rather than as independent contractors.

     Corporate Express contends that the Board's decision is 
inconsistent with that of its Director for Region Six, who 
found in another case that "owner-operators working [for this 
Company] under a similar contract were independent contrac-

tors."  See Corp. Express Delivery Sys., Case No. 
6-RC-11788 (Apr. 27, 2000).  But the contract in the Region 
Six case was apparently dissimilar in a key respect:  As the 
Company itself acknowledges, the Region Six decision "em-
phasized the owner-operators['] control over their work be-
cause of their ability to set their own delivery schedule."  As 
discussed above, that factor cuts the opposite way in this case.  
In any event, the decision of a Regional Director does not 
bind the Board.

     Finally, Corporate Express maintains that even if the 
owner-operators were employees, it did not engage in any 
unfair labor practices.  This claim simply cannot be squared 
with the record evidence in light of the credibility findings 
made by the ALJ.  The Company's main argument is that its 
area manager, William Kennedy, could not have fired owner-
operators due to their participation in union organizing activi-
ties because he was unaware of that participation when he 
fired them.  The ALJ, however, expressly did not credit 
Kennedy's testimony to the extent it conflicted with other, 
credited evidence;  and two people whom the ALJ deemed 
credible gave testimony that contradicted Kennedy's claim.  
First, union organizer Eddie Landers testified that he had 
faxed Kennedy a list of the organizers a week before Kenne-
dy terminated two owner-operators whose names appeared at 
the top of that list.  Corp. Express, 332 N.L.R.B. No. 144, at 
10.  Second, the ALJ found that "Kennedy told [owner-
operator] Dunn that his name had come up," thereby reveal-
ing that Kennedy and others in the Company "had discussed 
employee support for the Union" before the terminations.  
Id.  The Company's other arguments regarding the unfair 
labor practice charges similarly ignore the record evidence 
upon which the ALJ relied.  We therefore uphold the Board's 
ruling that Corporate Express committed unfair labor prac-
tices by monitoring, threatening, and firing employees for 
their efforts to organize a union.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, the Company's petition for 
review is denied and the Board's cross-application for en-
forcement is granted.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                                 