                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                      Filed October 23, 2001

                           No. 00-1141

                    Trans Union Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                    Federal Trade Commission, 
                            Respondent

                         On Petition for Rehearing

                            ---------

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  In its petition for rehearing, Trans 
Union argues that we incorrectly applied Dun & Bradstreet, 
Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U.S. 749, 759-60 (1985), 
when we decided that target marketing lists merit only 
intermediate scrutiny.  In Dun & Bradstreet, the Supreme 
Court held that a consumer reporting agency's wholly false 
credit report warranted only qualified constitutional protec-

tion because the report "concern[ed] no public issue."  Id. at 
762.  In reaching that conclusion, the Court noted that the 
report constituted "speech solely in the individual interest of 
the speaker and its specific business audience," and that the 
report reached only "five subscribers, who, under the terms 
of the subscription agreement, could not distribute it further."  
Id.  The same is true here:  Trans Union's target marketing 
lists interest only Trans Union and its target marketing 
customers, and Trans Union sells its lists for one-time use, 
prohibiting purchasers from disseminating the data.

     To be sure, Trans Union's lists are not "wholly false," as 
was the Dun & Bradstreet credit report, nor is the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act ("FCRA"), 15 U.S.C. ss 1681, 1681a-
1681u, an "incidental state regulation," as Dun & Bradstreet 
termed the state defamation law challenged in that case.  472 
U.S. at 762.  Nothing in Dun & Bradstreet, however, sug-
gests that these two factors were critical to the Court's 
decision.  The important point is that here, as in Dun & 
Bradstreet, the targeted speech solely interests the speaker 
(Trans Union) and its "specific business audience" (its cus-
tomers).  Id.

     One additional consideration, absent in Dun & Bradstreet, 
supports our conclusion that Trans Union's target marketing 
lists comprise speech of purely private concern.  The lists 
contain names of private individuals, not incorporated busi-
nesses like the respondent in Dun & Bradstreet.  We do not 
suggest that corporations lack privacy interests, nor that all 
corporate speech is somehow inherently public.  But the 
particular information at issue in this case--people's names, 
addresses, and financial circumstances--is less public than 
the same information about companies whose articles of incor-
poration and financial statements are generally available for 
inspection.  Cf. Cox Broad. Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U.S. 469, 495 
(1975) ("By placing the information in the public domain ... , 
the State must be presumed to have concluded that the public 
interest was thereby being served.").

     In support of its argument that the FCRA's target market-
ing limitation merits strict scrutiny, Trans Union cites cases 

in which the Supreme Court "struck down privacy-based 
restrictions on the publication of truthful information."  Pet. 
at 5-6.  Unlike this case, however, most of the cited cases 
involve speech on matters of public concern.  E.g., Bartnicki 
v. Vopper, 121 S.Ct. 1753, 1765 (2001) (concluding that privacy 
concerns raised by disclosure of contents of private cellular 
telephone call "give way when balanced against the interest in 
publishing matters of public importance");  Florida Star v. 
B.J.F., 491 U.S. 524, 536 (1989) (holding that state may not 
punish publication of " 'lawfully obtain[ed] truthful informa-
tion about a matter of public significance' " (citing Smith v. 
Daily Mail Publ'g Co., 443 U.S. 97, 103 (1979)));  NAACP v. 
Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886, 913 (1982) (concluding 
that disclosure of names of civil rights boycott violators is 
"expression on public issues" and rests on "highest rung of 
the hierarchy of First Amendment values") (citations omit-
ted);  Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U.S. 
829, 839 (1978) (deciding that state may not punish press for 
disclosing confidential judicial proceedings, in part because a 
"responsible press has always been regarded as the handmai-
den of effective judicial administration") (citations omitted);  
Cox Broad. Corp., 420 U.S. at 491-92 (noting that "[w]ith 
respect to judicial proceedings ... the press serves to guar-
antee the fairness of trials and to bring to bear the beneficial 
effects of public scrutiny upon the administration of justice").  
Another cited case involves speech addressed to a large, 
public audience.  Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 146-47 
(1943) (recognizing leafleting as central to public discourse 
because the "[f]reedom to distribute information to every 
citizen ... is ... clearly vital to the preservation of a free 
society").  Finally, two cases concern commercial speech 
that--like the speech at issue here--merits only intermediate 
scrutiny.  Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass'n, 486 U.S. 466 
(1988) (lawyer advertising);  Bolger v. Youngs Drug Prods. 
Corp., 463 U.S. 60 (1983) (pamphlets about contraceptives).  
Trans Union's reliance on these last two cases is particularly 
misplaced, for they stand not for the principle that speech 
rights "prevail" over privacy rights "virtually without excep-

tion," Pet. at 5, but instead for the principle that speech of 
largely private concern may warrant only qualified protection.

     Trans Union next argues that by permitting the sale of 
consumer reports to facilitate guaranteed offers of credit or 
insurance (prescreening), but prohibiting the sale of similar 
information to facilitate offers of other goods or services 
(target marketing), the FCRA makes a content-based distinc-
tion deserving strict scrutiny.  The notion that content-based 
speech restrictions warrant strict scrutiny, however, derives 
from cases involving fully protected speech.  See, e.g., Arkan-
sas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221 (1987) 
(striking down content-based sales tax on print media);  FCC 
v. League of Women Voters, 468 U.S. 364 (1984) (striking 
down content-based law that forbade noncommercial edu-
cational broadcasting stations from editorializing).  Trans 
Union's target marketing lists are private speech warranting 
only qualified constitutional protection.  We need not now 
decide whether content-based restrictions of private speech 
might sometimes merit strict scrutiny.  It is sufficient to note 
that given the Supreme Court's commercial speech doctrine, 
which creates a category of speech defined by content but 
afforded only qualified protection, the fact that a restriction is 
content-based cannot alone trigger strict scrutiny.  See, e.g., 
City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 507 U.S. 410 
(1993) (applying intermediate scrutiny to determine constitu-
tionality of Cincinnati rule banning handbill racks--but not 
newspaper racks--on public property).

     In the alternative, Trans Union argues that the FCRA's 
target marketing restriction fails even intermediate scrutiny.  
Again, the cases the company cites are distinguishable.  In 
Edenfield v. Fane, for example, the Supreme Court struck 
down a state rule prohibiting certified public accountants 
from personally soliciting new clients, partly because the 
state failed to establish that the rule would directly promote 
the state's interest in reducing fraud.  507 U.S. 761 (1993).  
Here, by contrast, the government cannot promote its inter-
est (protection of personal financial data) except by regulating 
speech because the speech itself (dissemination of financial 
data) causes the very harm the government seeks to prevent.  

Thus, the FCRA unquestionably advances the identified state 
interest.  For the same reason, unlike in Greater New Or-
leans Broadcasting Ass'n, Inc. v. United States, where the 
Court struck down a ban on casino advertising, in part 
because "practical and nonspeech-related forms of regulation 
... could more directly and effectively" advance the govern-
ment's interest in reducing casino gambling, 527 U.S. 173, 192 
(1999), here there is no possibility that some less-restrictive 
or nonspeech-related regulation could achieve the identified 
state interest.  See also Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 514 U.S. 
476 (1995) (striking down prohibition on beer labels that 
identify alcohol content, in part because government interest 
in preventing brewers from competing on basis of alcohol 
content could be advanced through less-restrictive regula-
tions);  44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island, 517 U.S. 484, 
507 (1996) (invalidating Rhode Island's ban on advertising of 
retail prices of alcoholic beverages because "alternative forms 
of regulation that would not involve any restriction on speech 
... would be more likely to achieve the State's goal of 
promoting temperance").  Finally, also unlike in Greater New 
Orleans Broadcasting Ass'n, where the challenged statute 
was "pierced by exemptions and inconsistencies," 527 U.S. at 
190, here we confront a law with just one exception:  the 
permissive standard applied to information sold for pres-
creening.

     Nothing in Lorillard Tobacco Co. v. Reilly, 121 S.Ct. 2404 
(2001), issued after publication of our opinion, requires a 
different result.  In that case, the Supreme Court struck 
down Massachusetts regulations governing advertising of var-
ious tobacco products, largely because the sheer breadth of 
the regulations raised questions about the fit between the 
regulations' means (restricting advertising) and ends (pre-
venting underage tobacco use).  Id. at 2425.  Lorillard noted 
several ways in which the "breadth and scope of the regula-
tions" evidenced that Massachusetts had not performed "a 
careful calculation of the speech interests involved."  Id.  For 
example, the regulations failed to target "advertising and 
promotion practices that appeal to youth," encompassing in-
stead all forms of communication, and even restricting a 

retailer's ability to "answer inquiries [from adults] about its 
tobacco products."  Id. at 2426.  No similar problem exists 
here.  Aiming directly at its intended target, supra at 4, the 
FCRA has neither indirect nor unintended effects on speech.  
The statute therefore sweeps only as broadly as necessary to 
accomplish its goal:  protecting the privacy of personal finan-
cial information.  A narrower restriction would immediately 
lead to increased disclosure of such information.  The 
FCRA's means and ends are thus one, leaving no possibility 
of a careless or imperfect "fit."

     As for Trans Union's suggestion that Congress should have 
adopted an opt-out scheme, we note that Congress considered 
such a scheme, S. Rep. 104-185, at 36-38 (1995);  H.R. Rep. 
102-692, at 25-27 (1992), but settled on an opt-in scheme 
instead, 15 U.S.C. s 1681b(a)(2).  As enacted, therefore, the 
statute permits Trans Union to sell a consumer's private 
information as long as the consumer consents.  Although the 
opt-in scheme may limit more Trans Union speech than would 
the opt-out scheme the company prefers, intermediate scruti-
ny does not obligate courts to invalidate a "remedial scheme 
because some alternative solution is marginally less intrusive 
on a speaker's First Amendment interests."  Turner Broad. 
System, Inc. v. FCC, 520 U.S. 180, 217-18 (1997) (citations 
omitted).  "So long as the means chosen are not substantially 
broader than necessary to achieve the government's interest, 
... [a] regulation [is] not ... invalid simply because a court 
concludes that the government's interest could be adequately 
served by some less-speech-restrictive alternative."  Id. at 
218.

     Trans Union also argues that the FCRA's permissive treat-
ment of information sold for prescreening "illustrate[s] ... 
[t]he [statute's] lack of narrow tailoring."  Trans Union's 
Supp. Br. at 4.  On the contrary, the statute's differential 
treatment of information sold for prescreening and that sold 
for target marketing recognizes that individuals' privacy in-
terests in personal information are not absolute:  Such inter-
ests are defined not only by the content of the information, 
but also by the identity of the audience and the use to which 
the information may be put.  For example, people who fierce-

ly protect the privacy of personal medical information may 
nevertheless disclose such information on job or medical 
insurance applications.  People who protect the privacy of 
their salaries may nevertheless reveal how much they make 
to qualify for a mortgage.  So too, here.  Congress apparent-
ly believes that people are more willing to reveal personal 
information in return for guaranteed offers of credit than for 
catalogs and sales pitches.  Given the nature of intermediate 
scrutiny, it can hardly be said that the First Amendment 
prohibits Congress from balancing privacy interests different-
ly in these different circumstances--particularly since the 
FCRA's express purpose is to facilitate credit, not target 
marketing.

     Nor does the FCRA's permissive treatment of information 
sold for prescreening demonstrate, as Trans Union argues, 
that the statute is unconstitutionally underinclusive.  " '[A] 
regulation is not fatally underinclusive simply because an 
alternative regulation, which would restrict more speech or 
the speech of more people, could be more effective.' "  Trans 
Union v. FTC, 245 F.3d 809, 819 (2001) (citing Blount v. SEC, 
61 F.3d 938, 946 (D.C. Cir. 1995)).  Underinclusiveness analy-
sis "ensure[s] that the proffered state interest actually under-
lies the law, [so] a rule is struck for underinclusiveness only if 
it cannot fairly be said to advance any genuinely substantial 
governmental interest."  Blount, 61 F.3d at 946 (citations 
omitted).  To survive a First Amendment underinclusiveness 
challenge, therefore, "neither a perfect nor even the best 
available fit between means and ends is required."  Id.  The 
FCRA satisfies this standard.

     Finally, Trans Union argues that we erred by declining to 
consider its statutory interpretation and arbitrary and capri-
cious claims.  We explained, however, that Trans Union's 
briefs fell far short of this Circuit's requirements for present-
ing issues for decision.  Trans Union v. FTC, 245 F.3d at 
814.  To be sure, the briefs attempted statutory claims, id. 
(discussing petitioner's briefs), and we had discretion to con-
sider them.  Cf. Public Citizen Health Research Group v. 
FDA, 185 F.3d 898, 903 n.* (D.C. Cir. 1999).  But because of 
the utter incoherence of Trans Union's briefs, and because we 

discerned no substantial constitutional issue, cf. DeBartolo 
Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & Constr. Trades 
Council, 485 U.S. 568, 574-77 (1988) ("[W]here an otherwise 
acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious con-
stitutional problems, the Court will construe the statute to 
avoid such problems unless such construction is plainly con-
trary to the intent of Congress."), we chose not to address 
those claims.  Since Trans Union's petition for rehearing 
merely clarifies arguments the company's briefs had muddied, 
instead of restating arguments claimed to have been over-
looked or misunderstood, the petition comes too late.

     The petition for rehearing is denied.

                                                                 So ordered.

                                 





























                         United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                            ---------

                           No. 00-1141

                   Filed On:  October 23, 2001

                                 
                    Trans Union Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                    Federal Trade Commission, 
                            Respondent

                            ---------
            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                     Federal Trade Commission
                            ---------

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Edwards and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

                              ORDER
     Upon consideration of Petitioner's petition for rehearing 
filed May 25, 2001, and of the opposition thereto, it is

     ORDERED that the petition be denied, as is more fully set 
forth in the opinion of the court filed herein this date.

                            Per Curiam

                                        FOR THE COURT:

                                        Mark J. Langer, Clerk

                                   BY:

      

                                        Deputy Clerk                                                