                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued October 5, 2001    Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 00-5455

               P.I.A. Michigan City Incorporated, 
                    d/b/a Kingwood Hospital, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

        Tommy G. Thompson, Secretary of the United States 
            Department of Health and Human Services, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02386)

     Jonathan P. Neustadter argued the cause for appellant.  
With him on the briefs was Patric Hooper.

     Marcus H. Christ, Jr., Attorney, U.S. Department of 
Health & Human Services, argued the cause for appellee.  
With him on the brief were David S. Cade, Acting General 

Counsel, Henry R. Goldberg, Deputy Associate General Coun-
sel, David W. Ogden, Assistant Attorney General, U.S. De-
partment of Justice, Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. Attorney at the 
time the brief was filed, and Anthony J. Steinmeyer, Attor-
ney, U.S. Department of Justice.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge;  Sentelle and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  P.I.A. Michigan City, Inc., 
brought this action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(f)(1) for 
review of the Secretary's decision in a Medicare reimburse-
ment matter.  The hospital contended that the Secretary 
erred in denying it an exemption from the Medicare payment 
limitations imposed under the Tax Equity and Fiscal Respon-
sibility Act of 1982.  The district court denied the motion of 
the hospital for summary judgment, granted the cross-motion 
for summary judgment of the Secretary, and dismissed the 
action.  Because we agree with the district court that the 
Secretary's application of regulations was reasonable and the 
Secretary's decision was supported by the record, we affirm 
the grant of summary judgment in favor of the Secretary.

                          I. Background

A.   Statutory and Regulatory Background

     This case involves proper calculation of a hospital's compen-
sation or reimbursement under Part A of Medicare, the 
federally funded and administered health insurance program 
for the eligible elderly and disabled established by title XVIII 
of the Social Security Act and codified as amended at 42 
U.S.C. ss 1395-1395i-s (1994 & Supp. 1999).  The program 
can make direct payment to providers of inpatient hospital 
services, 42 U.S.C. s 1395d(a)(1), including psychiatric hospi-
tals.  Id. s 1395d(c).  The statute describes hospitals eligible 
to participate, including psychiatric hospitals, 42 U.S.C. 
s 1395x(e)-(f), and permits a "distinct part" of an institution 
to qualify as a psychiatric hospital.  Id. s 1395x(f).  The 
statute also defines, and limits payment to, "reasonable 

costs."  42 U.S.C. ss 1395x(v), 1395f(b)(1).  The statutory 
distinction between a generic hospital ("general hospital" 
hereinafter) and a psychiatric or other special purpose hospi-
tal is material to the controversy before us because Congress 
has chosen different means to attempt to limit the rise in 
"reasonable costs" allowed for general hospitals than for 
specialty hospitals.

     Congress enacted a limitation on the extent to which Medi-
care Part A hospital insurance could recognize an increase in 
a hospital's otherwise "reasonable costs" in the Tax Equity 
and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, Pub. L. No. 97-248, 
s 101(a)(1) (codified at 42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(b)(1994 & Supp. 
1999)) ("TEFRA").  This approach allowed a percentage in-
crease in reasonable costs each year.  The percentage was 
specified in the statute;  the base of costs to which the 
percentage applied, or "target amount," was a hospital-
specific figure equal, for the hospital's first cost year under 
the statute, to its actual operating costs in the preceding cost 
year.  Each year thereafter, the target amount for that 
hospital increased from its base year target amount by the 
percentage specified in the statute, even if the hospital's 
actual cost experience differed.  The target amount used in 
the statutory formula for a particular hospital for a particular 
subsequent year, in effect, was simply the product of that 
hospital's base year costs and the cumulative statutory per-
centages.  The next year, Congress partially replaced the 
TEFRA limitation with a "prospective payment system" 
(PPS) applicable to general hospitals but not to psychiatric 
hospitals, distinct part psychiatric units, and other specialty 
hospitals and distinct part units.  See 42 U.S.C. 
s 1395ww(d)(1)(A)-(B).

     Congress directed the Secretary to provide exemption from 
the TEFRA limit for events beyond a hospital's control, and 
authorized such other relief from the TEFRA limit as the 
Secretary deemed appropriate.  42 U.S.C. s 1395ww(b)(4)(A).  
Pursuant to that discretionary authority, the Secretary pro-
mulgated the predecessor to 42 C.F.R s 413.40 in 1982 and 
subsequently amended relevant portions of those regulations.  

The present controversy relates to these regulations and 
amendments as in effect for 1989-1990.

     The Secretary's regulations provided a short term exemp-
tion for a "new hospital," which the regulations defined at the 
pertinent time as

     a provider of inpatient hospital services that has operat-
     ed as the type of hospital for which HCFA granted it 
     approval to participate in the Medicare program * * * 
     for less than three full years.
     
42 C.F.R. s 413.40(f)(1)(i)(1989).  ("HCFA" stands for Health 
Care Financing Administration, an agency under the Secre-
tary.  In the context of this opinion, distinctions between the 
Secretary and HCFA are immaterial and not observed.)  The 
regulation tethered this paragraph (f) exemption period to 
admission of the hospital's first patient.  Id.  Paragraph (b) 
of the same regulation provided that the base year of a 
hospital or a distinct unit continued in effect "unless the 
hospital * * * qualifies as a new hospital."  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40(b)(1)(1989) (rebase provision).

     In 1992, the Secretary amended these paragraph (f) exemp-
tion and paragraph (b) rebase provisions.  Changes to the 
Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems, 57 Fed. 
Reg. 39746 (Sept. 1, 1992).  The paragraph (f) new hospital 
exemption provision was changed by shortening the three-
year period and, more relevant to this controversy, by adding 
a second, "has provided" criterion to the existing "has operat-
ed" criterion:

          For purposes of this section, a new hospital is a 
     provider of hospital inpatient services that--
     
          (A) Has operated as the type of hospital for which 
     HCFA granted it approval to participate in the Medicare 
     program, under present or previous ownership (or both), 
     for less than 2 full years;  and
     
          (B) Has provided the type of hospital inpatient ser-
     vices for which HCFA granted it approval to participate 
     in the Medicare program, for less than 2 years.
     
42 C.F.R. s 413.40(f)(1992).  The amendment also added the 
following sentence to the existing rebase provision:

     When the operational structure of a hospital or distinct 
     unit changes (that is, a freestanding hospital becomes a 
     distinct part unit or vice versa) the base period would be 
     the first full 12-month cost reporting period effective 
     with the revised Medicare certification classification.
     
42 C.F.R. s 413.40(b)(1) (1992).  With subsequent minor 
changes in wording and format not material to this dispute, 
these provisions persist to the present.  See 42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40 (2001).

B.   Factual Background

     Plaintiff P.I.A. Michigan City, Inc., formerly known as 
Kingwood Hospital, of Michigan City, Indiana ("Kingwood" 
hereinafter), was an existing hospital that began participating 
in Medicare in 1968 as a general, short-term acute care 
hospital of 89 beds.  By 1984, Kingwood converted 36 of its 89 
beds to psychiatric use and Medicare certified Kingwood as a 
general acute-care hospital (subject to PPS payment regula-
tion) with a distinct part psychiatric unit (subject to TEFRA 
limit payment regulation).  By September 1985, Kingwood 
had expanded its psychiatric unit to 58 of its 89 beds.  By 
May 31, 1989, Kingwood's psychiatric unit engulfed the gen-
eral-hospital remainder of its 89 beds.  Medicare recognized 
Kingwood as a free-standing psychiatric hospital effective 
June 1, 1989.

     Accordingly, when the Secretary applied Kingwood's 1984 
base-year TEFRA limit to its 1989-90 cost year to deny 
Kingwood full recovery of its costs, Kingwood applied timely 
for recognition of exempt "new hospital" status under para-
graph (f) of 42 C.F.R. s 413.40, or at least a change in its 
TEFRA limit base year from 1984 to 1989-90 under 
s 413.40(b).  The Provider Reimbursement Review Board 
rejected both requests.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395oo(a);  Hearing 
Decision, Kingwood Hospital, No. 93-0054 (Provider Reim-
bursement Rev. Bd. Aug. 7, 1998), reprinted in Medicare & 
Medicaid Guide (CCH) p 80,046 ("Board Decision" hereafter).  

As the Secretary declined to review the matter further, 
Kingwood's recourse was to the courts.  42 U.S.C. 
s 1395oo(f).

     Kingwood filed a civil action in the district court seeking 
recognition of exempt new hospital status or alternatively a 
new base year.  Both Kingwood and the Secretary moved for 
summary judgment.  The district court denied Kingwood's 
motion, granted the Secretary's, and dismissed Kingwood's 
complaint.  Order, P.I.A. Michigan City, Inc. v. Shalala, No. 
98-2386 (D.D.C. Oct. 27, 2000).  The district court held that 
the Secretary's interpretations of the applicable regulations 
were reasonable and her decisions supported by substantial 
evidence.

                           II. Analysis

     Plaintiff's appeal presents the same alternative issues as 
were before the Secretary and the district court:  First, 
whether Kingwood was entitled to a new TEFRA base cost 
reporting period beginning June 1, 1989 under 42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40(b)(1) as in effect June 1, 1989, taking into account 
any retroactive amendments thereto, if any, and evidence of 
the Secretary's interpretation thereof.  Alternatively, wheth-
er Kingwood was entitled to a new-hospital exemption as of 
June 1, 1989 under 42 C.F.R. s 413.40(f)(1) as in effect June 
1, 1989.

     The standards for our review are well known.  We review 
the district court's application of law de novo.  As did the 
district court, we review the Secretary's interpretation and 
application of her regulations for reasonableness and the 
Secretary's findings for substantial support in the record.  
See, e.g., Allentown Mack Sales & Service, Inc. v. NLRB, 522 
U.S. 359, 377 (1998).

A.   New Base Period

     Kingwood argues that it is entitled to a more or less 
automatic change of its base period, under authority of 
s 413.40(b), from calendar year 1984 to the fiscal year June 1, 
1989 through May 31, 1990 by reason of operational changes 

that led to its June 1, 1989 change in Medicare certification 
from a general hospital (subject to PPS) with a distinct-part 
psychiatric unit (subject to TEFRA) to an exclusively psychi-
atric, all-TEFRA hospital.  According to Kingwood, granting 
such a change of base year following such a change in 
operations and certification was the then-existing policy of the 
Secretary, as evidenced, first, by the Secretary's 1992 amend-
ment to "clarify" paragraph (b)(1), see 57 Fed. Reg. 23618, 
23660 (June 4, 1992), by adding the language quoted in Part 
I.A, supra, and second, by the Secretary's slightly earlier 
May 1992 letter decision allegedly granting just such a new 
base year to Dallas Rehabilitation Institute ("DRI").

     The Review Board rejected Kingwood's argument.  The 
Review Board began by searching the then-applicable regula-
tions for language that supported an automatic change in 
base year, but it found none in effect for a cost year begin-
ning when Kingwood's did.  That decision evidences a reason-
able interpretation by the Board, because the language of 
paragraph (b) as it existed in 1989, prior to the 1992 and later 
revisions, appears to refer only to change of base year in 
paragraph (f) "new hospital" circumstances.  (Kingwood, of 
course, seeks that paragraph (f) exemption as well, but as-
serts in this argument that it has a right to paragraph (b) 
relief as of 1989 independently of whether it obtains para-
graph (f) relief.)  Nor does Kingwood appear fundamentally 
to disagree with the Review Board's conclusion on this partic-
ular point, as Kingwood's counsel conceded at oral argument 
that Kingwood did not rely on the plain language of the pre-
1992 text.

     The Review Board did note, further, that the Secretary had 
added a provision relating to changing base years in para-
graph (j), 42 C.F.R. s 431.40(j) (now paragraph (i)), but that 
provision became effective too late to benefit Kingwood, a 
point Kingwood concedes.  The Review Board noted, finally, 
Kingwood's argument that the 1992 amendment to paragraph 
(b) was intended to "clarify" the existing paragraph (b).  The 
preamble language upon which Kingwood relies states:

     Therefore, to preclude hospitals from qualifying for a 
     new hospital exemption based solely on such operational 
     reorganizations, we are proposing to revise s 413.40(f) to 
     specify that a hospital will qualify as a new hospital only 
     if it has not previously provided the type of hospital 
     inpatient services for which HCFA granted it approval to 
     participate in the Medicare program.
     
          However, we also recognize that it would not be appro-
     priate to subject these types of hospitals or distinct-part 
     units to the [TEFRA Limit] that applied before the 
     hospital's reorganization.  Therefore, when the opera-
     tional structure of hospital or distinct unit changes (that 
     is, a freestanding rehabilitation hospital becomes a dis-
     tinct part or vice versa), we are proposing to revise 
     s 413.40(b)(1) to clarify that the base period would be 
     the first full 12-month period effective with the revised 
     Medicare certification.
     
57 Fed. Reg. at 23,660 (emphasis supplied by Kingwood).  
Kingwood argues that the Secretary's styling of the new 
language as "clarification" must mean that the effect of the 
amended regulation is the same as the prior language, and 
that therefore, the pre-amendment language, applicable to 
Kingwood, must reach the same result as would prevail after 
the amendment.  The Review Board rejected that retroactivi-
ty argument on the grounds that the same preamble express-
ly provided that the regulations proposed had an effective 
date of October 1992.  Accordingly, the Review Board dis-
missed Kingwood's view that the single use of the word 
"clarify" in the regulation preamble mandated retroactive 
application of that portion of the regulation, notwithstanding 
the effective date clause.  This final conclusion is not unrea-
sonable, particularly as the usage cited by Kingwood is in the 
context of an integrated six-paragraph discussion of the rea-
sons for the third proposed change to the new hospital 
exemption regulations, which Kingwood expressly argues is 
not retroactive.  See generally 57 Fed. Reg. at 23,659-60.  
Finally, the Review Board observed that Kingwood was not 
entirely without relief under the then-effective regulations 
because the 1989 version of paragraph (h), 42 C.F.R. 

s 413.40(h)(1989) (codified as revised at 42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40(g)(2001)), provided a mechanism for adjustment to 
cost period data, including data in the base year itself, and 
that in fact Kingwood had received some relief under that 
provision.  Yet again the Review Board's interpretation of the 
regulations is reasonable.

     Unfortunately, the Review Board does not directly address 
the DRI letter decision in this analysis.  The Review Board 
did discuss that letter as the last item in the immediately 
preceding section of its opinion, but only in discussing the 
paragraph (f)(1) exemption.  The DRI letter decision in ques-
tion is a three-paragraph response to an equally short inquiry 
by DRI's financial intermediary as to whether DRI might be 
eligible for a new base period because of its June 1, 1989 
change in certification from an exclusively rehabilitation spe-
cialty hospital to a general short-term hospital with a distinct 
part rehabilitation unit.  (A rehabilitation hospital or unit is 
subject to TEFRA limits, but a general short-term hospital is 
subject to the PPS regime.)  The Director of the Office of 
Payment Policy, a sub-subdivision of HCFA, replied that it 
"would not be appropriate" to continue use of the TEFRA 
base period formerly established for the free-standing reha-
bilitation hospital for the rehabilitation unit because of an 
unspecified change in "methodology in determining Medi-
care's share of the costs of the different levels of patient care 
services," and authorized a base period of June 1, 1989 to 
May 31, 1990.  Letter from Charles R. Booth, Director, Office 
of Payment Policy, Health Care Financing Administration to 
Gene Brock, Senior Audit/Reimbursement Representative, 
Medicare Administration, Aetna Life Insurance Co. (May 
1992), Administrative Record at 110.  The short letter says 
little else.

     As noted above, the Review Board did not deal with this 
letter at all in the portion of its opinion discussing this 
paragraph (b) issue.  The Board's entire treatment of the 
DRI letter in the last two sentences of the preceding section, 
dismissing Kingwood's request for a paragraph (f) new hospi-
tal exemption, is curt and cryptic.  The Board disregards the 
letter because "the facts in the Texas case can be distin-

guished from the facts in the current issue."  Board Decision 
at 14.  At oral argument, neither counsel for Kingwood or for 
the Secretary was able to provide content for this statement 
with support in the record, and we have found none in the 
record.

     However, although it is incumbent on an agency to explain 
itself, it is also incumbent on an appellant complaining of 
inconsistency and capriciousness in the agency's explanation 
of its treatment to bring before the reviewing court sufficient 
particulars of how the appellant was situated, how the alleg-
edly favored party was situated, and how such similarities as 
may exist dictate similar treatment and how such dissimilari-
ties as may exist are irrelevant or outweighed.  Kingwood on 
the sparse record before us "has failed to establish convincing 
inconsistencies between [the Secretary's] treatment of [King-
wood] and other facilities."  Lomak Petroleum, Inc. v. Feder-
al Energy Regulatory Commission, 206 F.3d 1193, 1198 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000).  The DRI letter does not come close to filling this 
gap.  The burden of proof lays the consequences on King-
wood.  See id.  In these circumstances, the treatment of the 
DRI letter is not a fatal flaw in the Review Board's otherwise 
adequate rejection of Kingwood's arguments on this issue.

B.   New Hospital Exemption

     We now turn to Kingwood's alternative argument, that, if 
not entitled to a new base period, it must certainly be entitled 
to a new-hospital exemption.  As noted earlier, a new hospital 
is one "that has operated as the type of hospital for which 
HCFA granted it approval to participate in the Medicare 
program * * * for less than three full years."  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40(f)(1)(i) (1989).  Kingwood argues that, by this lan-
guage, the Secretary adopted a bright line test based on the 
date of HCFA approval.  In Kingwood's view, the regulation 
is clear that an institution can not have operated as a psychi-
atric hospital until Medicare had recognized it as such.  King-
wood supports this position by drawing to our attention the 
additional operational standards for records and staff that 
Medicare requires for its recognition, not just as a hospital, 
but as a psychiatric hospital.  42 U.S.C. s 1395x(f)(3)-(4), 42 

C.F.R. ss 482.60-482.62.  Kingwood also relies upon the 
preamble to the original exemption from 1982 in which the 
Secretary offered as a reason for the exemption that new 
hospitals "commonly have unusually high operating costs per 
case in the first year of operation."  47 Fed. Reg. at 43,282, 
43,288 (Sept. 30, 1982).  Kingwood argues that an institution 
like itself which changes its nature incurs costs in meeting the 
additional requirements occasioned by the change so as to 
come within the Secretary's rationale of increased operating 
costs expressed in that preamble.  Thus, Kingwood concludes 
that the Secretary's concern supports a bright-line test based 
on date of certification.

     The Review Board did not accept this bright line test and 
peremptorily rejected exemption based on "recertification and 
licensure change in and of itself."  Board Decision at 14.  The 
critical facts for the Review Board were instead that King-
wood "was primarily operating as a provider of psychiatric 
services for over five years prior to its recertification as a free 
standing psychiatric hospital" and "had used a majority of its 
beds (eighty-nine percent) for psychiatric services during the 
three years preceding its recertification on June 1, 1989."  Id.  
The Review Board cited substantial record evidence for these 
findings, which Kingwood does not challenge.  The only ques-
tion is the legal relevance of these findings.

     We hold that the Review Board's interpretation is reason-
able and entitled to deference.  Kingwood claims that its 
bright-line reading of the regulation is "compell[ing]" and 
therefore bars deference, citing Thomas Jefferson University 
v. Shalala, 512 U.S. 504, 512 (1994).  We do not agree.  
Kingwood reminds us that neither the Review Board nor this 
Court may focus on the phrase "has operated" and ignore the 
balance of the regulatory sentence.  Cf. Lexecon Inc. v. 
Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes & Lerach, 523 U.S. 26, 35-36 
(1998) (courts must construe a statute as a whole).  Kingwood 
emphasizes that the regulation refers to a "new hospital" as 
"hav[ing] operated as the type of hospital for which HCFA 
granted it approval" for the requisite period.  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40(f).  Unquestionably, the "for which" phrase King-
wood emphasizes modifies the "type of hospital" phrase, and 

must be given effect.  But the Review Board appears to have 
given it effect when it determined that Kingwood had been 
"primarily operating as a provider of psychiatric services."  
Board Decision at 14 (emphasis added).  The Review Board 
clearly first determined that "psychiatric hospital" is the 
"type of hospital for which HCFA granted [Kingwood] ap-
proval to participate in the Medicare program" and then 
inquired whether Kingwood had operated as such for less 
than three full years.  42 C.F.R. s 413.40(f)(1)(i) (1989).  The 
interpretation of the regulation embodied in that inquiry 
takes into account the entire regulation.

     Kingwood's contrary position that the entire regulatory 
sentence must be read to refer not simply to a period of 
operation as a psychiatric hospital, but to a period of opera-
tion as a HCFA-approved psychiatric hospital is not com-
pelled by the language of the regulation.  See Thomas Jeffer-
son University, 512 U.S. at 512.  In fact, Kingwood's bright-
line interpretation arguably is the less reasonable reading 
because it effectively reads the verb "operated" out of the 
sentence.  Kingwood might have had the necessarily "com-
pell[ing]" reading if the Secretary had, in 1982, defined a new 
hospital as one that had been "certified as the type of hospital 
for which HCFA granted it approval to participate in the 
Medicare program for less than three years," but the verb the 
Secretary chose was operated, not certified or approved.  A 
hospital can operate as a psychiatric hospital, that is, provide 
psychiatric services, without Medicare approval.  No hospital 
is required, at least by Medicare itself, to meet Medicare 
criteria as such if the hospital does not seek payment from 
Medicare, see 42 U.S.C. ss 1395f(a), 1395cc(b)(2)(B) (incorpo-
rating section 1395x definitions), 1395cc(i), and we are not 
aware of any other law or regulation, state or federal, that 
requires a facility to have Medicare approval solely as a 
requirement for providing psychiatric services to patients.  
Indeed, quite the contrary.  42 U.S.C. s 1395.  A hospital 
could be licensed by its state to offer psychiatric services 
primarily or exclusively without seeking Medicare certifica-
tion, and still be a psychiatric hospital.

     Kingwood assumes that the term psychiatric hospital is a 
term of Medicare art that necessarily entails satisfaction of all 
the Medicare criteria, so that there is no meaningful distinc-
tion in this statutory and regulatory environment between the 
terms psychiatric hospital and HCFA-approved psychiatric 
hospital, making psychiatric hospital necessarily imply 
HCFA approval.  See 42 U.S.C. s 1395x(f) (defining psychiat-
ric hospital).  Fundamentally, this is the same argument 
raised in Memorial Rehabilitation Hospital of Santa Bar-
bara v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 65 F.3d 
134, 137 & n.3 (9th Cir. 1995), with respect to the expression 
type of provider in an earlier version of this regulation.  
There, the institution claiming a new-hospital exemption was 
a rehabilitation hospital that had, under prior ownership, 
been only a distinct-part unit of another hospital and thus did 
not meet the statutory definition of provider, including the 
statutory definition of a hospital as a separately licensed 
entity.  Thus, argued the institution, the Secretary was bound 
by these definitions and the institution clearly was a new 
provider because it never previously had met the definition of 
provider at all.  The court rejected that argument on the 
grounds that the Secretary's interpretation need only be 
reasonable in light of the wording and purpose of the regula-
tion, and the Secretary's generic interpretation of provider 
satisfied that test because the plaintiff's predecessor had 
offered and been certified for the same services.  See id.

     For substantially the same reasons, the Secretary's implicit 
interpretation, that the regulation in its 1989 form does not 
use the term hospital in the phrase type of hospital in the 
technical sense of the statutory definition, is reasonable.  The 
essential fact distinguishing the Medicare definition of a 
psychiatric hospital from any other type of hospital is the 
type of services the institution primarily provides.  The stat-
ute defines "hospital" for relevant purposes as an institution 
which

          (1) is primarily engaged in providing, by or under the 
     supervision of physicians, to inpatients (A) diagnostic 
     services and therapeutic services for medical diagnosis, 
     treatment, and care of injured, disabled, or sick persons, 
     
     or (B) rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of 
     injured, disabled, or sick persons;
     
          (2) maintains clinical records on all patients;
     
          (3) has bylaws in effect with respect to its staff of 
     physicians;
     
          (4) has a requirement that every patient with respect 
     to whom payment may be made under this subchapter 
     must be under the care of a physician;
     
          (5) provides 24-hour nursing service rendered or su-
     pervised by a registered professional nurse, and has a 
     licensed practical nurse or registered professional nurse 
     on duty at all times;  except that until January 1, 1979, 
     the Secretary is authorized to waive the requirement of 
     this paragraph for any one-year period with respect to 
     any institution, insofar as such requirement relates to the 
     provision of twenty-four-hour nursing service rendered 
     or supervised by a registered professional nurse (except 
     that in any event a registered professional nurse must be 
     present on the premises to render or supervise the 
     nursing service provided, during at least the regular 
     daytime shift), where immediately preceding such one-
     year period he finds that--....
42 U.S.C. s 1395x(e)(1).  The same statute defines "psychiat-
ric hospital" as
     an institution which--
     
          (1) is primarily engaged in providing, by or under the 
     supervision of a physician, psychiatric services for the 
     diagnosis and treatment of mentally ill persons;
     
          (2) satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (3) 
     through (9) of subsection (e) of this section;
     
          (3) maintains clinical records on all patients and main-
     tains such records as the Secretary finds to be necessary 
     to determine the degree and intensity of the treatment 
     provided to individuals entitled to hospital insurance 
     benefits under part A of this subchapter;  and
     
          (4) meets such staffing requirements as the Secretary 
     finds necessary for the institution to carry out an active 

     program of treatment for individuals who are furnished 
     services in the institution.
     
42 U.S.C. s 1395x(f)(1).  Other than the difference in services 
provided, the only differences in definitions address require-
ments of clinical records and staffing, which do not go to the 
type of provider in the direct manner that the nature of 
services provided does.  Accordingly, as did the Ninth Cir-
cuit, we hold that the "type for which" phrase in the regula-
tion does not compel technical Medicare usage rather than 
customary, everyday usage.

     Kingwood has relied on not just the plain language of the 
1989 regulation, but the light shed on that language by both 
the 1992 amendment of the regulation and the accompanying 
preamble.  Kingwood points to language in the preamble to 
the 1992 Proposed Rule that characterizes this addition as a 
substantive change intended to prevent results that had oc-
curred under the 1989 regulations.  See Proposed Rule, 
Changes to the Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Sys-
tems, 57 Fed. Reg. at 23,618, 23,659-60 (June 4, 1992).  In 
particular, Kingwood relies on the concluding six-paragraph 
passage at the end of the preamble discussion of changes to 
the new hospital, which states, in relevant part:

          Our third proposed change in the new hospital exemp-
     tion concerns the issue of whether a participating facility 
     that reorganizes and/or changes the basis of its partic-
     ipation in the Medicare program is a new hospital....  
     Under our current regulations, [a described distinct part 
     unit that became a stand alone] rehabilitation hospital 
     would meet the criteria for a new hospital and, thus, 
     could qualify for a new hospital exemption.
     
          Another example involved a rehabilitation hospital that 
     added an acute care distinct-part unit [that eventually 
     became the hospital, with the former rehabilitation hospi-
     tal a distinct-part unit thereof].  Again, under the cur-
     rent regulations, the distinct-part unit would qualify for 
     an exemption because the hospital technically meets the 
     criteria for a new hospital.
     
          In both examples, the former distinct-part units quali-
     fied for a new hospital exemption because they were in 
     existence for less than 3 years as the type of hospital for 
     which they were approved to participate in the Medicare 
     program.  However, in a broader sense, these hospitals 
     were not new....  Therefore, to preclude hospitals from 
     qualifying for a new hospital exemption based solely on 
     such operational reorganizations, we are proposing to 
     revise s 413.40(f)....
     
          ... 
     
          We note that the proposed change would mean that 
     the new hospital exemption would not apply to hospitals 
     that change the basis of their certification but do not 
     experience a significant change in organizational struc-
     ture or in the type of services provided....  Under 
     current policy, the exemption as a new hospital would 
     begin with the first date ... for which the hospital is 
     certified as a [PPS-exempt hospital after having been 
     under PPS].  Under the revised policy, the exemption 
     would begin [when the hospital began offering relevant 
     services], whether or not the certification is effective for 
     that period.
     
          ... The proposed policy would be effective for Medi-
     care certifications occurring on or after October 1, 1992.
     
Id.

     This preamble language, Kingwood submits, is more than 
simply a retrospective interpretation of the prior regulation, 
as another provider argued (unsuccessfully) in SSM Rehabili-
tation Institute v. Shalala, 68 F.3d 266, 270 (8th Cir. 1995), 
but the very reason given by the Secretary for the need to 
change that regulation by amendment to end the conse-
quences of that interpretation.  Thus the weight accorded the 
1992 preamble should not be the slight weight accorded a 
mere after-the-fact commentary, but instead the full weight 
due the Secretary's contemporaneous interpretation of his 
1992 amendment as necessary to bar future exemptions simi-
lar to some actually obtained under the pre-amendment lan-
guage.

     The difficulty we have in accepting this argument is that 
Kingwood has not in fact established that it is situated 
similarly to the unidentified entities discussed in the 1992 
preamble.  It is true that Kingwood's psychiatric services 
were formerly a distinct-part unit of the hospital, cf. 57 Fed. 
Reg. at 23,659, but the present Kingwood hospital is not one 
that "eventually split off" from its parent hospital, as did the 
unnamed institution described in the preamble.  In fact, that 
language in the preamble more accurately describes the facts 
in Memorial Rehabilitation Hospital than the facts here, and 
that was a case in which the Secretary clearly did not grant 
the exemption.  65 F.3d at 135-36, 139.  Likewise, the 
preamble refers to an acute care hospital that added a 
distinct part rehabilitation unit that eventually expanded to 
become the hospital, with the former hospital now a subordi-
nated acute-care unit.  See 57 Fed. Reg. at 23,659.  Again, 
this does not precisely describe Kingwood's circumstances.  
Finally, we note the absence of meaningful time references in 
either of the Secretary's two preamble descriptions, or quan-
tified comparisons of the proportion of all services provided 
by the hospitals and distinct part units, whereas the Review 
Board made unchallenged findings that Kingwood had been 
engaged "primarily" in providing psychiatric services for 
more than three years prior to its HCFA approval as an 
exclusively psychiatric hospital.  As there is no basis for 
comparison of Kingwood's situation with the anonymous, 
stick-figure entities sketched in the 1992 regulation preamble, 
and as the burden of fleshing out the alleged inconsistencies 
of treatment falls on Kingwood, Lomak Petroleum, 206 F.3d 
at 1198, Kingwood gains no ground from its reliance on the 
1992 preamble.  To the extent that the 1992 preamble may 
have characterized the new regulation as a change in policy 
that would be relevant to Kingwood and those similarly 
situated, that characterization is outweighed by earlier and 
more specific indications of the Secretary's intent.  See SSM 
Rehabilitation, 68 F.3d at 270.

     Extending its argument based on the 1992 amendment, 
Kingwood insists that the Review Board improperly applied 
the 1992 amendment itself to Kingwood retroactively.  King-

wood was certified as a psychiatric hospital in 1989, and by its 
terms the 1992 amendment applies only to "Medicare certifi-
cations occurring on or after October 1, 1992."  57 Fed. Reg. 
at 23,660.  The 1992 amendment added to the existing re-
quirement that the provider must have "operated as the type 
of hospital for which HCFA granted it approval to participate 
in the Medicare program" for less than a specified period a 
new, second requirement that the provider have "provided 
the type of hospital inpatient services for which HCFA 
granted it approval ... for less than two years."  42 C.F.R. 
s 413.40(f)(1992) (emphasis added).  Kingwood asserts that 
the Review Board disqualified Kingwood simply because 
Kingwood had provided psychiatric services for some time, 
thereby applying, before its 1992 effective date, the new "type 
of services" element of the 1992 test.  Kingwood is mistaken 
in its premise that the new element is necessary to explain 
the Review Board's decision.  It is true that the new "type of 
services" element does not specify the level of services the 
hospital must have offered for more than two years in order 
to bar it from exemption, and that that bar could be set quite 
low.  In the case before us, however, the Review Board's 
decision was not based simply on the fact that Kingwood had 
previously provided psychiatric services.  Instead, the Review 
Board's decision was based on well-supported factual determi-
nations that Kingwood had been "primarily operating" as a 
provider of psychiatric services and not "primarily providing 
acute care inpatient services" during the look-back period.  
This emphasis on Kingwood's "primary" level of activity 
clearly relates to the pre-1992 "type of hospital" test and the 
statutory definition of a psychiatric hospital.  See Board 
Decision at 14;  cf. 42 U.S.C. s 1395x(e)(1), (f)(1).  According-
ly, the second test, in which any level of services might be 
disqualifying, clearly was not applied by the Review Board to 
Kingwood, retroactively or otherwise, and this argument fails 
as well.

                         III. Conclusion

     The district court made no error in determining that the 
decision of the Review Board, as the decision of the Secre-

tary, satisfied the standards of 5 U.S.C. s 706.  The Secre-
tary has articulated reasonable interpretations of 42 C.F.R. 
ss 413.40(b) and (f) as in effect at the relevant time, and 
Kingwood Hospital has failed to establish a compelling alter-
native interpretation.  The judgment of the district court is 
affirmed.

                  