                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 15, 1999    Decided August 8, 2000 

                           No. 98-7207

                        Sunday Daskalea, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                    District of Columbia and 
          Margaret A. Moore, Director, D.C. Department of Correc-
                             tions, 
                            Appellants

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 96cv02496)

     Lutz Alexander Prager, Assistant Deputy Corporation 
Counsel, Office of Corporation Counsel, argued the cause for 
appellants.  With him on the briefs were Jo Anne Robinson, 
Interim Corporation Counsel at the time appellants' main 
brief was filed, Robert R. Rigsby, Interim Corporation Coun-

sel at the time appellants' reply brief was filed, and Charles 
L. Reischel, Deputy Corporation Counsel.  Donna M. Mura-
sky, Assistant Corporation Counsel, entered an appearance.

     Gregory L. Lattimer argued the cause and filed the brief 
for appellee.

     Before:  Sentelle, Henderson, and Garland, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  Uncontradicted evidence at the 
trial of this case established the routine sexual abuse of 
women inmates by prison guards at the District of Columbia 
Jail.  The plaintiff, Sunday Daskalea, suffered from a con-
tinuing course of such abuse, culminating in an evening 
during which "correctional" officers forced her to dance 
naked on a table before more than a hundred chanting, 
jeering guards and inmates.  The District asks us to relieve it 
of all responsibility for this conduct, contending that the facts 
fail to establish the "deliberate indifference" necessary to 
sustain a municipality's liability for the acts of its employees.  
But "deliberate indifference" is precisely how any reasonable 
person would describe the District's attitude toward its wom-
en prisoners, and we therefore uphold in full the jury's award 
of $350,000 in compensatory damages.  We are unable, how-
ever, to uphold the jury's punitive damages award because 
District of Columbia law bars the imposition of such awards 
against the District.  And because Daskalea sued co-
defendant Margaret Moore solely in her official capacity as 
Director of the Department of Corrections, plaintiff must look 
to the District alone for payment of compensation.

                                I

     This is not the first time the federal courts have reviewed 
charges of sexual abuse by D.C. correctional officers against 
female inmates.  In 1993, a class action was filed on behalf of 
all women prisoners under the care of the District of Colum-
bia correctional system.  See Women Prisoners v. District of 
Columbia, 877 F. Supp. 634 (D.D.C. 1994).  In that case, the 

district court found a pattern of rape and sexual assault--
coupled with other forms of sexual harassment, inadequate or 
nonexistent staff training, and retaliation against women who 
filed complaints--that rose to a level of objective cruelty 
sufficient to violate the Eighth Amendment.  See Women 
Prisoners, 877 F. Supp. at 639-43, 664-67;  see also Women 
Prisoners v. District of Columbia, 93 F.3d 910, 929, 931 (D.C. 
Cir. 1996).  The court further found that the inmates had 
filed complaints and written letters to prison administrators 
to no avail, and that the harassment was obvious and widely 
known.  It concluded that the District of Columbia had acted 
"with 'deliberate indifference' to the condition of sexual 
harassment which women prisoners at the [District's facili-
ties] must endure," and that the District was therefore liable 
under 42 U.S.C. s 1983 for the violation of the inmates' 
constitutional rights.  See Women Prisoners, 877 F. Supp. at 
665-67.1

     On the basis of the foregoing, the Women Prisoners court 
issued a detailed order on December 13, 1994, requiring the 
Department of Corrections to "take all action necessary to 
remedy and prevent" sexual harassment of female inmates by 
its employees.  The court specifically directed the Depart-
ment to issue, distribute, and post a sexual harassment policy 
within sixty days, and to conduct mandatory training on 
sexual harassment for both employees and female inmates.  
See Women Prisoners, 877 F. Supp. at 679-81.

     On May 15, 1995, the Department of Corrections issued a 
policy in response to the Women Prisoners order.  The policy 
forbade sexual misconduct and harassment, as well as retalia-
tion for the filing of complaints regarding such behavior, and 
directed the institution of mandatory training.  Although 
some of the guards who testified at Daskalea's trial remem-

__________
     1  The District did not appeal the district court's finding of 
liability.  See Women Prisoners, 93 F.3d at 928.  Although it did 
appeal aspects of the court's remedial order, the District did not 
challenge the requirement, discussed below, that it promulgate a 
sexual harassment policy.  This court ultimately overturned por-
tions of the remedy not relevant here and remanded for further 
proceedings.  See id. at 931-32.

bered receiving the policy, others did not.  No inmate testi-
fied to receiving the policy, and officers admitted that the 
policy was never posted.  There was no evidence that the 
training requirements were implemented nor that any signifi-
cant corrective intervention occurred.

     Against this background, we now turn to a consideration of 
the specific facts of Daskalea's case.

                                A

     Daskalea was arrested on drug charges and sent to the 
D.C. Jail on October 26, 1994--two months before the district 
court issued its decision and order in the Women Prisoners 
litigation.  She was initially housed in South 1, the unit used 
primarily for women awaiting trial and for those in either 
solitary confinement or protective custody.  From the begin-
ning of her confinement, Daskalea testified that she was 
called "whore," "white bitch," "cracker," and other epithets by 
guards and inmates alike.2

     In January 1995, Daskalea was moved to Southeast 1.  
This unit housed approximately eighty women who were 
serving short-term sentences.  Upon arrival, she was met 
with rumors that she was an undercover FBI agent.  She was 
threatened by other inmates, including one who--in the pres-
ence of several guards who did not intervene--told her:  
"Bitch, you better sleep with one eye open."  Daskalea's fears 
of attack were realized when she was subsequently assaulted 
by two inmates.

     The civilian employee in charge of the Jail's library, Ed-
ward Gardner, was well known for providing inmates with 
cigarettes in exchange for sex.  It was also widely known that 

__________
     2  This recitation of facts is taken from the testimony of plain-
tiff's witnesses, which stands largely unrebutted because the Dis-
trict did not offer any evidence of its own.  Even if that were not 
the case, when reviewing a jury's verdict we must adopt the version 
of the facts most favorable to the party prevailing below.  See 
Kirkland v. District of Columbia, 70 F.3d 629, 635 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

the rooms adjacent to the library were routinely used for sex 
between library staff and inmates.  When Daskalea first 
attempted to use the library's research materials, Gardner 
leered at her and rubbed his genitals.  She rebuffed his 
advances, and thereafter had difficulty obtaining any assis-
tance from the library staff.  Some time later, a guard took 
Daskalea out of her cell and brought her to the library.  The 
guard led her to a room where a male inmate, notorious for 
engaging in sexual misconduct in the library, was waiting.  
The inmate then attacked her, attempting a sexual assault.

     As time went on, the campaign of fear, harassment, and 
violence against Daskalea--on the part of both staff and 
inmates--intensified.  Guards told her they would break her.  
One day, when inmates were supposed to be on lockdown, a 
prisoner known as Bootsie came to Daskalea's cell and spat 
and cursed at her.  Later that day a guard, Sgt. Theresa 
Noble, forcibly restrained Daskalea's hands while Bootsie 
attacked her.  Plaintiff stopped sleeping at night for fear she 
would be raped or assaulted.

     The testimony at trial disclosed a culture of routine accep-
tance of sexual encounters between staff and inmates on 
Southeast 1.  One cell, known as Cell 73, was kept empty and 
used for sex between prisoners and guards.  It was also used 
by staff to sleep off drunkenness--particularly by Officer 
Yvonne Walker, the officer in charge of the evening shift.  
There was also testimony that one of the inmates, Jacky 
Newby, was threatened by a guard jealous of Newby's sexual 
relationship with evening-shift guard Quida Graham.

     Daskalea repeatedly complained to the authorities about 
sexual harassment.  She filed more than fifteen official Inter-
nal Grievance Procedure Forms and wrote letters directly to, 
among others, the Deputy Warden, Warden, and Director 
Moore.  She also wrote to the judge in her criminal case, who 
held a hearing at which Daskalea's complaints of sexual 
harassment were aired.  Notwithstanding the judge's written 
recommendation that "defendant be moved from D.C. Jail," 

J.A. at 484 (commitment order), she was not.  Nor did prison 
authorities intervene in any other way to stop the abuse.

     All of the above turned out to be a mere prelude to the 
events of July 20, 1995.  During the weeks preceding that 
date--on at least three occasions and perhaps as often as 
weekly--Officer Walker, the head guard on the evening shift, 
organized a series of evenings during which female inmates 
stripped and danced provocatively to loud music.  Both fe-
male and male guards were present and, according to the 
testimony at trial, some guards assaulted inmates who re-
fused to dance.

     On the evening of July 20, the Jail's cell doors were kept 
open because the air conditioning system was malfunctioning.  
Sometime that evening, while plaintiff was sitting in her cell, 
loud music began and inmates started moving to the dining 
area.  Daskalea followed, arriving late and standing at the 
back of the crowd.  There, at the center of attention, was 
Officer Walker, doing a handstand on one of the dining tables 
and gyrating her hips provocatively.  Soon, at Walker's insti-
gation, three inmates climbed onto the table and began 
dancing, completely naked, while the crowd cheered.  One of 
the dancing inmates performed a lewd act, and Officer Walk-
er placed her head between the inmate's legs to get a closer 
look.  By that point, all of the inmates, numerous female 
guards, and several male guards and maintenance workers 
were in attendance.

     Then, someone called out Daskalea's name.  Fearing what 
might be coming, plaintiff fled back to her cell, but was 
unable to close the door.  A few minutes later, Officer Walker 
bellowed out the command:  "Get Sunday down here!"  The 
crowd began chanting Daskalea's name, and the dancing 
stopped.  Two inmates pulled plaintiff out of her cell, one 
taking each arm while a third followed behind preventing 
escape.  The inmates dragged Daskalea to the center of the 
crowd.  Officer Walker commanded her to dance, and when 
Daskalea hesitated, Walker visibly angered.  Afraid, Daska-
lea complied.  She removed all of her clothes except for her 
underwear and attempted to dance to the music.  But she 

was in such a state of shock and fear that her legs trembled.  
Guards began shouting and clapping;  some flashed money.  
Officer Walker tried to get Daskalea to remove her under-
wear.  An inmate began rubbing baby oil all over Daskalea's 
body.  The inmate then began rubbing her own body against 
Daskalea's.  Plaintiff lost control of her legs and collapsed to 
the ground.  The other inmate lay on top of her.  Eventually, 
the guards permitted Daskalea to take her clothes and return 
to her cell.  Later that night, both guards and inmates 
approached her, communicating sexual interest.  One guard 
exposed herself to Daskalea while telling her how much she 
enjoyed the dance.

     During the next few days, word spread about the incident.  
When inmate Newby submitted a grievance complaining of 
sexual harassment, assault, and threats by correctional offi-
cers, Lt. Edward Given "counseled" Newby to mind her own 
business.  Subsequently, Daskalea was summoned to the 
office of a Mr. Lytle, who asked her about the forced strip-
tease.  Although Daskalea expressed concern that guards 
would retaliate against her if she discussed it, Lytle assured 
her that they would not.

     Just days later, however, an officer arrived at Daskalea's 
cell and demanded that she turn over all of her underwear as 
"contraband."  Plaintiff's request to talk to Lytle was ig-
nored.  A lieutenant appeared, told Daskalea she was going 
to solitary, and when she protested threatened to mace her.  
She was then placed in solitary confinement, without any of 
her belongings and, at first, without a mattress.  A guard 
who went back to Daskalea's cell to retrieve her personal 
items, including her legal papers, found another guard going 
through them.  The second guard told the first that Daskalea 
would not be getting them back.

     Daskalea's requests to call an attorney were refused.  She 
wrote a letter to the Warden to report the forced stripping.  
When she subsequently saw the Warden, however, he 
brushed her off and turned away.

     The Warden appointed a committee, headed by Acting 
Deputy Warden Brenda Makins, to investigate the nude 

dancing incidents.  When the Makins' Committee asked to 
speak with Daskalea in early August--at which time she was 
being held in solitary confinement--it was informed that she 
had already been discharged.  The Committee concluded that 
Daskalea had been forced to dance for the assemblage (in-
cluding both female and male guards) against her will, and 
that nude dancing had taken place on three earlier dates the 
same month.  The Makins Report named fourteen guards 
who had "aided and abetted" the "sexual misconduct" and/or 
"assault."  These included the lead guard, Officer Walker, 
who was also found to have attacked another prisoner while 
the prisoner was hand-cuffed and in the presence of other 
guards.  In addition, the Committee concluded that eight 
officers, ranging from corporals to lieutenants, had been 
negligent, and that the "misconduct/assault was effected due 
to," among other things, "poorly trained supervisors."  The 
Committee further found that officers had tried to cover up 
the incidents by providing it with false information.  At trial, 
Director Moore testified that she had never read the Makins 
Report.

                                B

     Daskalea was released from prison at the end of August 
1995.  On October 30, 1996, she filed a lawsuit alleging 
violations of her civil rights under 42 U.S.C. s 1983.  Her 
second amended complaint added common law claims of 
negligent supervision and intentional infliction of emotional 
distress.  The parties agreed to refer the case to a magistrate 
judge for all purposes pursuant to 28 U.S.C. s 636(c)(1).

     At trial, the named defendants were the District of Colum-
bia and Director Moore.  Daskalea testified on her own 
behalf, along with other inmates and six former or present 
Department of Corrections employees.  Among the latter 
were Brenda Makins, head of the investigatory committee, 
whose report was introduced into evidence.  Daskalea also 
called as a witness defendant Moore, who, among other 
things, testified about the district court's findings and order 
in the Women Prisoners case;  the order itself was entered 

into evidence.  Defendants introduced no evidence.  The jury 
found them liable on all counts and awarded $350,000 in 
compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive damages.  
Defendants moved for judgment as a matter of law or, in the 
alternative, for a new trial or remittitur on the ground that 
the damages award was excessive.  The court denied the 
motion.

     In this court, defendants press most of the arguments they 
advanced below.  In particular, they deny liability under 
section 1983, deny liability under the common law of the 
District, assert immunity against punitive damages, and con-
tend that Director Moore cannot be held personally liable 
because she was sued solely in her official capacity.  We 
consider each of these contentions below.

                                II

     We begin with an examination of the issues raised by the 
District regarding the jury's finding of liability and award of 
damages under 42 U.S.C. s 1983.

                                A

     Section 1 of the Civil Rights Act of 1871, now codified at 42 
U.S.C. s 1983, provides a cause of action for monetary dam-
ages and injunctive relief against "[e]very person who, under 
color of [law] ... subjects or causes to be subjected, any 
person ... to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or 
immunities secured by the Constitution...."  The District 
does not dispute that the guards who assaulted and torment-
ed plaintiff violated her Eighth Amendment right to be free 
of "cruel and unusual punishments."  U.S. Const. amend. 
VIII;  see Hudson v. McMillian, 503 U.S. 1, 7-9 (1992) 
(holding Eighth Amendment is violated, even in the absence 
of serious injury, when guard uses force against prisoner 
maliciously and sadistically to cause harm, rather than in 
good-faith effort to maintain discipline);  Schwenk v. Hart-
ford, 204 F.3d 1187, 1196-97 (9th Cir. 2000) (holding guard's 
attempted rape of prisoner constituted Eighth Amendment 

violation).  The only question is whether the District may be 
held liable for that violation.3

     There is also no disagreement over the appropriate stan-
dard for determining whether the District may be held liable.  
In Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 
(1978), the Supreme Court ruled that a municipality is a 
"person" who can be held liable under section 1983, but only 
when the municipality's "policy or custom ... inflicts the 
injury."  Id. at 694.  In subsequent cases, the Supreme Court 
and this court have held that a city's inaction, including its 
failure to train or supervise its employees adequately, consti-
tutes a "policy or custom" under Monell when it can be said 
that the failure amounts to " 'deliberate indifference' towards 
the constitutional rights of persons in its domain."  City of 
Canton v. Harris, 489 U.S. 378, 388-89 & n.7 (1989) (recog-
nizing municipal liability under s 1983 for failure to train 
adequately);  see Rogala v. District of Columbia, 161 F.3d 44, 
56 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (recognizing liability for failure to train or 
supervise);  Triplett v. District of Columbia, 108 F.3d 1450, 
1453 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (noting that "inaction giving rise to or 
endorsing a custom" can be basis of s 1983 liability).4

     The District has no objection to the manner in which the 
jury was charged on the question of municipal liability.  Its 
only contention is that there was insufficient evidence upon 
which to base a finding of deliberate indifference, and that the 
magistrate should therefore have granted its motion for judg-
ment as a matter of law under Federal Rule of Civil Proce-
dure 50(a).  We review de novo a trial court's ruling on such a 
motion.  See United States ex rel. Yesudian v. Howard Univ., 
153 F.3d 731, 735 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  Because granting judg-
ment as a matter of law "intrudes upon the rightful province 
of the jury, it is highly disfavored."  Id. (quoting Boodoo v. 

__________
     3  Although plaintiff's complaint also asserted violations of due 
process and equal protection under the Fifth Amendment, only the 
Eighth Amendment issue was submitted to the jury.

     4  See also Atchinson v. District of Columbia, 73 F.3d 418, 419 
(D.C. Cir. 1996) (failure to train);  Parker v. District of Columbia, 
850 F.2d 708, 712 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (same).

Cary, 21 F.3d 1157, 1161 (D.C. Cir. 1994)).  It "is warranted 
only if 'no reasonable juror could reach the verdict rendered 
in th[e] case.' "  Id. (quoting Anderson v. Group Hospitaliza-
tion, Inc., 820 F.2d 465, 473 (D.C. Cir. 1987)).

     We conclude that the jury had more than sufficient evi-
dence upon which to base its finding of deliberate indiffer-
ence.  Only seven months prior to Daskalea's forced strip-
tease, a federal district court had found the District liable 
under section 1983 for being deliberately indifferent to the 
repeated sexual abuse and harassment of women prisoners by 
D.C. correctional officers.  The court noted a failure to train 
officers to prevent such misconduct, and ordered the District 
to take all steps necessary to prevent sexual harassment of 
female prisoners, including the institution of mandatory train-
ing.  Given this history, the District and its policymakers 
were on notice that D.C. guards lacked basic respect for the 
rights of female inmates, and that absent substantial inter-
vention, the pattern of unconstitutional behavior would per-
sist.

     Notwithstanding the court's unequivocal findings and or-
der, the sexual abuse of women prisoners at Southeast 1 
continued in an open and notorious manner.  The use of the 
library for sexual trysts between guards and inmates was well 
known.  Nude dancing incidents, accompanied by blaring 
music and raucous crowds, took place on a regular basis.  
There was no evidence that a training program or any other 
corrective measure was implemented.  Daskalea repeatedly 
complained of sexual abuse, sending grievance forms and 
letters to everyone from correctional officers to the Deputy 
Warden, Warden, and Director of the Department.  Given 
the notice afforded by the Women Prisoners order and 
Daskalea's own letters, and the open and notorious nature of 
the continued abuse, a jury could reasonably have concluded 
that the District was deliberately indifferent to the constitu-
tional rights of its women prisoners.  See Canton, 489 U.S. at 
390 n.10 (recognizing municipal liability where officers "so 
often violate constitutional rights that the need for further 
training must have been plainly obvious to the city policymak-
ers");  Atchinson, 73 F.3d at 421 (same);  see also Board of 

County Comm'rs v. Brown, 520 U.S. 397, 407-08 (1997) 
(recognizing that "the existence of a pattern of tortious 
conduct by inadequately trained employees may tend to show 
that the lack of proper training ... is the 'moving force' 
behind the plaintiff's injury");  id. at 407 (noting that "munici-
pal decisionmakers['].... continued adherence to an ap-
proach that they know or should know has failed to prevent 
tortious conduct by employees may establish the conscious 
disregard for the consequences of their action--the 'deliber-
ate indifference'--necessary to trigger municipal liability").

     Finally, the jury had additional, direct evidence from which 
it could have concluded that the District's policymakers were 
indifferent to the plight of women in the Jail, and specifically 
to the plight of Sunday Daskalea.  Margaret Moore, Director 
of the Department of Corrections, testified at the trial.  Not-
withstanding the notoriety of the incident, Moore conceded 
that she had not read the Makins Report and had not 
familiarized herself with the events at issue.  Moreover, 
notwithstanding the findings of the report, Moore pronounced 
herself unaware of the multiple nude dancing incidents that 
preceded Daskalea's humiliation, and she took no action to 
protect Daskalea from the subsequent harassment and soli-
tary confinement that a jury reasonably could have regarded 
as retaliation for Daskalea's complaints.

     The District's principal defense to section 1983 liability is 
that, because the abuses in this case were committed by 
female guards, while those in Women Prisoners were commit-
ted by males, Women Prisoners did not sufficiently put it on 
notice of the kind of constitutional violations that Daskalea 
would suffer.  We reject this argument as cutting the notice 
issue much too finely.  Moreover, its premise is factually 
inaccurate:  several of the incidents in this case did involve 
male-on-female harassment.  To take but three examples:  
the librarian who demanded sexual favors of Daskalea was a 
male;  the guard who brought her to the library to be 
attacked by a male prisoner was a male;  and the group of 
guards and other employees who were "entertained" by Das-
kalea's forced striptease included several males.

     The District also attempts to turn the very court order that 
required it to issue a harassment policy into a defense against 
liability for its guards' harassment.  Because the Department 
of Corrections eventually did issue such a policy, the District 
argues, it is clear that sexual harassment was against District 
"policy" and hence may not be the subject of a section 1983 
action.  This argument has two flaws.  First, the policy upon 
which the District relies was not issued until well after many 
of the events of which Daskalea complains.  Second, a "pa-
per" policy cannot insulate a municipality from liability where 
there is evidence, as there was here, that the municipality was 
deliberately indifferent to the policy's violation.  See Ware v. 
Jackson County, 150 F.3d 873, 882 (8th Cir. 1998) ("[T]he 
existence of written policies of a defendant are of no moment 
in the face of evidence that such policies are neither followed 
nor enforced.").  That evidence included not only the contin-
ued blatant violation of the policy, but also the fact that the 
policy was never posted, that some guards did not recall 
receiving it, that inmates never received it, and that there 
was no evidence of the training that was supposed to accom-
pany it.  Indeed, the Department purportedly had a "policy" 
against sexual harassment even before the court order in 
Women Prisoners--a policy that court found to have been "of 
little value."  877 F. Supp. at 640.

     The District makes one further attempt at legal jujitsu--
trying to turn Daskalea's evidence against her by arguing 
that the very fact that guards sought to conceal the July 20 
incident is proof that the abuse was only undertaken "by a 
small group of rogue employees, acting surreptitiously."  Re-
ply Br. at 16.  In Triplett v. District of Columbia, we did note 
that "[c]over-up efforts at relatively low levels in the hierar-
chy not only reduce the likelihood that policymakers will 
learn of the covert practice, but suggest a belief by the 
subordinates that their behavior violates established policy."  
108 F.3d 1450, 1453 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  But here the miscon-
duct can hardly be described as that of a few "rogues."  The 
District's own investigative committee charged fourteen 
guards with "aiding and abetting" sexual misconduct and/or 
assault, and charged several more--including supervisors and 

lieutenants--with negligence.  Moreover, whatever the par-
ticipants did to cover up the July 20 incident, the series of 
bacchanalian nights that preceded it was open and notorious, 
and the jury could reasonably have concluded that if such 
behavior were not known to prison policymakers, it was only 
because of their deliberate indifference to conditions at the 
Jail.  Accordingly, we affirm the jury's verdict against the 
District under 42 U.S.C. s 1983. 5

                                B

     The District urges that even if we affirm the jury's finding 
of liability, we should grant a new trial with respect to the 
amount of the compensatory damages award.  We review 
trial courts' rulings on motions for new trial only for an abuse 
of discretion.  See Langevine v. District of Columbia, 106 
F.3d 1018, 1023 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  A jury award must stand 
unless it is "beyond all reason" or "so great as to shock the 
conscience."  Williams v. Steuart Motor Co., 494 F.2d 1074, 
1085 (D.C. Cir. 1974).  "Courts may not set aside a jury 
verdict merely deemed generous;  rather, the verdict must be 
so unreasonably high as to result in a miscarriage of justice."  
Langevine, 106 F.3d at 1024 (citing Barry v. Edmunds, 116 
U.S. 550, 565 (1886)).  And remittitur of a jury verdict is 
appropriate only if the verdict "is so inordinately large as 
obviously to exceed the maximum limit of a reasonable range 
within which the jury may properly operate."  Id. at 1024 
(internal quotation omitted);  see Carter v. District of Colum-
bia, 795 F.2d 116, 135 n.13 (D.C. Cir. 1986).

     The District argues that there was insufficient evidence to 
justify a compensatory award of $350,000 because Daskalea 

__________
     5  The District also contends that proof of its adherence to the 
harassment policy is demonstrated by the fact that employees were 
disciplined for its violation.  But while there was some evidence 
that discipline followed the July 20 incident, too late to be of any 
comfort to Daskalea, the only person identified as having been 
terminated was Brenda Makins--the author of the investigative 
report that found serious wrongdoing at the Jail--allegedly because 
she had lied about her home address.

"suffered no physical injury," because her damages evidence 
was limited to her own testimony, and because she did not 
establish a "causal link" between the unlawful acts and the 
harm she suffered.  We disagree.

     First, it is well established that "mental and emotional 
distress" are "compensable under s 1983," even in the ab-
sence of physical injury.  Carey v. Piphus, 435 U.S. 247, 264 
(1978);  see Gray v. Spillman, 925 F.2d 90, 94 (4th Cir. 1991) 
(noting that "even in the absence of physical injury," plaintiff 
may prove actual damages under s 1983 "based on injuries 
such as 'personal humiliation' and 'mental anguish and suffer-
ing' ") (quoting Memphis Community Sch. Dist. v. Stachura, 
477 U.S. 299, 307 (1986)).  Moreover, Daskalea plainly did 
suffer "physical" injury through sexual assault.  If what the 
District means is that she did not suffer permanent injury 
from such attacks, we emphatically disagree with the proposi-
tion that a person may not recover damages for a constitu-
tional violation unless she suffers lasting physical harm.

     Second, no expert testimony was required to bolster that of 
Daskalea and her witnesses, or to show the causal link 
between her treatment in prison and her injuries.  See Price 
v. City of Charlotte, 93 F.3d 1241, 1251 (4th Cir. 1996) ("A 
survey of the case law reveals that a plaintiff's testimony, 
standing alone, may support a claim of emotional distress 
precipitated by a constitutional violation.") (collecting cases).  
The unrebutted evidence showed that she was subjected to 
continuing sexual abuse and harassment, was denied library 
assistance because she refused to have sex with the librarian, 
was set up by correctional officers to be assaulted, was 
attacked with the assistance of correctional officers, was 
forced to perform a striptease for guards and inmates, and 
thereafter was confined in isolation without underwear or a 
mattress.  Daskalea testified that, as a result, she felt con-
stant stress, anxiety, and dread of imminent sexual attack.  
She had to sleep during the day for fear of what the guards 
might do at night.  After her release, she suffered from 
insomnia and eating disorders, and spent months emotionally 
and psychologically debilitated, withdrawn, and depressed.  
These injuries are hardly surprising or unexpected in light of 

the abuse Daskalea suffered, and it does not take an expert to 
confirm the jury's common sense with respect to both their 
existence and cause.

     Finally, we have no basis for questioning the amount of the 
jury's award.  The jury's valuation of Daskalea's damages 
"was neither beyond all reason nor so great as to shock the 
conscience."  Langevine, 106 F.3d at 1024 (affirming award of 
$200,000 under s 1983 for, inter alia, pain, suffering, humilia-
tion, and emotional distress, despite only minor physical 
injury arising from single incident).  Indeed, a "court must be 
especially hesitant to disturb a jury's determination of dam-
ages in cases involving intangible and non-economic injuries."  
Id.  The magistrate's denial of the District's motion for a new 
trial is therefore affirmed.6

                               III

     In addition to finding the District liable for violating section 
1983, the jury found it liable on Daskalea's pendent claim for 
negligent supervision under the common law.  The damages 
verdict did not distinguish between the grounds for liability, 
and Daskalea concedes that both theories represented at-
tempts to impose liability for the same predicate acts.  The 
District challenges this ground for liability as well.

     Under District of Columbia law, prison authorities have "a 
duty to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances in 
the protection and safekeeping of prisoners," Toy v. District 
of Columbia, 549 A.2d 1, 6 (D.C. 1988), including the duty "to 
use reasonable care in supervising and controlling" their 
employees, Morgan v. District of Columbia, 449 A.2d 1102, 

__________
     6  The District contends that a new trial should also be granted 
because the magistrate judge wrongly denied it an opportunity to 
cross-examine Daskalea as to whether some of the stress she 
suffered was actually caused by her alleged post-release activities 
as an informant.  We review such a claim only for abuse of 
discretion.  See United States v. White, 116 F.3d 903, 919 (D.C. Cir. 
1997).  The magistrate found the District's proposed cross-
examination to be both irrelevant and prejudicial, and we perceive 
no error.

1108 & n.3 (D.C. 1982), rev'd on other grounds, 468 A.2d 1306 
(1983) (en banc).7  The District may be held liable for dam-
ages caused by its negligence in carrying out that duty.  See 
Finkelstein v. District of Columbia, 593 A.2d 591, 594-95 
(D.C. 1991) (holding District liable for negligence in death of 
prisoner).  That the District negligently supervised its em-
ployees in this case is an a fortiori conclusion from the 
finding, discussed in Part II.A. above, that the District dis-
played deliberate indifference with respect to the treatment 
of women prisoners by correctional officers.

     The District's only real challenge to liability for negligent 
supervision is its claim that proof of the standard of care 
requires expert testimony, which Daskalea did not offer.  
That, however, is not the law of the District of Columbia.  To 
the contrary, the rule is that "[p]roof of a deviation from the 
applicable standard of care need not include expert testimony 
where the alleged negligent act is 'within the realm of com-
mon knowledge and everyday experience.' "  Toy, 549 A.2d at 
6 (quoting District of Columbia v. White, 442 A.2d 159, 164 
(D.C. 1982)).  Expert testimony is required only "where the 
subject presented is 'so distinctly related to some science, 
profession, or occupation as to be beyond the ken of the 
average layperson.' "  Id. (quoting District of Columbia v. 
Peters, 527 A.2d 1269, 1273 (D.C. 1987)).

     It is true that in cases involving assaults on prisoners by 
fellow prisoners, the District of Columbia Court of Appeals 
has held expert testimony necessary to establish the standard 
of care for "secur[ing] the safety of an inmate," because a 
"reasonably prudent juror cannot be expected to appreciate 
the ramifications of prison security."  District of Columbia v. 
Carmichael, 577 A.2d 312, 314 (D.C. 1990) (quoting Hughes, 
425 A.2d at 1303);  cf. Toy, 549 A.2d at 9 (holding expert 
testimony necessary to establish standard of care for adminis-
tration of cardiopulmonary resuscitation).  But it does not 

__________
     7  See Finkelstein v. District of Columbia, 593 A.2d 591, 594 
(D.C. 1991);  District of Columbia v. Mitchell, 533 A.2d 629, 639 
(D.C. 1987);  Hughes v. District of Columbia, 425 A.2d 1299, 1302 
(D.C. 1981).

take an expert to establish that the District was negligent in 
permitting the kind of persistent, open and notorious conduct 
at issue here.  Surely a juror could reasonably conclude that 
the District had been negligent (at best) when it failed to 
notice, let alone stop, a continuing series of evening stripteas-
es, accompanied by blaring music and guard-on-inmate vio-
lence.  See Morgan, 449 A.2d at 1106, 1109 (stating that 
expert testimony is not required to establish "standard of 
care for control and supervision of police officers" because 
"[d]iscipline of police officers ... is not a matter which 
laymen are incapable of intelligently evaluating without the 
assistance of expert testimony") (internal quotation omitted).

     Nor did Daskalea's jury have to rely only upon its common 
sense.  As we have noted, the Department's own investigat-
ing committee concluded that eight officers, ranging from 
corporals to lieutenants, had been negligent, and that the 
"misconduct/assault was effected due to," among other things, 
"poorly trained supervisors."  Moreover, Patricia Jackson, 
Deputy Warden at the time of the events in question, testified 
that she agreed with the committee that the supervision had 
been inadequate, that officers were negligent, and that the 
Jail was grossly negligent in protecting women from sexual 
misconduct.

     The District also attacks the amount of damages awarded 
for negligent supervision, noting that the District of Columbia 
Code bars local law claims against the District unless, within 
six months after the injury, the potential claimant gives notice 
in writing of the "circumstances."  D.C. Code s 12-309;  see 
Gross v. District of Columbia, 734 A.2d 1077, 1081 (D.C. 
1999).  Because Daskalea did not send the required notice 
until November 21, 1995, the District contends she cannot 
recover for any injuries suffered before May 21 of that year.  
We need not resolve the merits of this contention, however, 
as it has no bearing on the result in this case.  The six-month 
notice requirement of the D.C. Code does not apply to 
plaintiff's claim under section 1983, see Brown v. United 
States, 742 F.2d 1498, 1509 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (en banc), and 

that cause of action therefore provides an independent basis 
for the full amount of the damages award. 8

                                IV

     In addition to compensatory damages, the jury awarded 
Daskalea $5 million in punitive damages for her D.C. common 
law claims.  In this Part, we consider the permissibility of 
that award.

     Daskalea did not seek punitive damages under 42 U.S.C. 
s 1983, conceding that she was not eligible for them in light 
of the Supreme Court's decision in City of Newport v. Fact 
Concerts, Inc., 453 U.S. 247 (1981).  See Daskalea Br. at 19.  
In Fact Concerts, the Court considered whether punitive 
damages may be awarded against municipalities under section 
1983.  It began by noting that municipalities had long been 
held immune from punitive damages under the law of the 
"vast majority" of the states.  453 U.S. at 259-60.  It then 
surveyed the rationales for that result, declaring that "puni-
tive damages imposed on a municipality are in effect a 
windfall to a fully compensated plaintiff[,] are likely accompa-
nied by an increase in taxes or a reduction of public services 
for the citizens footing the bill," and punish only the "blame-
less or unknowing taxpayers" rather than the true wrong-
doer, the offending government official.  Id. at 267.  Finding 
the same principles applicable to suits brought under section 
1983, the Supreme Court concluded that "a municipality is 
immune from punitive damages" under that statute as well.  
Id. at 271.  In a footnote, the Court preserved a potential 
exception:  "It is perhaps possible to imagine an extreme 
situation where the taxpayers are directly responsible for 
perpetrating an outrageous abuse of constitutional rights."  
Id. at 267 n.29

     The District contends that it is immune from punitive 
damages for the common law tort of negligent supervision, 

__________
     8  For the same reason, we need not address Daskalea's com-
mon law claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress, which 
involves the same predicate acts and produces no difference in the 
damages award.

just as it is for a violation of section 1983.  As the District 
points out, the D.C. Court of Appeals has never permitted 
such an award.  In Smith v. District of Columbia, 336 A.2d 
831 (D.C. 1975), a case decided before Fact Concerts, the 
Court of Appeals rejected a claim against the District for 
punitive damages resulting from false arrest and assault.  
The court noted that "[t]he clear weight of authority in the 
states is that as a general rule there can be no recovery of 
punitive damages against a municipality absent a statute 
expressly authorizing it."  336 A.2d at 832.  It then proceed-
ed to quote six paragraphs from a Florida Supreme Court 
opinion explaining the rationales for such immunity--ratio-
nales similar to those later surveyed by the U.S. Supreme 
Court in Fact Concerts.  See 336 A.2d at 832 (quoting Fisher 
v. City of Miami, 172 So. 2d 455, 457 (Fla. 1965)).9 On the 
basis of the Florida court's rationales, the D.C. Court of 
Appeals concluded:  "Absent extraordinary circumstances not 
present here, we agree with the weight of authority and 
conclude the District of Columbia is not liable for punitive 
damages."  Id. at 832.

     The District argues that notwithstanding the Court of 
Appeals' caveat--"absent extraordinary circumstances not 
present here"--punitive damages are never available against 
the District for wrongs committed by its employees.  That 
argument is not without support.  The Florida opinion upon 
which Smith rested held municipalities wholly immune in the 
absence of a legislative authorization.  See Fisher, 172 So. 2d 
at 457.  And in a subsequent en banc opinion, the D.C. Court 
of Appeals stated, this time without qualification, albeit in 
dictum, that:  "punitive damages may not be awarded against 
the District of Columbia."  Finkelstein v. District of Colum-
bia, 593 A.2d 591, 599 (D.C. 1991) (en banc) (citing Smith, 336 
A.2d at 832).  The following year, the court again rejected a 
claim for punitive damages against the District, citing Fact 
Concerts as "reaffirming [the] common law principle that 

__________
     9  Fact Concerts cited both Smith and Fisher as examples of 
"[j]udicial disinclination to award punitive damages against a munic-
ipality."  453 U.S. at 260 & n.21.

municipalities [are] immune from punitive damages."  Ramos 
v. District of Columbia Dep't of Consumer and Regulatory 
Affairs, 601 A.2d 1069, 1074 n.9 (D.C. 1992).

     We need not go as far as the District urges to resolve this 
case.  Even if the D.C. Court of Appeals would permit 
punitive damages in some not-yet-presented category of "ex-
traordinary" cases, we are unable to conclude that this case 
would fit within that category.  That is not, in any way, to 
minimize the offensiveness of the District's conduct here.  
But this is not a case that falls within the exception noted in 
Fact Concerts, where a jurisdiction's taxpayers are directly 
responsible for perpetrating the policies that caused the 
plaintiff's injuries.  Nor is this a case where a municipality or 
its policymakers have intentionally adopted the unconstitu-
tional policy that caused the damages in question.10  Rather, 
this is a case where the charge against the District is "delib-
erate indifference," and the D.C. Court of Appeals has given 
no hint that it would permit an award of punitive damages in 
such a case--if it would permit such an award at all.  Because 
our role in deciding a pendent District of Columbia claim is 
only to ascertain what District law is, "not what it ought to 
be," Women Prisoners, 93 F.3d at 922 (quoting Klaxon Co. v. 
Stentor Elec. Mfg. Co., 313 U.S. 487, 497 (1941)), we are 
unable to do for Daskalea what the D.C. Court of Appeals has 
never done for any plaintiff.

                                V

     The other named defendant in this case, Margaret Moore, 
served at all relevant times as the Director of the D.C. 
Department of Corrections.  The jury returned a general 

__________
     10  Cf. Kolstad v. American Dental Ass'n, 119 S.Ct. 2118, 2125-
26 (1999) (noting that "[t]he justification of exemplary damages lies 
in the evil intent of the defendant") (internal quotation omitted);  
Rieser v. District of Columbia, 563 F.2d 462, 481-82 (D.C. Cir. 
1977) (declining to find "extraordinary circumstances" justifying 
punitive damages against District, notwithstanding parole officers' 
breach of duty leading to murder of plaintiff's daughter), vacated 
then reinstated in relevant part by en banc court, 580 F.2d 647 
(D.C. Cir. 1978).

verdict finding "defendants" liable on all counts.  Moore and 
the District contend that Moore was sued solely in her official 
capacity, and hence cannot be held personally liable for the 
damages award.  Daskalea contends that she sued Moore in 
her individual (personal) capacity, and that Moore therefore is 
liable not only for the $350,000 in compensatory damages, but 
also--because she is not an immune municipality--for $5 
million in punitive damages.  See generally Kentucky v. Gra-
ham, 473 U.S. 159, 165-66 (1985) (holding that a government 
official may be held personally liable only if sued in an 
individual rather than official capacity);  Atchinson v. District 
of Columbia, 73 F.3d 418, 424 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (same);  Esk-
ridge v. Jackson, 401 A.2d 986, 989 n.7 (D.C. 1979) (same 
under D.C. law);  Keith v. Washington, 401 A.2d 468, 470-71 
(D.C. 1979) (same).  The magistrate judge agreed with Das-
kalea and held Moore personally liable for the entire amount 
of both awards.

     Neither the complaint nor any other pleading filed by 
plaintiff indicates whether Moore was charged in her official 
or her individual capacity.  In some circuits, that would be 
the end of the matter, as they require a plaintiff who seeks 
personal liability to plead specifically that the suit is brought 
against the defendant in her individual capacity.11  Although 
it has not definitively resolved the issue, see Hafer v. Melo, 
502 U.S. 21, 24 n.* (1991), the Supreme Court has typically 
looked instead to the "course of proceedings" to determine 
the nature of an action.  See Graham, 473 U.S. at 167 n.14;  
Brandon v. Holt, 469 U.S. 464, 469 (1985).  Following the 
Supreme Court's lead, this circuit has joined those of its 
sisters that employ the "course of proceedings" approach.  
See Atchinson, 73 F.3d at 425.12  Like the Supreme Court, 

__________
     11  See Soper ex rel. Soper v. Hoben, 195 F.3d 845, 853 (6th Cir. 
1999) ("Generally, plaintiffs must designate in which capacity they 
are suing defendants;  if not, by operation of law, defendants are 
deemed sued in their official capacities.");  see also Hafer v. Melo, 
502 U.S. 21, 24 n.* (1991) (citing Wells v. Brown, 891 F.2d 591, 592 
(6th Cir. 1989);  Nix v. Norman, 879 F.2d 429, 431 (8th Cir. 1989)).

     12  See Biggs v. Meadows, 66 F.3d 56, 61 (4th Cir. 1995) (examin-
ing "the nature of the plaintiff's claims, the relief sought, and the 

however, we remind litigants that "it is obviously preferable 
for the plaintiff to be specific in the first instance to avoid any 
ambiguity."  Hafer, 502 U.S. at 24 n.* (internal quotation 
omitted).

     We conclude that the course of proceedings in this case 
neither put Moore on notice that she was being sued in her 
individual capacity, nor evidenced her understanding that her 
personal liability was at stake.  As noted, the complaint itself 
did not give her such a warning, stating only that "Defendant 
Moore is the Director of the D.C. Department of Corrections 
and is responsible for the overall operation of that Depart-
ment and each institution of which it is comprised, including 
the D.C. Jail."  Nor did the complaint seek to hold the 
defendants jointly and severally liable, a formulation that 
might have given some indication of an intention to sue Moore 
in her personal capacity.  See Atchinson, 73 F.3d at 425.  
Indeed, at several points the complaint refers to "defendant's 
failure" in the possessive singular, suggesting that plaintiff 
viewed Moore and the District as interchangeable.  See 
Compl. p p 21, 23, 25, 27.

     Daskalea contends that the fact that Moore was named at 
all indicates an intention to hold her personally liable, because 
naming Moore would have added nothing to the available 
damages if she had been named only in her official capacity.  
Although the latter point is true, it does not prove the former.  
Complaints often include surplusage.  Indeed, it is not un-
common for civil rights complaints to name both the munici-
pality and an officer charged in his or her official capacity.  
On occasion this may be due to a misunderstanding of the law 
of section 1983, but it also may be done in an effort to 

__________
course of proceedings");  Jackson v. Georgia Dep't of Transp., 16 
F.3d 1573, 1575 (11th Cir. 1994);  Frank v. Relin, 1 F.3d 1317, 1326 
(2d Cir. 1993);  see also Hafer, 502 U.S. at 24 n.* (citing Houston v. 
Reich, 932 F.2d 883, 885 (10th Cir. 1991);  Melo v. Hafer, 912 F.2d 
628, 635-36 (3rd Cir. 1990);  Conner v. Reinhard, 847 F.2d 384, 394 
n.8 (7th Cir. 1988);  Lundgren v. McDaniel, 814 F.2d 600, 603-604 
(11th Cir. 1987)).

"personalize" the otherwise faceless municipal entity being 
sued.13

     Once the complaint was filed, attorneys for the District 
repeatedly expressed their understanding that Moore had 
been sued solely in her official capacity.  District counsel 
expressed that understanding in their answer to the com-
plaint.  See J.A. at 511 (stating that Moore had been "sued 
solely in her official capacity").  They did so again in their 
trial brief, specifically noting that because plaintiff "has sued 
only the District and the Director of the Department of 
Corrections in her official capacity, plaintiff's claim is gov-
erned by the standards set forth in Monell."  J.A. at 43.  And 
they did so yet again, with great clarity, on four occasions 
during the trial.14  Not once, prior to rebuttal argument, did 
Daskalea's attorney dispute opposing counsel's characteriza-
tion of the nature of the case.  To the contrary, plaintiff's own 
trial brief, which addressed only one claim, mentioned only a 
single defendant--the District of Columbia.  See Pl. Trial Br. 
at 1 (Jan. 12, 1998).

     Moreover, both Moore and her counsel plainly acted on the 
understanding that she had been sued solely in an official 
capacity.  Moore did not hire separate counsel, but relied 

__________
     13  The fact that the complaint sought punitive damages did not 
put Moore on notice that she was being sued in her individual 
capacity.  Although we hold in Part IV that such damages are 
unavailable against the District (or against Moore if sued in an 
official capacity), Daskalea prosecuted the case on the understand-
ing that punitive damages would be available against the District if 
she succeeded on a negligent supervision theory.

     14  Those four occasions were:  (1) before jury selection, see Tr. 
at 8-9 (Court:  "So it is only Margaret Moore?"  D.C. Counsel:  "In 
her official capacity.");  (2) when Moore testified, see J.A. at 216 
("Ms. Moore is also named as a defendant in her official capacity.");  
(3) when moving for directed verdict at the close of plaintiff's 
evidence, see J.A. at 359 ("Margaret Moore's sued solely in her 
official capacity.");  and (4) in closing argument, see Trial Tr. at 902 
("She is sued in this case in official capacity, which means that she's 
sued just because she's the head of the Department of Correc-
tions.").

instead upon the District of Columbia Office of Corporation 
Counsel, which represented the District in the case.  Al-
though joint representation would not necessarily have been 
unusual even if Moore had been sued individually, it would 
have raised potential conflicts that would have had to have 
been addressed.  See Atchinson, 73 F.3d at 427 ("[N]aming 
the officials in their individual capacities ... may make 
continued joint representation problematic, if not impossible.  
A municipality and officials named individually may have 
mutually exclusive defenses.").

     Corporation Counsel certainly defended the case as if 
Moore had nothing personally at risk.  A government official 
sued under section 1983 has available to her the defense of 
qualified immunity, a defense unavailable in an official-
capacity suit.  See Graham, 473 U.S. at 166-167;  Atchinson, 
73 F.3d at 425.  Corporation Counsel did not offer that 
defense on Moore's behalf, notwithstanding that it surely 
would have been at least colorable had she been sued individ-
ually.  Nor did Corporation Counsel (or plaintiff's counsel, for 
that matter) seek to introduce evidence of Moore's personal 
finances, despite the fact that punitive damages awards are 
supposed to be based on a defendant's "personal financial 
resources."  Fact Concerts, 453 U.S. at 269;  see also Jona-
than Woodner Co. v. Breeden, 665 A.2d 929, 940 (D.C. 1995).  
Other than assuming complete incompetence (as well as gross 
malpractice) on the part of Moore's attorneys, the only expla-
nation for these lapses must have been their perception that 
Moore had been sued in her official capacity alone.

     As against all of this, Daskalea draws our attention to a 
pretrial deposition at which counsel focused on the specifics of 
Moore's involvement, as well as to a pretrial conference at 
which her lawyer told lawyers for the District that "we're 
coming dead at your directors," and that "your Director was 
negligent."  These events did not, however, serve to put 
Director Moore on notice that plaintiff was seeking to hold 
her individually liable:  Moore's personal involvement, even 
her personal negligence, was equally relevant to proving the 
District's own deliberate indifference and negligent supervi-
sion.

     Finally, Daskalea calls our attention to her counsel's closing 
rebuttal argument, during which he told the jury:  "Margaret 
Moore is an actor here.  Margaret Moore is responsible for 
this.  Margaret Moore isn't some figurehead...."  Even if 
this were enough to make Moore's personal stake clear, it was 
simply too late to do so in a rebuttal argument--the last piece 
of advocacy prior to the jury's deliberations.  By that time it 
was too late for Moore to hire separate counsel, to proffer a 
defense of qualified immunity, or to introduce evidence that 
her personal assets did not approach $5 million.  Indeed, by 
that time it was too late for Moore's counsel to respond in any 
way at all.  Such notice can hardly be characterized as fair.  
See Atchinson, 73 F.3d at 427-28 (affirming denial, due to 
concern for prejudice, of plaintiff's motion to amend complaint 
to name official in individual capacity shortly before trial).  
Accordingly, we reverse the award of damages against Moore 
in her individual capacity.

                                VI

     Sexual assault, forced naked dancing, and the other indigni-
ties borne by Sunday Daskalea at the District of Columbia 
Jail are "simply not part of the penalty that criminal offend-
ers pay for their offenses against society."  Farmer v. Bren-
nan, 511 U.S. 825, 834 (1994) (internal quotation omitted);  see 
Women Prisoners, 93 F.3d at 929.  To the contrary, "when 
the State takes a person into its custody and holds [her] there 
against [her] will, the Constitution imposes upon it a corre-
sponding duty to assume some responsibility for [her] safety 
and general well-being."  DeShaney v. Winnebago County 
Dep't of Soc. Servs., 489 U.S. 189, 199-200 (1989).  Because 
the evidence at trial established that the District of Columbia 
wholly failed to live up to that responsibility, we affirm in full 
the jury's award of $350,000 in compensatory damages.  At 
the same time, however, District law requires us to reverse 
the award of punitive damages, and plaintiff's failure to sue 
co-defendant Moore in her individual capacity means that the 
District alone is responsible for payment.

                                                     