                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 11, 2002    Decided January 21, 2003 

                           No. 01-1163

         Duke Energy Trading and Marketing, L.L.C., and 
                American Natural Gas Corporation, 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

          PG&E Gas Transmission, Northwest Corporation 
                            Intervenor

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Gordon J. Smith argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.

     Laura J. Vallance, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on 

the brief were Cynthia A. Marlette, General Counsel, and 
Dennis Lane, Solicitor.

     Lee A. Alexander, Stefan M. Krantz, and Debra H. Rednik 
were on the brief for intervenor.  Carl M. Fink entered an 
appearance.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Duke Energy Trading & Market-
ing, L.L.C. (Duke) and American Natural Gas Corporation 
(ANG) petition for review of a Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission (FERC or the Commission) order accepting a 
tariff filing from PG&E Gas Transmission, Northwest Corpo-
ration (PG&E). PG&E Gas Transmission, Northwest Corp., 
93 F.E.R.C. p 61,072 (2000), reh'g denied, 94 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,114 (2001).  The order under review allows PG&E to 
eliminate its queue system for allocating interruptible trans-
mission (IT) capacity among maximum rate bidders and to 
replace it with pro rata allocation.  We find that FERC acted 
reasonably in accepting PG&E's filing and thus deny the 
petition for review.

                          I. Background

     PG&E operates a natural gas pipeline running 612 miles 
from the Washington/Canada border to the border between 
Oregon and California.  On its pipeline, PG&E sells two 
primary types of natural gas transportation capacity-firm and 
interruptible.  Firm capacity is purchased on a monthly basis 
and cannot be interrupted or curtailed except in limited 
circumstances. Interruptible capacity can be interrupted 
when necessary to provide service to higher priority custom-
ers, such as firm customers.  Interruptible capacity is bid for 
as needed, rather than purchased monthly.  PG&E's gas 
tariff sets the maximum per-mile rates PG&E can charge for 
its interruptible transportation services.  The total amount a 
shipper pays for service, and thus the revenue generated, is 
derived by multiplying the per-mile bid by the number of 
miles the gas is to be transported.

     Prior to the proceedings under review, PG&E allocated IT 
capacity first to shippers bidding the maximum per-mile rate, 
regardless of distance, and hence regardless of revenue.  
PG&E then allocated any remaining capacity to shippers 
bidding less than the maximum per-mile tariff rate by rank-
ing bids based on total revenue.  Ties between bidders, at 
both the maximum and sub-maximum rates, were broken 
according to a shipper's position in the IT queue.  Thus, if 
two shippers' bids were tied, the shipper with the higher 
position in the queue would be allocated the IT capacity.  
Queue positions were determined by a lottery held by PG&E 
in 1987.  See Pacific Gas Transmission Co., 40 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,193 (1987).  In that lottery, ANG won the highest posi-
tion in the queue.  Duke later acquired ANG.

     On March 1, 2000, PG&E submitted a tariff filing pursuant 
to Section 4 of the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. s 717c (2000), 
seeking to change its IT capacity allocation method.  PG&E 
proposed to use the system it employed to rank sub-maximum 
rate bidders to rank bids from maximum rate bidders as well.  
Under this "revenue-based" or "distance-based" proposal, 
allocation would be determined by net revenue generated per 
dekatherm, with net revenue being determined by multiplying 
the distance in pipeline miles from the receipt point to the 
delivery point by the rate bid plus surcharges.  Consequent-
ly, a long-haul maximum rate bidder would always defeat a 
shorter-haul maximum rate bidder, because the long-haul 
shipper's total bid would always generate greater revenue.  If 
any ties remained between bids generating the same net 
revenue, capacity would be allocated pro rata-that is, each 
tied bidder would receive a proportionate share of the re-
maining capacity.  In sum, under PG&E's filing, the IT queue 
would be replaced with revenue-based allocation followed by a 
pro rata tiebreaker.

     On September 14, 2000, FERC rejected PG&E's proposal. 
See PG&E Gas Transmission, Northwest Corp., 92 F.E.R.C. 
p 61,202 (2000) (PG&E I).  In PG&E I, FERC focused almost 
exclusively on its concern that extending revenue-based allo-
cation to maximum rate bidders would unduly discriminate 
against short-haul shippers whose bids could never generate 

more revenue than longer-haul shippers.1  See id. at 61,677.  
Even though FERC rejected PG&E's revenue-based alloca-
tion mechanism, the rejection was "without prejudice to 
PG&E[ ] making a new filing to modify its proposal to include 
an alternate allocation mechanism," id., and FERC explicitly 
noted that it had "accepted other methods of allocating 
capacity when shippers all bid the maximum rate, such as pro 
rata," id. at 61,676.

     Shortly thereafter, PG&E submitted a new tariff filing that 
replaced the queue with simple pro rata allocation among all 
maximum rate bidders.  Under this proposal, each maximum 
rate bidder would receive a proportionate share of capacity 
regardless of revenue generated by its total bid. Petitioners 
lodged a protest arguing that PG&E's new proposal was 
identical to the filing rejected in PG&E I because both 
proposals contained an element of pro rata allocation and 
resulted in elimination of the IT queue.  Petitioners also 
contended that continued use of the IT queue would promote 
FERC's efficiency goals better than pro rata allocation.

     On October 25, 2000, FERC approved PG&E's filing over 
petitioners' protest, rejecting petitioners' argument that 
PG&E's filing was identical to the filing in PG&E I.  PG&E 
Gas Transmission, Northwest Corp., 93 F.E.R.C. p 61,072, at 
61,187 (2000) (PG&E II).  In addition, FERC reasoned that 
pro rata allocation would eliminate the need for a complex 
queue and improve efficiency along the pipeline by allocating 
capacity based on willingness to pay rather than queue posi-
tion.  Id.  Finally, FERC relied on its own precedent finding 
the pro rata method to be a just and reasonable means of 
allocating interruptible capacity among tied bidders.  Id.

     FERC denied petitioners' request for rehearing, PG&E 
Gas Transmission, Northwest Corp., 94 F.E.R.C. p 61,114 
(2001) (Rehearing Order), and petitioners timely sought judi-
cial review.

__________
     1 PG&E's appeal of this ruling is addressed in a companion case, 
PG&E Gas Transmission, Northwest Corp. v. FERC, __ F.3d __ 
(D.C. Cir. 2003), issued by this Court today.

                           II. Analysis

     Under Section 4 of the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. s 717c, 
a pipeline proposing a rate change has the burden of showing 
that the proposed rate is just and reasonable.  Exxon Corp. 
v. FERC, 206 F.3d 47, 51 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  "If it meets that 
burden, FERC approves the rate regardless of whether there 
may be other rates that would also be just and reasonable."  
Id.  We will uphold FERC's decision to approve a tariff filing 
unless it is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or 
otherwise not in accordance with law." 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A) 
(2000). Under this deferential standard, "the Commission 
must be able to demonstrate that it has made a reasoned 
decision based upon substantial evidence in the record."  
Northern States Power Co. v. FERC, 30 F.3d 177, 180 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994) (quotation omitted).

     Petitioners attack FERC's ruling on two grounds.  First, 
petitioners claim that FERC arbitrarily and capriciously ap-
proved the pro rata mechanism in PG&E II after rejecting 
what petitioners describe as an "identical" proposal in PG&E 
I.  Second, petitioners contend that FERC's acceptance of 
the pro rata mechanism as "just and reasonable" was arbi-
trary and capricious and unsupported by substantial evidence.  
We find neither argument persuasive.

                                A.

     Describing PG&E's second proposed tariff as "simply a 
'rerun' of the same filing" that PG&E had previously made, 
and the Commission rejected, petitioners assert that the new 
filing "should have been summarily rejected under collateral 
estoppel principles," and the Commission's acceptance of it 
was arbitrary and capricious.  Pet. Br. at 12.  This argument 
fails utterly.  Petitioners' contention that the pro rata mecha-
nism at issue here is identical to the one FERC rejected in 
PG&E I is meritless.  As FERC correctly found, the present 
proposal "no longer seeks to prioritize maximum rate bids 
based upon a distance-based allocation mechanism."  PG&E 
II, 93 F.E.R.C. at 61,187.  Rather, PG&E "solely proposes to 
implement a tie-breaking procedure for maximum bids strict-

ly on a pro rata basis."  Id.  The most superficial analysis 
demonstrates that FERC correctly found the instant proposal 
to be entirely different than the revenue-based mechanism 
followed by a pro rata tiebreaker it rejected in PG&E I.  The 
two proposals operate differently and produce vastly different 
results.  For example, envision two shippers each bidding the 
maximum per-mile rate.  Shipper A bids for 100 miles of 
transportation, while Shipper B bids for 200 miles.  Under 
PG&E's first proposal, Shipper B would always receive IT 
capacity over Shipper A because his bid would generate 
greater revenue.  Under the present pro rata proposal, by 
contrast, each shipper would receive a proportionate alloca-
tion of capacity.

     That the proposals both contain a pro rata component is 
not determinative.  The pro rata device plays a substantially 
different role in the two proposals.  Under the PG&E I filing, 
the pro rata tiebreaker was to be applied only after the 
revenue mechanism was used to rank bidders on the basis of 
distance and hence revenue.  That is, pro rata allocation 
served only in a secondary capacity after application of the 
revenue mechanism had failed to resolve all allocation issues.  
Under the instant proposal, pro rata allocation is the sole 
means for allocating capacity among maximum rate bidders, 
and thus performs a much more fundamental and important 
role.  Just as importantly, total revenue plays no role in 
allocating capacity among maximum rate bidders in the in-
stant proposal, thereby eliminating FERC's PG&E I concern 
about discrimination against short-haul shippers.  To suggest 
that two separate tariffs are identical, and that the rejection 
of one mandates the rejection of the other, simply because 
they contain a common element makes no sense.  As there 
are a limited number of factors that pipelines can conceivably 
rely upon to set tariffs, petitioners' approach would virtually 
lock the pipelines and the Commission into a perpetual rate 
once the first attempt at change has failed, no matter how 
just and reasonable some subsequent submission might be.

     Petitioners also apply the same sort of faulty reasoning to a 
different element of the approved tariff by contending that 
because FERC in PG&E I rejected one proposal to eliminate 

the IT queue, FERC could not approve any subsequent 
proposal that eliminated the queue.  This is nonsense.  The 
fact that FERC rejected one rate proposal including elimina-
tion of the queue cannot conceivably preclude it from accept-
ing a later "just and reasonable" proposal merely because the 
new proposal also eliminates the queue. FERC's order in 
PG&E I offers no support for petitioners' argument.  First, 
nothing in PG&E I suggests that FERC found any inherent 
defect in eliminating the queue.  Rather, FERC's opinion 
focused on the shortfalls of the revenue-based mechanism as 
a primary allocator of capacity, rejecting it because it would 
result in discrimination against short-haul shippers.  See 
PG&E I, 92 F.E.R.C. at 61,677.  That is, the Commission 
rejected only PG&E's proposed replacement for the queue;  it 
did not hold or even suggest that there could never be any 
valid replacement. Moreover, the Commission never ad-
dressed the validity of the pro rata portion of the proposal, 
much less the validity of a pro rata mechanism acting alone to 
allocate capacity, as is proposed here.  To the contrary, 
FERC "reject[ed] PG&E[ ]'s capacity allocation proposal 
without prejudice to PG&E[ ] making a new filing to modify 
its proposal to include an alternate allocation mechanism."  
Id.  Far from barring future filings to eliminate the queue, 
FERC explicitly noted that it "has accepted other methods of 
allocating capacity when shippers all bid the maximum rate, 
such as pro rata."  Id. at 61,676.  Thus, the Commission's 
order implicitly, if not explicitly, invited PG&E to propose pro 
rata allocation of IT capacity among maximum rate bidders.  
It certainly did not preclude future proposals to eliminate the 
queue.

     Consequently, we reject petitioners' claim that the ruling 
under review is inconsistent with FERC's order in PG&E I.

                                B.

     Petitioners' second argument is as meritless as their first.  
They contend that FERC's conclusion that PG&E's pro rata 
proposal is "just and reasonable" under Section 4 of the 
Natural Gas Act is arbitrary and capricious, as there was 

before the Commission no substantial evidence that pro rata 
allocation would be more efficient than the use of the queue.  
They further argue that FERC ignored its own precedents 
finding queues to be just and reasonable and instead "cherry-
picked" precedents finding pro rata applications to be just 
and reasonable.  None of this undermines the validity of the 
Commission's decision.

     Petitioners' arguments rest on a fundamental misunder-
standing of the inquiry under Section 4 of the Natural Gas 
Act.  Under Section 4, a pipeline seeking to change its 
existing tariff need not demonstrate that the existing tariff, in 
this case the queue, is unjust and unreasonable.  Mun. Def. 
Group v. FERC, 170 F.3d 197, 201 (D.C. Cir. 1999) ("s 4 
applied and the Commission was not required to establish 
that [the pipeline's] prior allocation method was unjust or 
unreasonable.").  Rather, the Commission need only find that 
the proposed tariff is just and reasonable.  Exxon Corp., 206 
F.3d at 51.  Nothing in Section 4 requires the pipeline to 
prove that its proposal is more just and reasonable than the 
existing system.  The pipeline must only show that its pro-
posal is just and reasonable in its own right.  In this case, 
then, FERC had no obligation to find that the IT queue was 
no longer functioning well, nor even to find that pro rata 
allocation is more efficient than the IT queue.  As petitioners 
correctly conceded at oral argument, there may be a number 
of different potential rates all of which are just and reason-
able.  Thus, FERC needed only to find pro rata allocation to 
be just and reasonable.

     In finding PG&E's pro rata allocation proposal just and 
reasonable FERC cited four cases in which "[t]he Commis-
sion has ruled ... that the pro rata methodology for breaking 
ties for interruptible service is just and reasonable under 
Section 4 of the Natural Gas Act."  PG&E II, 93 F.E.R.C. at 
61,187 & n.6.  Specifically, FERC relied on Northern Border 
Pipeline Co., 69 F.E.R.C. p 61,114 (1994), reh'g denied, 70 
F.E.R.C. p 61,034 (1995), a case with similar facts to this one 
in which FERC approved elimination of a queue in favor of 
pro rata allocation among tied bidders.  PG&E II at 61,187.

     Petitioners do not dispute that these cases establish the 
validity of the pro rata mechanism.  See Pet. Br. at 24 ("the 
Commission has clearly determined that either queue or pro-
rata tiebreakers are equally consistent with Commission poli-
cy").  Nor do petitioners submit any reason why we should 
attempt to limit the Commission's application of its own 
precedent.  Rather, petitioners argue that FERC should have 
rejected the pro rata proposal by relying on precedent find-
ing queues to be just and reasonable.  As explained above, 
petitioners' argument is a non sequitur. Under Section 4, the 
fact that PG&E's queue was just and reasonable under 
FERC precedent does not preclude FERC from accepting 
pro rata allocation as just and reasonable as well.  Therefore, 
we hold that the Commission did not "cherry-pick" favorable 
precedent, as petitioners claim, but instead reasonably fol-
lowed the consistent rulings of the Commission finding pro 
rata tiebreakers to be just and reasonable.

     We would be remiss if we did not note one complicating 
factor.  We have today issued the opinion in a companion 
case, PG&E Gas Transmission v. FERC, __ F.3d __, grant-
ing PG&E's petition for review of the FERC decision in 
PG&E I.  We recognize the very real possibility that Com-
mission proceedings on remand may result in the displace-
ment of the tariff approved in PG&E II, which we review in 
this proceeding.  We wish to make it plain that we do not 
intend this opinion to bar any party from litigation of any 
issue not decided herein.  We decide only those issues raised 
in this petition, in the anticipation that the approved tariff 
which we review herein will continue in effect unless and until 
displaced by some other tariff in further appropriate proceed-
ings.

                         III. Conclusion

     We hold that FERC was not precluded from approving 
PG&E's pro rata allocation mechanism by its rejection of an 
earlier filing proposing revenue-based allocation followed by a 
pro rata tiebreaker.  On the merits, we hold that FERC 
adequately supported its conclusion that PG&E's proposal to 

allocate IT capacity pro rata among maximum rate bidders is 
"just and reasonable" under Section 4 of the Natural Gas Act.  
Accordingly, the petition for review is

                                                                 Denied.

                                                                   