                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 11, 2001   Decided December 28, 2001 

                           No. 00-5345

                       Shubing Liu, M.D., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

         Immigration and Naturalization Service, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           ( 99cv02511)

     Frederic W. Schwartz, Jr. argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for appellant.

     Fred E. Haynes, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellees.  With him on the briefs were Roscoe C. How-
ard, Jr., U.S. Attorney, R. Craig Lawrence and Michael J. 
Ryan, Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  Dr. Shubing Liu appeals from 
the judgment of the district court dismissing his action for 
judicial review of the Immigration and Naturalization Ser-
vice's denial of his second preference employment-based im-
migration petition.  Because Dr. Liu has been granted first 
preference employment-based immigrant status, we hold that 
his case is moot.

     Dr. Liu, a Chinese citizen engaged in medical research in 
the United States, filed a second preference employment-
based petition (an "EB-2" petition) pursuant to 8 U.S.C. 
s 1153(b)(2), which allows visas to be granted to aliens of 
exceptional ability and aliens who are members of the profes-
sions holding advanced degrees. Petitions for EB-2 status 
generally must include both a job offer and a certification 
from the Department of Labor.  See 8 C.F.R. s 204.5(k).  
Although Dr. Liu had a job offer from the University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, he lacked the requisite labor 
certification.  Therefore, Dr. Liu sought a waiver pursuant to 
8 U.S.C. s 1153(b)(2)(B)(i), which permits the INS, via au-
thority delegated from the Attorney General, to waive the job 
offer and labor certification requirements if such a waiver is 
found to be in the "national interest."  See Kooritzky v. 
Reich, 17 F.3d 1509, 1510 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1994).

     In November 1998, the INS denied Dr. Liu's application for 
a waiver, finding that a waiver would not be in the national 
interest.  On Dr. Liu's administrative appeal, the INS Admin-
istrative Appeals Unit affirmed.  Dr. Liu then filed the 
present complaint.  The district court refused to hear the 
case, holding that it lacked jurisdiction.  The court reasoned 
that the INS's decision not to grant Dr. Liu a national 
interest waiver was discretionary and that the Immigration 
and Nationality Act precludes judicial review of discretionary 
decisions.  See 8 U.S.C. s 1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) (precluding judicial 
review of "any other decision or action of the Attorney 
General the authority for which is specified under this sub-
chapter to be in the discretion of the Attorney General, other 

than the granting of relief under section 1158(a) of this title").  
The court also concluded that review was not available under 
the Administrative Procedure Act.

     The case is now moot, so the government claims.  Moot-
ness goes to our jurisdiction, see Iron Arrow Honor Soc'y v. 
Heckler, 464 U.S. 67, 70 (1983) (per curiam).  It is therefore 
an optional ground of decision, and one we have decided to 
examine first in view of the more complicated issues 
s 1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) presents.  The question of mootness arises 
as follows.  After the INS denied Dr. Liu a national interest 
waiver and EB-2 status, he filed a first preference employ-
ment-based immigration petition (an "EB-1" petition) pursu-
ant to 8 U.S.C. s 1153(b)(1)(B), which allows visas to be 
granted to outstanding professors and researchers.  The INS 
granted Dr. Liu EB-1 status;  his adjustment application for 
legal permanent residence status is now pending.

     Dr. Liu offers four reasons why his case is not moot.  
First, he asserts that he would be able to switch jobs more 
easily if he had been granted EB-2 rather than EB-1 status.  
As against this, the government points to the American 
Competitiveness in the Twenty First Century Act, arguing 
that it allows Dr. Liu to switch jobs as long as the new job is 
in the "same or similar occupational classification."  See 8 
U.S.C. s 1154(j) (providing that a petition for individual immi-
grant status that remains unadjudicated for 180 days will 
remain valid with respect to a new job "if the new job is in the 
same or a similar occupational classification as the job for 
which the petition was filed") (emphasis added).  Dr. Liu 
fears that the INS might read s 1154(j)'s use of the phrase 
"same or similar occupational classification" narrowly, thus 
limiting his ability to change jobs while his application for 
legal permanent residence status is pending.  He contends 
that if he had been granted a national interest waiver and 
EB-2 status, then he would be free to switch jobs more easily 
because he would only have to show that his new job re-
mained in the "national interest."

     The trouble is Dr. Liu has given us no reason for supposing 
that he might change jobs before the INS acts on his 

application for legal permanent residence status.  At oral 
argument, we invited his attorney to remedy this factual gap 
with either representations or affidavits.  He did not do so.  
To the contrary, Dr. Liu's supplemental brief states that it is 
"unlikely" that he will stray far from biological research.  See 
Appellant's Supplemental Brief at 6.  In short, all we have is 
the conjectural possibility that Dr. Liu might want to switch 
jobs and that the INS might construe s 1154(j) narrowly so 
as to prevent Dr. Liu from changing jobs.  This simply is not 
enough.  See American Family Life Assurance Co. of Co-
lumbus v. FCC, 129 F.3d 625, 628 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  To "save 
a case from mootness the ongoing injury must be more than a 
'remote possibility,' not 'conjectural,' more than 'specula-
tive.' "  Id. (quoting Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 507 
(1975)).

     Second, Dr. Liu claims that if he leaves his job at the 
University of Pittsburgh, INS procedures would require that 
he wait for an interview with an immigration officer, which 
would delay the processing of his green card application.  
This argument too--as Dr. Liu admits in his supplemental 
brief--is based entirely on speculation.  Dr. Liu also forgets 
that under the INS's I-485 Standard Operating Procedure, 
he would have to wait for an interview even if he had been 
granted a national interest waiver and EB-2 status.  See I-
485 Operating Procedure at 7-3.24.

     Third, Dr. Liu asserts that his claim for attorney's fees is 
sufficient to save the case from mootness.  The law is other-
wise.  The "mere fact that continued adjudication would 
provide a remedy for an injury that is only the byproduct of 
the suit itself does not mean that an injury is cognizable 
under Art. III."  Diamond v. Charles, 476 U.S. 54, 70-71 
(1986).  Contrast Washington Hosp. Ctr. Nat'l Rehabilitation 
Hosp. v. Collier, 947 F.2d 1498, 1502 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (holding 
that a claim for attorney's fees was sufficient to save the 
breach of contract case from mootness because attorney's 
fees were an element of the damages claim, not a mere 
byproduct of the suit).  Hence, an interest in attorney's fees 
"is, of course, insufficient to create an Article III case or 
controversy where none exists on the merits of the underly-

ing claim." Lewis v. Cont'l Bank Corp., 494 U.S. 472, 480 
(1990).

     Fourth and last, Dr. Liu contends that because he will have 
to continue to deal with the INS as his green card application 
is processed, his claim is "capable of repetition yet evading 
review" and therefore is not moot.  See S. Pac. Terminal Co. 
v. ICC, 219 U.S. 498, 515 (1911).  This argument also fails.  
"By 'capable of repetition' the Supreme Court now means a 
'reasonable expectation that the same complaining party 
would be subjected to the same action again.' " Christian 
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan Invisible Empire, Inc. v. 
District of Columbia, 972 F.2d 365, 370 (D.C. Cir. 1992) 
(quoting Weinstein v. Bradford, 423 U.S. 147, 149 (1975) (per 
curiam)).  Since he has been granted EB-1 status, it is 
extremely unlikely that Dr. Liu would be subjected to the 
same challenged action (i.e., a denial of a national interest 
waiver) in the future.

     In short, Dr. Liu would not be any better off if he had been 
granted a national interest waiver and EB-2 status rather 
than EB-1 immigrant status.  A live controversy has ceased 
to exist.  We therefore affirm the judgment of the district 
court dismissing for lack of jurisdiction.  In doing so, we 
affirm on the ground that the complaint is moot and do not 
reach the issue whether review is precluded by 8 U.S.C. 
s 1252(a)(2)(B)(ii).

                                                                 So ordered.

                                                   