                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 6, 1999     Decided March 24, 2000 

                           No. 99-1118

                    Chicago Local No. 458-3M, 
      Graphic Communications International Union, AFL-CIO, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

                        White Cap, Inc., 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Thomas D. Allison, Jr., argued the cause for petitioner.  
With him on the briefs was N. Elizabeth Reynolds.

     Steven B. Goldstein, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on the 

brief were Linda Sher, Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. 
Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel, and Fred L. 
Cornnell, Supervisory Attorney.

     Harry J. Secaras argued the cause for intervenor.  With 
him on the brief was Howard L. Bernstein.

     Before:  Henderson, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  The Chicago Local No. 458-3M, 
Graphic Communications International Union, AFL-CIO 
("union"), appeals the National Labor Relations Board's 
("Board") decision that White Cap, Inc. ("company"), did not 
violate s 8(a)(1), (3), and (5) of the National Labor Relations 
Act ("Act").  See 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (3), (5) (1994).  As a 
threshold contention, the union maintains that there is no 
discernible rationale underlying the Board decision because 
the three separate opinions of the Board members are in 
conflict.  Indeed, there are some expressions of uncertainty 
in the opinions regarding Board precedent governing the 
practice of "regressive bargaining."  We conclude, however, 
that there is more agreement than is first apparent and that 
there is a majority-supported rationale for the decision that 
we can review.  As to the union's other challenges to the 
Board's decision, we hold that the Board reasonably conclud-
ed that the company bargained in good faith when it, with 
good cause, replaced a proposal with a less favorable propos-
al;  that the company's unilateral implementation of its final 
offer was justified because a bargaining impasse had been 
reached;  and that the company's lockout of its employees was 
lawful because it was in support of a legitimate bargaining 
position.1

     Accordingly, we deny the petition.

__________
     1 The union's further contention that the company violated the 
Act by refusing to bargain over certain mandatory subjects of 
bargaining is not properly before the court, and, therefore, we do 
not address it.  The union never raised this issue in its charge, it 
was not contained in the General Counsel's complaint, and the 
parties did not litigate the issue before the ALJ, who never 

                                I.

     White Cap, Inc., manufactures metal and plastic caps for 
beverage and food containers in several cities in the United 
States, including Hazelton, Pennsylvania, Hayward, Califor-
nia, Chicago, Illinois, and Champaign, Illinois.  Since about 
1970, the union has been the exclusive collective-bargaining 
representative of thirty-one lithographic production employ-
ees in the company's manufacturing facility in Chicago.

     In December 1993, the company informed the union that it 
wanted to implement a new work schedule in the Chicago 
facility by January 31, 1994, and presented a written proposal 
setting out the terms.  By then, the company had already 
implemented the new schedule in its Hazelton, Hayward, and 
Champaign facilities, and it explained to the union that the 
new work schedule was necessary in order to increase pro-
ductivity and efficiency.  Under the proposed schedule, the 
employees would work twelve hours per day, three consecu-
tive days per week, whereas under the collective-bargaining 
agreement then in effect,2 the employees worked five days 

__________
addressed it.  The issue was first raised by Member Liebman in 
her separate opinion.  See White Cap, Inc., 325 N.L.R.B. No. 220, 
7-8 (July 24, 1998).  The court has previously held that "[t]he 
Board may not make findings or order remedies on violations not 
charged in the ... complaint or litigated in the subsequent hear-
ing."  NLRB v. Blake Constr. Co., 663 F.2d 272, 279 (D.C. Cir. 
1981);  see also Conair Corp. v. NLRB, 721 F.2d 1355, 1371-72 
(D.C. Cir. 1983).  As the court explained in Trident Seafoods, Inc. 
v. NLRB, 101 F.3d 111 (D.C. Cir. 1996), each party "must have a 
full and fair opportunity to litigate the issues to be decided by the 
agency," and "[w]hen one party utterly fails to raise a significant 
issue before the ALJ, the record developed with regard to that 
issue will usually be inadequate to support a substantive finding in 
its favor."  Id. at 116.  The same rationale dictates that we reject 
the union's argument on the issue without considering its merits.

     2 Because the existing agreement did not expire until April 30, 
1994, the company first sought the union's consent to modify the 
agreement in order to implement the new schedule by January 31, 
1994.  Soon after the negotiations began, however, the company and 
the union agreed to commence negotiations for a new contract, in 

per week, on day or night shifts lasting seven-and-a-half 
hours.3  This proposal led to a series of negotiating meetings 
as the parties attempted to reach a new agreement.  A major 
stumbling block to any agreement, however, was the union's 
insistence on a wage increase and the company's refusal to 
offer one.  Although the company agreed to some of the other 
demands by the union, the parties never came to an agree-
ment that they could both approve, and the union member-
ship voted down the company's proposal by a wide margin in 
February 1994.4  For the next few months, the parties contin-
ued to meet and negotiate, focusing on whether a wage 
increase in some form would be acceptable to both parties.5  
For purposes of this appeal, we focus on the company's 
proposals of June 13th and September 14th and 22nd.

     On June 13, 1994, the company presented a proposal pro-
viding for the new work schedule to take effect on July 11, 
1994.  The proposal included a two percent wage increase 
effective August 1, 1994, no increase the following year, and a 
one percent wage increase in the third year.  The proposal 
also provided for a signing bonus in the event the new 

__________
addition to negotiations for the company's proposal of an immediate 
modification of the existing contract.

     3 The new proposal also contained several other changes from 
the existing contract, such as:  forty hours pay for thirty-six hours 
worked;  overtime pay at time-and-a-half for hours worked in excess 
of thirty-six hours per week or twelve hours a day;  increased pay 
for holiday and vacation time;  and increased paid break periods.

     4 By the time of the union membership's first vote in February, 
the company had improved its December proposal by adding a 
night-shift differential, an increase in the company's contribution to 
the monthly fringe benefit fund by fifty dollars per employee, and 
double pay for overtime (limited to time-and-a-half for hours in 
excess of thirty-six per week).  In addition, the company had 
offered a one-time lump-sum bonus of one week's pay, to be given 
to the employees when the new schedule went into effect.

     5 Because the existing contract was set to expire on April 30, 
the parties agreed to extend the original contract on a day-to-day 
basis, with a provision allowing for a ten-day notice to terminate.

schedule was implemented on July 11th, but no signing bonus 
if the schedule was phased in to be implemented by Septem-
ber 12, 1994.  These provisions were in addition to the 
company's proposal that the union membership had rejected 
in February.  See supra note 4.  Although the union ex-
pressed the view that the June 13th proposal was "very 
excellent," the membership rejected it.6  By letter of June 
23rd, the company urged the union to resubmit the June 13th 
proposal to the membership with "the strongest possible" 
message that the company "absolutely will not make any 
further improvements to its proposal" and "will not back off 
its plans to convert to 12-hour scheduling."  The company 
also alerted the union that if the June 13th offer was not 
ratified by the membership by July 1, 1994, the company 
would withdraw the proposed wage increases, increased over-
time, increased vacation pay and holiday pay, as well as 
increased employer contributions to employee health and 
welfare benefits.  The union sought an extension of the 
deadline until July 10th, but the company agreed to extend it 
only until July 5th, citing the costs of the delay in implement-
ing the new schedule.  The July 5th deadline passed without 
a new vote by the membership.

     On July 11th, the company implemented the new work 
schedule for all non-lithograph production employees at its 
Chicago facility.  The company begged off the union's request 
to resume negotiations on the basis of its busy schedule.  
Consequently, the parties did not meet again until the fall.

     On September 14th, the company, noting its prior warning 
of June 23rd, proposed six changes to its June 13th proposal:  
withdrawal of two wage increases;  calculation of overtime 
pay (to begin after forty hours instead of thirty-six);  with-
drawal of increased holiday and increased vacation pay;  and a 
phased increase in the company's health and welfare contribu-

__________
     6 There was testimony that because the vote occurred on Fa-
ther's Day many employees stayed home while those who opposed 
the twelve-hour day attended the meeting to vote against it.  The 
membership had, by a show of hands, approved the twelve-hour day 
in May.

tions, rather than an immediate fifty dollars per month 
increase.  In addition, the company made four changes in the 
parties' agreement that had not been mentioned in the June 
23rd letter:  termination of the cost of living adjustment 
provision;  time-and-a-half, not double, pay for hours in excess 
of twelve per day;  reduction in the night shift differential;  
and deletion of the voluntary overtime provision.  The union 
offered a counterproposal on September 22nd that called for 
maintaining the five-day work week in effect under the prior 
contract.  The company rejected the counterproposal and 
then rejected the union's revised counterproposal to postpone 
implementation of the new work schedule for one year.  The 
company also stated that same day, September 22nd, that all 
but four of the items in its September 14th proposal were 
final;  it remained open to negotiations only on wages, vaca-
tion and holiday pay, and night shift differential.

     A few days later, the company notified the union of its 
intention to terminate the contract extension agreement, see 
supra note 5, effective October 7, 1994, and the parties met 
for further negotiations on October 4th.  At that time the 
company asked if the union had a new counterproposal;  the 
union had none, inquiring only whether the company would be 
willing to meet with a federal mediator.  The company reject-
ed that idea and stated that its September 22nd offer was its 
final offer in light of the union's failure to offer a new 
counterproposal.  The union then asked if they were at an 
impasse.  The company's lawyer responded, "As third party 
observer, we are."  The following day, the company notified 
the union by letter that the parties were "obviously and 
hopelessly deadlocked," and that the company would imple-
ment the new work schedule and its September 22nd proposal 
on October 10th, noting that "business circumstances compel" 
the new work schedule.  Shortly after 9 a.m. on October 10th, 
the union advised the company that the membership had 
voted to accept the company's June 13th proposal.  The 
company advised the union that that proposal had expired 

and been replaced by the September 22nd proposal, which the 
company was implementing that day.

     The company met at the union's request on November 9th 
and took the same position in rejecting the union's renewed 
request to return to the June 13th proposal.  Instead, the 
company proposed a wage increase over three years and 
restored its proposals for increases in vacation and holiday 
pay, benefit contributions, and night shift differential.  The 
company also offered to modify the contract language regard-
ing mandatory overtime.  The union said it could not accept 
the new proposal without a cost of living adjustment.  When 
the November 9th proposal was nevertheless submitted to the 
members for a vote, it was overwhelmingly rejected.

     On November 21st, the company locked out the bargaining 
unit employees pending ratification of the November 9th 
proposal.  The lockout lasted for nearly eleven months, until 
October 16, 1995, when the parties entered into a new collec-
tive bargaining agreement.  During the lockout, the company 
hired at least twelve temporary replacements.

     The union filed an unfair labor practice charge.  An Admin-
istrative Law Judge ("ALJ") found that the company engaged 
in an unfair labor practice by engaging in regressive bargain-
ing without good cause when it threatened to withdraw 
several provisions from the June 13th proposal and when it 
actually withdrew those provisions and more in the Septem-
ber 14th proposal.  See White Cap, Inc., 325 N.L.R.B. No. 
220, 20 (July 24, 1998).  The ALJ based this conclusion on the 
Board's decision in Driftwood Convalescent Hospital, 312 
N.L.R.B. 247, 252 (1993), which observed that:
     the law is settled that "[t]he withdrawal of a proposal by 
     an employer without good cause is evidence of a lack of 
     good faith bargaining by the employer in violation of 
     Section 8(a)(5) of the Act where the proposal has been 
     tentatively agreed upon...."
Id. (quoting Mead Corp. v. NLRB, 697 F.2d 1013 (11th Cir. 
1983)) (alteration in original).  The Driftwood opinion, which 
was an adoption by the Board of the ALJ's findings and 
recommended order,7 explained that regressive bargaining 

__________
     7 Although the Board in Driftwood stated merely that it was 
"adopt[ing] the recommended Order" by the ALJ, Driftwood, 312 

"has the inevitable and foreseeable effect of obstructing and 
impeding the collective-bargaining process," id., and that the 
relevant inquiry is " 'not whether the Respondent acted in 
good faith, but whether the Respondent had good cause in 
unilaterally withdrawing from tentative agreements and con-
cessions made.' "  Id. (quoting Arrow Sash & Door Co., 281 
N.L.R.B. 1108, 1108 n.2 (1980)).  In the instant case, the ALJ 
noted that the company's regressive bargaining was not 
justified by good cause because the company failed to show 
that economic pressure led to the company's actions.  See 
White Cap, at 17-20.  The ALJ also found that the company's 
unilateral implementation of the final offer in the absence of a 
legally cognizable impasse, as well as its locking out of the 
unit employees, constituted unfair labor practices.  See id.

     The Board reversed, and by a two to one vote, dismissed 
the complaint.  Chairman Gould and Member Hurtgen, in 
separate opinions, agreed that the company satisfied its duty 
to bargain in good faith.  Member Liebman dissented in part 
on the basis that the company violated the Act by refusing to 
bargain on mandatory subjects of bargaining.  We examine 
each opinion as background for our consideration of the 
union's threshold challenge to the Board's decision.

     Member Hurtgen began his analysis by observing some-
what enigmatically that he found it "unnecessary to pass on 
the continued viability of Driftwood because ... the [ALJ] 
erred in his application of these principles to the facts of [the 
instant] case."  Id. at 2.  He then proceeded to apply the 
good cause standard and found that both the company's 
threats to withdraw the six provisions of the June 13th 
proposal and its withdrawal of those provisions and others in 
the September 14th proposal were supported by good cause 
and thus did not constitute unlawful regressive bargaining.  

__________
N.L.R.B. at 247, its summary affirmance of the ALJ's "rulings, 
findings, and conclusions," id., constitutes an adoption of the ALJ's 
findings as well.  See Cities of Bethany v. FERC, 727 F.2d 1131, 
1145 (D.C. Cir. 1984);  see also City of Frankfort v. FERC, 678 F.2d 
699, 708 (7th Cir. 1982).

See id. at 3.  Specifically, he pointed to the fact that "the six 
tentatively agreed to items [in the June 13th proposal] had 
already been rejected at the time the [company] threatened 
to withdraw them" in the June 23rd letter.  Id. at 2.  He 
considered this factor, not discussed by the ALJ, to be "an 
important one that distinguishes this case from Driftwood ...  
where the employer withdrew from tentative agreements with 
the union before any ratification vote had been held."  Id.  
He noted also that, unlike in the instant case, in Driftwood 
the employer had offered the union "no explanation whatsoev-
er for withdrawing from the tentative agreements."  Id. at 2 
n.4.  In addition, he emphasized that "the record evidence 
establishes an intent, even a desire, by [the company] to 
reach agreement," id. at 4, and that there was "no evidence 
that the [company] sought to avoid reaching an agreement."  
Id. at 5.  Then, turning to the other issues, he found that the 
company's unilateral implementation of its final offer and its 
lockout of the employees were lawful because they occurred 
following a bargaining impasse and because the lockout was 
"for the sole purpose of bringing economic pressure to bear in 
support of a legitimate bargaining position."  Id. at 5 (citing 
American Ship Bldg. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 300, 310-11, 318 
(1965)).

     Chairman Gould concurred in Hurtgen's conclusion that the 
ALJ erred in finding that the company had violated the Act 
by its conduct in the bargaining negotiations.  See id.  He 
disagreed, however, with Member Hurtgen's discussion of the 
regressive bargaining doctrine.  Stressing that "the default 
practice of collective-bargaining negotiations ... allow[s] 
withdrawal at will from tentative agreements prior to final 
agreement," id. at 6, Chairman Gould stated that "[t]he 
applicable standard here must be only whether the [compa-
ny's] tactics provided full scope for good-faith bargaining."  
Id. at 7.  Chairman Gould concluded, "[s]ince the evidence [in 
the instant case] clearly indicates that the [company] was 
seriously negotiating in order to obtain an agreement, we 
must find that it was bargaining in good faith."  Id.  To make 

his point about the lawfulness of regressive bargaining even 
clearer, Chairman Gould noted that:

     Member Hurtgen does not pass on this rule, but distin-
     guishes [the company's] conduct on the basis that it 
     provided a "good cause" explanation to the Union for its 
     change of position.  I would find this "rule" to be utterly 
     inconsistent with both the Supreme Court's "freedom of 
     contract" trilogy as well as long-held principles of collec-
     tive bargaining.  Inasmuch as the cases cited by the 
     [ALJ] do support this standard, they should be over-
     ruled.
     
Id. at 6.  Thus, in Chairman Gould's view, regressive bargain-
ing is lawful, with or without good cause, as long as "it is not 
undertaken [with] ...  an intent to evade coming to an 
agreement."  Id.

     Member Liebman concurred in part and dissented in part.  
She expressly joined Hurtgen's conclusion that the company's 
withdrawal of provisions of the June 13th proposal was not 
unlawful regressive bargaining because the company had 
good cause.8  See id. at 7 & n.2.  In noting her concurrence, 
Member Liebman emphasized that she "agree[d] with the 
legal principles cited by the [ALJ]," and that her "disagree-
ment [was] solely with the way these principles were applied 
[by the ALJ] to the facts of this case."  Id. at 7 n.2.  Member 
Liebman parted company with Member Hurtgen and Chair-
man Gould, however, in her conclusion that the company 
engaged in an unfair labor practice by refusing to negotiate 
over two mandatory subjects of bargaining (cost of living 
adjustment and voluntary overtime) in September and Octo-
ber 1994.  See id. at 7.  Thus, Member Liebman did not 
reach the issue of the validity of the company's September 
14th proposal.  See id. at 7-8.

__________
     8 In Member Liebman's words:  "For the reasons stated in ...  
Member Hurtgen's opinion, I join him in finding that the [company] 
did not bargain in bad faith in June 1994 following the employees' 
rejection of the contract it negotiated with the Union."  Id. at 7 
(footnotes omitted).

                               II.

     In order for the court properly to review the Board's 
decision, it "must be able to discern the rationale" underlying 
the Board's conclusions.  Oil, Chemical & Atomic Workers 
Int'l Union v. NLRB, 46 F.3d 82, 90 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  see 
also Acme Die Casting v. NLRB, 26 F.3d 162, 166 (D.C. Cir. 
1994);  United Food & Commercial Workers Int'l Union v. 
NLRB, 880 F.2d 1422, 1436 (D.C. Cir. 1989).  The union 
contends that the Board, by issuing three conflicting opinions, 
failed to articulate a rationale that the court can review, and 
left uncertain whether regressive bargaining in the absence of 
good cause violates the Act.  Although the union raises a 
legitimate concern about the troubling division within the 
Board, the union overstates its position in maintaining that 
the three opinions "reduce [the] established principles of 
regressive bargaining law to chaos."  Unlike the situation in 
Oil, Chemical, on which the union relies, an examination of 
the separate opinions shows that there is " 'a majority-
supported statement of the rule that the Board applied and 
will be applying ... in the future.' "  Oil, Chemical, 46 F.3d 
at 91 (quoting United Food, 880 F.2d at 1436-37).

     In examining whether there is a Board decision that the 
court can review, the underlying question is the continued 
vitality of Driftwood.  In that case, as noted above, the Board 
stated that "the law is settled that '[t]he withdrawal of a 
proposal by an employer without good cause is evidence of a 
lack of good faith bargaining by the employer in violation of 
Section 8(a)(5) of the Act where the proposal has been 
tentatively agreed upon.' "  Driftwood, 312 N.L.R.B. at 252 
(citation omitted).  The Driftwood Board further explained 
that in a regressive bargaining situation, the key issue is 
"whether the Respondent had good cause in unilaterally 
withdrawing from tentative agreements and concessions 
made."  Id. (quotation omitted) (citation omitted).  A review 
of Board precedent confirms this summary of the law.  See, 
e.g., Transit Serv. Corp., 312 N.L.R.B. 477, 483 (1993);  Nati-

co, Inc., 302 N.L.R.B. 668, 670-71 (1991);  Arrow Sash, 281 
N.L.R.B. at 1108 n.2;  Food Serv. Co., 202 N.L.R.B. 790, 803 
(1973).

     The ALJ relied on Driftwood in finding that the company 
violated s 8(a)(1) and (5) of the Act by failing to show good 
cause to withdraw the six provisions from the June 13th 
proposal.  The Board, in reversing, left the good cause rule of 
Driftwood untouched.  Neither Member Hurtgen nor Mem-
ber Liebman adopted Chairman Gould's view that the good 
cause rule of Driftwood should be abandoned;  to the con-
trary, they expressly relied on the Driftwood rule in reaching 
their findings.  Member Hurtgen applied the good cause 
standard to find that the company's regressive bargaining 
tactics in June and September were lawful.  See White Cap, 
at 2.  Member Liebman joined Member Hurtgen's opinion 
with respect to the company's conduct in June, specifically 
noting the good cause standard of Driftwood as the basis of 
her concurrence.  See id. at 7 n.2.  Therefore, the Driftwood 
rule remains the law of the Board.

     The difficulty to which the union points arises from the 
apparent indication that the good cause standard may not 
stand on a firm footing.  In addition to Chairman Gould's 
criticism that the good cause requirement was contrary to the 
law and reality of labor practice, Member Hurtgen stated 
that he was avoiding the issue of "the continued viability of 
Driftwood" even though he was applying Driftwood in the 
instant case.  Id. at 2.  But the union's concern about the 
future viability of the Driftwood rule may be premature.  
Unlike the situation in Oil, Chemical, the Board in White Cap 
was not faced with a question of first impression.  See Oil, 
Chemical, 46 F.3d at 84.  Neither, as in Acme Die, or United 
Food, was the Board dealing in an area characterized by long-
standing ambiguity or confusion in Board precedent.  See 
Acme Die, 26 F.3d at 165-66;  United Food, 880 F.2d at 1436.  
By contrast, the good cause rule had been established and 
repeatedly applied by the Board.  See, e.g., Transit Serv., 312 
N.L.R.B. at 483;  Natico, 302 N.L.R.B. at 670-71;  Arrow 
Sash, 281 N.L.R.B. at 1108 n.2;  Food Serv., 202 N.L.R.B. at 
803.  Even Chairman Gould acknowledged the existence of 

Board precedent requiring good cause in urging that it be 
overruled.  See White Cap, at 6-7.  The legal significance of 
the disagreement among the Board members must be evalu-
ated in its context, and, contrary to the union's contention, the 
court cannot reasonably interpret the tension among the 
views of the Board members as upsetting Board precedent 
without a more express statement by the Board indicating 
such a change in the law.  See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. 
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 41-42 (1983).

     Of course, that the majority of the Board supported the 
good cause rule does not fully resolve the issue whether there 
is a majority-supported conclusion of law that the court can 
review.  With respect to the legality of the company's threat 
in June 1994 to withdraw items from the June 13th proposal 
unless it was ratified by July 4th, Members Hurtgen and 
Liebman are in agreement that no violation of the Act 
occurred.  However, because Member Liebman never ad-
dressed whether the company's September actions constitut-
ed unlawful regressive bargaining, there is no majority deci-
sion on the issue unless Chairman Gould joined Member 
Hurtgen's opinion or vice versa.  Chairman Gould's separate 
opinion makes clear that he agreed with Member Hurtgen 
that the company's regressive bargaining in September was 
not an unfair labor practice.  It is also clear that Chairman 
Gould disapproved of Member Hurtgen's reliance on the good 
cause requirement of Driftwood.  What is not as clear is the 
extent to which Chairman Gould and Member Hurtgen 
agreed or disagreed on whether the reasons for the compa-
ny's regressive bargaining met the Driftwood good cause 
standard.  For the following reasons, we conclude that Chair-
man Gould joined Member Hurtgen's opinion on the issue.

     A comparison of the two Board members' opinions shows 
that their analyses bear more substantive resemblance to 
each other than might initially be evident.  For his finding 
that there was good cause for the company's regressive 
bargaining in September, Member Hurtgen reasoned that the 
company "was seeking timely ratification and implementation 
of the new work schedule in exchange for improved contract 

terms," and that the union's refusal to approve the June 13th 
proposal within the stated time period thus justified the 
company's withdrawal of certain terms.  White Cap, at 4.  
Member Hurtgen did not stop his analysis there, however.  
He also stated that the "essential element" of good-faith 
bargaining is "the serious intent to adjust differences and to 
reach an acceptable common ground."  Id. at 4-5.  He ob-
served that the company satisfied this standard because "the 
record evidence establishes an intent, even a desire, by [the 
company] to reach agreement" as is clear from the company's 
"willingness to compromise and make concessions," id. at 4, 
and there was "no evidence that the [company] sought to 
avoid reaching an agreement."  Id. at 5.

     Member Hurtgen noted that Chairman Gould "concur[red] 
in this result," id. and Chairman Gould's opinion shows the 
extent to which his opinion should be read as concurring in 
the analysis, as well as in the result, of Member Hurtgen's 
opinion.  For example, Chairman Gould, like Member Hurt-
gen, thought that "the evidence here clearly indicates that 
[the company] was seriously negotiating in order to obtain an 
agreement," id. at 7, and placed much emphasis on the 
company's apparent "willingness to reach agreement."  Id. at 
6.  After his general discussion of the legality of regressive 
bargaining, Chairman Gould stressed that "[h]ere, it would be 
particularly inappropriate to find the [company's] withdrawals 
unlawfully regressive because the [company] was clearly ... 
adjusting its proposals ... in the course of bargaining in 
order [to] obtain agreement on a crucial issue."  Id. at 7.  
From these statements, we conclude that Chairman Gould 
and Member Hurtgen were in agreement that the company's 
reasons for resorting to regressive bargaining constituted 
good cause.  Chairman Gould's separate opinion, then, should 
not be read to be expressing any doubt as to whether the 
company met the good cause requirement.  Rather, in our 
view, his opinion stems from his position that the good cause 
requirement should not be applied in future cases even 
though, in the instant case, the existence of the requirement 
did not change the ultimate outcome.

     In reaching this conclusion, we emphasize that it would 
have been preferable for the Board to have stated more 
explicitly that Member Hurtgen's opinion represented the 
majority position of the Board rather than requiring the court 
to decide that issue.  Be that as it may, for the reasons noted, 
we treat Member Hurtgen's opinion as the opinion of the 
Board and review its findings of fact and application of the 
law to the facts under the familiar substantial evidence stan-
dard.  See NLRB v. United Insurance Co., 390 U.S. 254, 260 
(1968);  Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 488 
(1951).

                               III.

     Section 8(a)(5) of the Act makes it an unfair labor practice 
for an employer "to refuse to bargain collectively with the 
representatives of [its] employees."  29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(5).  
Under s 8(d), "to bargain collectively is the performance of 
the mutual obligation of the employer and the representative 
of the employees to meet at reasonable times and confer in 
good faith with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and 
conditions of employment."  Id. s 158(d).  The union con-
tends that the company's withdrawal of certain terms from its 
proposals in June and September 1994 violated its s 8(a)(5) 
duty to bargain in good faith and that the Board erred in 
finding otherwise.  Because there is substantial evidence in 
the record to support the Board's conclusion, we reject the 
union's challenge.

     The Board concluded that the company had good cause for 
its threat to withdraw six provisions in the June 13th proposal 
and for its subsequent withdrawal of those six provisions plus 
more in September.  The Board stated that, unlike in Drift-
wood, where the employer engaged in regressive bargaining 
before the union held a ratification vote on the tentative 
agreement, "the six tentatively agreed to items had already 
been rejected at the time the [Company] threatened to with-
draw them."  White Cap, at 2.  In addition, the Board 
observed that the company had "stressed from the inception 
of negotiations its desire for timely implementation of the 

new schedule" and that the "improved contract terms were 
linked to timely implementation of the new work schedule."  
Id. at 3.  The Board concluded from these considerations that 
the company's threat to withdraw the June 13th proposal was 
"an effort to secure ratification of the agreement it reached 
with the Union, rather than an attempt to obstruct meaning-
ful bargaining."  Id.  In addition, the Board relied as further 
support on the fact that the company offered the union 
another opportunity to ratify the proposal after the union's 
rejection and that the company had given the union sufficient 
"opportunity to digest, understand, evaluate, and vote on the 
June 13 contract proposal."  Id.  For essentially the same 
reasons, that the company "was seeking timely ratification 
and implementation of the new work schedule in exchange for 
improved contract terms" id. at 4, and that "the record 
evidence establishes an intent, even a desire, by [the compa-
ny] to reach agreement," the Board found that the company's 
withdrawal of several provisions in its September proposal 
did not constitute an unfair labor practice.  Id.

     There is substantial evidence in the record to support the 
Board's findings.  During the parties' extended negotiations 
for nearly a year, the company made repeated efforts to 
reach common ground with the union.  The company made 
clear from the beginning of the negotiations that it could not 
offer a wage increase and that it sought a timely implementa-
tion of the new work schedule.  However, the company was 
willing to offer a shift differential, increased contributions to 
the monthly fringe benefit fund, and increased overtime pay, 
all in response to specific demands by the union as a condition 
for approving the new work schedule.  When those conces-
sions proved to be inadequate, the company gave up its initial 
position and agreed to give wage increases, in a proposal that 
the union characterized as "very excellent."  Even after the 
membership rejected the proposal on June 19th, the company 
gave the union a second chance and expressed its hope that 
they reach an agreement soon.  In addition, throughout the 
period, the company stressed that the improved contract 
terms it was offering were linked to timely implementation of 
the schedule, and this link was emphasized in its June 23rd 

letter.  The union membership's failure to ratify timely the 
proposal triggered the company's withdrawals, and these 
circumstances hardly demonstrate that the company sought 
to frustrate the collective bargaining process.  Therefore, the 
Board's finding of good cause in the company's regressive 
bargaining is supported by substantial evidence.

     Contending that the Board erred in its application of the 
good cause standard, the union asserts that Board precedent 
recognizes only two types of good cause to justify regressive 
bargaining--changed economic circumstances and a change in 
the party's relative bargaining power.  This misrepresents 
the law.  The cases cited by the union support its position 
only to the extent that each case can easily be placed in one of 
the two categories that the union puts forward.  See, e.g., 
A.M.F. Bowling Co., 314 N.L.R.B. 969, 975 (1994), enf. denied 
on other grounds, 63 F.3d 1293 (4th Cir. 1995);  Aero Alloys, 
289 N.L.R.B. 497, 497 (1988);  Cook Bros. Enters., 288 
N.L.R.B. 387, 387-89 (1988);  O'Malley Lumber Co., 234 
N.L.R.B. 1171, 1179-80 (1978).  However, no case cited by 
the union has limited the definition of good cause to the two 
categories only.  Of the cases cited by the union, the closest 
the Board came to the union's position was in the following 
passage in Hyatt Hotels Corp., 296 N.L.R.B. 289, 314 (1989):

     A regression in economic position during bargaining is 
     not of itself dispositive of the good-faith issue where 
     economic considerations and the ability to compete moti-
     vate the regressive bargaining stance.  Furthermore, it 
     is no manifestation of bad faith for an employer to 
     change his bargaining posture to one less favorable when 
     he does so in "flexing economic muscle" in consequence 
     of an intervening circumstance....
     
Id. at 314 (citation omitted).  However, nowhere did the 
Board state in Hyatt Hotels that these categories exhausted 
the possible types of good cause.  On the contrary, the Board 
also defined the general issue of justifiable regressive bar-
gaining as whether a party's "proffered reasons for its 
changed bargaining stance were so illogical or unreasonable 

as to necessarily warrant an inference of bad faith."  Id. at 
315.  In Barry-Wehmiller Co., 271 N.L.R.B. 471, 473 (1984), 
another case cited by the union, the Board stated that, in 
evaluating the legality of an instance of regressive bargaining, 
"[w]hat is important is whether [the proffered reasons for 
regressive bargaining] are 'so illogical' as to warrant the 
conclusion that the [party] by offering them demonstrated an 
intent to frustrate the bargaining process and there-by pre-
clude the reaching of any agreement."  Id. (emphasis added).

     This view, that the key issue in evaluating the propriety of 
regressive bargaining is whether it is designed to "frustrate 
the bargaining process," is the principle applied by the Board 
in the instant case, and is the predominant theme in the 
Board's regressive bargaining decisions.  In addition to the 
cases already discussed, the following cases, all cited by the 
union, are illustrative:  Fairhaven Properties, Inc., 314 
N.L.R.B. 763, 771 (1994);  Transit Serv., 312 N.L.R.B. at 483;  
Toyota of San Francisco, 280 N.L.R.B. 784, 801 (1986);  
Pacific Grinding Wheel Co., 220 N.L.R.B. 1389, 1390 (1975).  
Therefore, the Board here has not departed from Board 
precedent.  On the other hand, to generalize, as the union 
does, that Board precedent requires changes in either a 
party's economic circumstances or bargaining power for good 
cause to exist is to make an illogical leap from "If x is the 
case, regressive bargaining is justified" to "If x is not the 
case, regressive bargaining is not justified."  The root of this 
elementary error on the union's part is its perception that the 
good cause requirement is a narrow exception to the general 
rule that regressive bargaining constitutes bad faith bargain-
ing, a view that has no basis in Board precedent.

     The union also cites several Supreme Court and circuit 
courts of appeals cases to contend that the Board's opinion 
frustrates the purpose of s 8(a)(5) of the Act.  This conten-
tion has no merit.  In order to make NLRB v. Katz, 369 U.S. 
736 (1962), applicable to the instant case, the union resorts to 
quoting general statements prohibiting "behavior which is in 
effect a refusal to negotiate, or which directly obstructs or 
inhibits the actual process of discussion," Katz, 369 U.S. at 
747, without explaining how such statements demonstrate 

that the Board reached the wrong decision in the instant case.  
Neither is Daily News of Los Angeles v. NLRB, 73 F.3d 406 
(D.C. Cir. 1996), another case relied on by the union, of much 
help in that it was also about what the court saw as " 'behav-
ior which is in effect a refusal to negotiate.' "  Id. at 414 
(quoting Katz, 369 U.S. at 747).  In the instant case, the 
starting point of the Board's analysis was precisely that "the 
withdrawal of previous proposals does not per se establish the 
absence of good faith," White Cap, at 4, and thus does not 
constitute "behavior which is in effect a refusal to negotiate."  
Katz, 369 U.S. at 747.  Therefore, the union's reliance on 
Katz and Daily News is misplaced.

     Similarly, the union's contention based on Charles D. Bo-
nanno Linen Serv., Inc. v. NLRB, 454 U.S. 404 (1982), and 
McClatchy Newspapers, Inc. v. NLRB, 131 F.3d 1026 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997), has no merit.  The union cites the two cases for 
the proposition that certain bargaining tactics are so destabi-
lizing that they are improper even if there is no showing of 
subjective bad faith.  The cases may well stand for that 
proposition;  however, the union's further inference that the 
Board therefore erred in not finding a violation of the Act is a 
nonsequitur.  Again, the Board started from the assumption, 
firmly supported by Board precedent, that regressive bar-
gaining is not so harmful to the collective bargaining process 
as to require a general prohibition.  Therefore, the Board's 
findings simply do not contradict the propositions of law that 
the union contends are dispositive.  In the end, the union 
offers no reason for the court to disturb the Board's conclu-
sions.

                               IV.

     The union further contends that the company violated 
s 8(a)(5) of the Act by unilaterally changing terms and condi-
tions of employment in October, 1994 without a bargaining 
impasse.  See NLRB v. McClatchy Newspapers, Inc., 964 
F.2d 1153, 1165 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (in banc);  American Fed'n of 
Television & Radio Artists, Kansas City Local v. NLRB, 395 

F.2d 622, 624 (D.C. Cir. 1968).  We have previously stated 
that "[t]here is no fixed definition of an impasse ... which 
can be applied mechanically to all factual situations."  Dallas 
Gen. Drivers, Warehousemen and Helpers, Local No. 745 v. 
NLRB, 355 F.2d 842, 845 (D.C. Cir. 1966).  The Board 
"considers a number of factors, including the 'bargaining 
history, the good faith of the parties in negotiations, the 
length of the negotiations, the importance of the issue or 
issues as to which there is disagreement, [and] the contempo-
raneous understanding of the parties as to the state of 
negotiations.' "  Teamsters Local Union No. 639 v. NLRB, 
924 F.2d 1078, 1083 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (quoting Taft Broad. Co., 
163 N.L.R.B. 475, 478 (1967), aff'd, 395 F.2d 622 (1968)) 
(alteration in original).  We hold that there is substantial 
evidence in the record supporting the Board's application of 
these factors in finding an impasse.  See White Cap, at 5.

     First, at the time of the unilateral implementation, the 
company had bargained in good faith with the union for 
approximately ten months, making many concessions along 
the way.  In addition, as the Board observed, "the parties on 
October 4 were at impasse on the critical issue of the [new 
work] schedule, which precluded reaching an agreement."  
Id.  The new work schedule was a critical issue for the 
company, as it had made clear at the beginning of the 
negotiations.  After rejecting the company's proposals con-
taining the new schedule several times, the union proposed 
maintaining the old work schedule in its September 22nd 
proposal.  When the company rejected the union's attempt to 
revive the old work schedule, the union proposed that imple-
mentation of the new work schedule be postponed for one 
year, which the company also rejected.  In their last meeting 
before October 10th, the union failed to offer any new propos-
al.  The contemporaneous understandings of the parties fur-
ther support the Board's finding.  On October 4th, the Union 
offered no new proposal and brought up the subject of 
whether there was an impasse, and did not disagree when the 
company's attorney stated that he believed the parties were 
at an impasse.  The union's contention that the impasse was 
broken when it ratified the June 13th offer before the unilat-

eral implementation is meritless, considering how the June 
13th offer had expired months earlier.  Thus, applying the 
relevant factors shows that there was substantial evidence for 
the Board's finding that there was an actual impasse before 
the company's unilateral implementation of its final offer on 
October 10th.

     Finally, the union maintains that even if there were an 
impasse, it did not justify the company's unilateral implemen-
tation because the impasse was caused by the company's 
unlawful regressive bargaining.  See United Packinghouse, 
Food & Allied Workers Int'l Union v. NLRB, 416 F.2d 1126, 
1131 (D.C. Cir. 1969).  We reject this contention because, as 
noted, the Board reasonably concluded that the company's 
regressive bargaining did not constitute an unlawful labor 
practice.  Similarly, the union contends that the company's 
lockout was unlawful because the company's unlawful labor 
practice deprived it of the claim that the purpose of lockout 
was to "bring[ ] economic pressure to bear in support of [its] 
legitimate bargaining position."  American Ship Bldg. Co. v. 
NLRB, 380 U.S. 300, 318 (1965);  see also Teamsters Local 
Union No. 639 v. NLRB, 924 F.2d 1078, 1085 (D.C. Cir. 
1991).  Again, as the Board found, the company did not 
engage in an unfair bargaining practice, and there is substan-
tial evidence in the record to support the Board's decision 
that the lockout was lawful because the company's purpose 
was to apply economic pressure on the employees in order to 
support its "legitimate bargaining position."  American Ship 
Bldg., 380 U.S. at 318.

     Accordingly, we deny the petition.

                           