                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 10, 2002     Decided June 14, 2002 

                           No. 01-1467

                        AT&T Corporation, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

       Association of Communications Enterprises, et al., 
                           Intervenors

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Peter D. Keisler argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were David W. Carpenter, James F. Benderna-
gel Jr., Michael J. Hunseder, Mark C. Rosenblum, and Peter 
H. Jacoby.

     Richard K. Welch, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for respondents.  On the brief were 
Jane E. Mago, General Counsel, John E. Ingle, Deputy 
Associate General Counsel, Rodger D. Citron, Counsel, Rob-
ert B. Nicholson and Marion Jetton, Attorneys, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice.

     Andrew D. Lipman, Russell M. Blau, David Cosson, 
Glenn B. Manishin, Jonathan E. Canis, Timothy J. Fitzgib-
bon, Charles C. Hunter and Catherine M. Hannan were on 
the brief for intervenors Association of Communications En-
terprises, et al.  Ronald J. Jarvis and Richard J. Metzger 
entered appearances.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge, Randolph and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  In October 2001, the FCC issued 
a declaratory ruling holding that long-distance carriers have 
an obligation to purchase interstate switched access services 
provided by competitive local exchange carriers.  See In re 
AT&T & Sprint Petitions for Declaratory Ruling on CLEC 
Access Charge Issues, 16 F.C.C.R. 19158 (2001) ("Declaratory 
Ruling").  We now grant AT&T's petition for judicial review 
of this ruling.

                                I.

     Long-distance telephone carriers (also called "interex-
change carriers" or "IXCs") generally do not directly connect 
to their telephone customers.  Rather, long-distance tele-
phone traffic is ordinarily transmitted by a local exchange 
carrier (also called a "LEC") from its originating customer to 
an IXC.  See generally United States Tel. Ass'n v. FCC, 188 
F.3d 521, 523-24 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Then the "IXC carries the 
traffic to its region of destination and hands it off to the LEC 
there."  Id. at 524.  For example, if a customer in Washing-
ton, D.C., who subscribes to Verizon for local service and 
AT&T for long-distance service, calls a relative in Florida, 
who subscribes to Bellsouth for local service, the call initially 

will travel over Verizon's facilities.  Verizon will hand off the 
call to AT&T's facilities, which will carry the call to Florida 
before handing it off to Bellsouth's facilities for delivery to 
the caller's relative.  AT&T will charge the caller for the 
telephone call, and will pay "originating" access charges to 
Verizon and "terminating" access charges to BellSouth.  
These interstate access charges--that is, the charges paid to 
LECs by IXCs for local origination and termination of inter-
state long-distance telephone calls--are at the heart of this 
case.

     Until recently a single, incumbent local exchange carrier or 
ILEC, whose access rates were regulated by the FCC, pro-
vided all local exchange and exchange access services in a 
particular region.  See In re Access Charge Reform, Sixth 
Report and Order, 15 F.C.C.R. 12962, 12965-67 (2000).  The 
Telecommunications Act of 1996 allowed a new class of com-
petitive local exchange carriers ("CLECs") into the local 
exchange market.  See In re Access Charge Reform, Seventh 
Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemak-
ing, 16 F.C.C.R. 9923, 9931 (2001).  At first, the FCC left 
CLECs largely free of the kind of rate regulation applied to 
monopoly LECs.  The assumption was that CLECs' small 
market share would not allow them to charge unreasonable 
rates.  See id. at 9926.  This assumption later proved to be 
incorrect with respect to access charges because CLECs 
possess a "series of bottleneck monopolies over access to each 
individual end user."  Id. at 9935.  If an IXC wants to 
provide long-distance service to customers of a CLEC's local 
service, the IXC must utilize access services from that partic-
ular CLEC.  Id.  When "an end user decides to take service 
from a particular LEC, that LEC controls an essential com-
ponent of the system that provides interexchange calls, and it 
becomes the bottleneck for IXCs wishing to complete calls to, 
or carry calls from, that end user."  Id.  In addition, the FCC 
requires IXCs to geographically average their rates so as to 
spread the cost of both originating and terminating access 
over all their end users, thereby precluding IXCs from shift-
ing the burden of high CLEC access rates to those customers 

who have chosen CLECs that charge unreasonably high 
access rates.  Id.

     Taking advantage of their control over essential compo-
nents of the network, some CLECs began charging access 
rates that were well above the rates ILECs charged for 
similar services.  See id. at 9931.  While the access rates of 
some CLECs, for example, were in excess of nine cents per 
minute, see id., the average interstate access rate the ILECs 
charged in 2000 was around one cent per minute.  See Brief 
of Petitioner at 5.

     Because of high access rates, AT&T decided that it did not 
want to purchase access services from certain CLECs, and it 
began taking steps to cut off its ties with these companies.  
AT&T sent letters to CLECs informing them that it would 
not submit an Access Service Request to a CLEC unless 
AT&T and the CLEC reached an agreement regarding the 
access rates to be charged.  Nevertheless, some CLECs 
continued to send long-distance calls from their customers to 
AT&T and then billed AT&T for that traffic.  They were able 
to do so without AT&T's agreement because the CLECs first 
routed their traffic to a tandem switch operated by the ILEC 
in their area.  By the time the call reached AT&T's network, 
it was intermingled with the traffic of other carriers, and 
AT&T was unable to identify and block the traffic on a 
CLEC-specific basis.1

     In response to the CLECs' actions, AT&T filed a petition 
with the FCC in October 1998 in which it complained that 
numerous CLECs were charging excessive access rates and 
refusing to negotiate with AT&T regarding those rates.  
AT&T requested a declaratory ruling that existing law, policy 
and regulations do not require IXCs to purchase tariffed 
access services from CLECs.  On August 27, 1999, the FCC 
determined that a declaratory ruling was not the proper 
vehicle to resolve the issue.  See In re Access Charge Reform, 

__________
     1 At oral argument, AT&T's counsel stated that AT&T could have 
developed technology to sort out unwanted CLEC traffic but that 
this technology would have cost $35 to $40 million.  See  Transcript 
of Proceedings at 6.

Fifth Report and Order, 14 F.C.C.R. 14221 (1999).  Instead, 
it decided to invite comments and initiate a rulemaking 
regarding the reasonableness of CLEC access charges and 
whether the FCC might adopt rules to address, by the least 
intrusive means, any failure of market forces to constrain 
CLEC access charges.2  Id.

     Thereafter numerous CLECs initiated litigation in federal 
court seeking to force IXCs, such as AT&T, to pay for access 
charges incurred.  See Seventh Rep. & Order, 16 F.C.C.R. at 
9932 n.56.  In one of the suits, filed January 5, 2000, in the 
Eastern District of Virginia, the CLECs alleged that they 
began providing originating and terminating access services 
to AT&T in April 1997 and that AT&T paid for those services 
at full tariffed rates until November 1998, when AT&T 
stopped payment.  See Advamtel, LLC v. AT&T Corp., No. 
00-643-A (E.D. Va.).  AT&T responded by denying that it 
had ordered the services, and by asserting that in one in-
stance, it had canceled the service.

     In January 2001, the district court in Advamtel referred 
two legal issues to the FCC, invoking the doctrine of primary 
jurisdiction.  See Advamtel, LLC v. Sprint Communications 
Co., 125 F. Supp. 2d 800 (E.D. Va. 2001).  The two questions 
were:  (1) whether any statutory or regulatory constraints 
prevent an IXC from terminating or declining access services 
ordered or constructively ordered;  and (2) if not, what steps 
IXCs must take to avoid ordering service or to cancel service 
after it has been ordered.  Id. at 807.  The district court said 
that if the FCC did not act within six months, the court would 
proceed to trial and resolve the issues itself.  Id.

__________
     2 The FCC eventually issued a rulemaking order requiring 
IXCs--strictly on a prospective basis after April 2001--to purchase 
CLEC access services if the rates are set at or below a benchmark 
rate of 2.5 cents per minute, or the rate charged by the competing 
ILEC, whichever is higher.  See Seventh Rep. & Order, 16 F.C.C.R. 
at 9925, 9941.  The benchmark rate, the FCC declared, will decline 
gradually over a three-year period.  Id. at 9941.  This order is the 
subject of a separate petition for review in this court.  See AT&T 
Corp. v. FCC, No. 01-1244.

     When the FCC failed to act within the allotted time, the 
district court decided to reach the issues itself and ordered 
the parties to submit briefs on the issues.  The court then 
held that the "plain terms of s 201(a)" of the Communications 
Act do not "impose on AT&T any duty to accept all access 
services."  See Transcript of Motions Hearing Before Judge 
Ellis in Advamtel, LLC v. AT&T Corp., No. 00-643-A, at 18, 
reprinted in Joint Appendix at 342.  Under s 201(a), the 
FCC may order, on a prospective basis after opportunity for 
a hearing, an IXC to provide service to end users and to 
establish connections with other carriers.  Id.  Because the 
FCC had not held a hearing or issued a prospective order, the 
district court entered partial summary judgment for AT&T 
on the issue whether the FCC could compel AT&T to pur-
chase the access services in dispute, and it set the remaining 
issues for trial.  See Order in Advamtel, LLC v. AT&T Corp., 
No. 00-643-A (E.D. Va. Sept. 7, 2001), reprinted in Joint 
Appendix at 359-61.

     Just weeks after the district court issued its order, the 
FCC finally acted on the questions referred to it by the 
district court.  See Declaratory Ruling, 16 F.C.C.R. at 19158.  
The FCC's ruling declared that "an IXC cannot refuse to 
exchange originating or terminating [access] traffic with the 
CLEC."  Id. at 19163.  The FCC based its reasoning on the 
first clause in s 201(a) of the Federal Communications Act, 
which requires common carriers to accept a "reasonable 
request" for service.  See 47 U.S.C. s 201(a).  According to 
the FCC, during the period at issue, CLECs were required to 
file tariffs and such filed tariffs were considered presumptive-
ly lawful.  See Declaratory Ruling, 16 F.C.C.R. at 19163.  
Therefore, IXCs must accept all requests "to complete a call 
using CLEC access service that is tariffed at presumptively 
reasonable rates."  Id. at 19163-64.

     AT&T filed a timely petition for review of the FCC's 
declaratory ruling, bringing the case before us.  Because the 
FCC's interpretation of a statutory provision it administers is 
at issue, we now review the FCC's declaratory ruling in 
accordance with Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. 
Council, 467 U.S. 837 (1984).

                               II.

     The question before us is whether s 201(a) permitted 
AT&T to refuse to purchase access services from a CLEC 
when an end user has requested that AT&T provide long-
distance service through the CLEC.  Section 201(a) provides:

     It shall be the duty of every common carrier engaged in 
     interstate or foreign communication by wire or radio to 
     furnish such communication service upon reasonable re-
     quest therefor;  and, in accordance with the orders of the 
     Commission, in cases where the Commission, after op-
     portunity for hearing, finds such action necessary or 
     desirable in the public interest, to establish physical 
     connections with other carriers, to establish through 
     routes and charges applicable thereto and the divisions of 
     such charges, and to establish and provide facilities and 
     regulations for operating such through routes.
     
47 U.S.C. s 201(a).  The first clause of s 201(a)--the clause 
preceding the semicolon--establishes the duty of every com-
mon carrier to furnish communication service upon "reason-
able request."  The second clause--after the semicolon--
provides that the FCC may order a carrier to establish a 
through route only after opportunity for a hearing.

     AT&T argues that when both clauses of s 201(a) are 
considered together, it is clear that the first clause of s 201(a) 
concerns a carrier's obligations to its own customers' reason-
able requests and that the second clause concerns a carrier's 
obligation to provide service in conjunction with other carri-
ers.  See Brief of Petitioner at 16.  This, according to AT&T, 
means that it must provide service to customers upon "rea-
sonable request" only when doing so would not compel AT&T 
to act jointly with other carriers.  See id.  When providing 
service would require AT&T to establish a physical connec-
tion or through route with another carrier, then AT&T as-
serts that its duty to purchase access services from a CLEC 
is limited to obeying any FCC order entered after the hear-
ing provided in the second clause of s 201(a).  See id.  As 
against this, the FCC argues that when a customer makes a 
"reasonable request" for service, IXCs are required by the 

first clause of s 201(a) to provide the service--whether or not 
providing that service would force the IXC to act in conjunc-
tion with other carriers without the hearing called for in the 
second clause of s 201(a).

     We reject the FCC's interpretation.  The language of 
s 201(a) is clear:  if the FCC wants to compel AT&T to 
establish a through route with another carrier, then the FCC 
must follow the procedures specified in the second clause of 
s 201(a).  In ruling that AT&T was obligated to purchase 
access services from CLECs, the FCC sought--without first 
having followed the procedures specified in the second clause 
of s 201(a)--to compel AT&T to establish a through route.

     It cannot be that a CLEC's demand to an IXC for a 
physical connection or a through route is a request by the 
CLEC's customer for such service under the first clause of 
s 201(a).  This would allow the first clause in s 201(a) to 
render the second clause meaningless.  Yet all parts of a 
statute are to be given effect, see Weinberger v. Hynson, 
Wescott & Dunning, 412 U.S. 609, 633 (1973), as the FCC 
recognized long ago in regard to s 201(a).  See American 
Tel. & Tel. Co. & the Western Union Tel. Co., 5 Rad. Reg. 
(P & F) 639, 659 (1949) (explaining that if a customer could 
effect the establishment of a through route, this "would 
permit the customer to do at will what this Commission 
cannot do without a finding, after opportunity for a hearing, 
that such action is 'necessary or desirable in the public 
interest,' and would result in a clear circumvention of the 
Congressional intent expressed in s 201(a) of the Act.").

     The FCC gave the second clause of s 201(a) no more than 
one cursory paragraph's worth of attention in its declaratory 
ruling.  See Declaratory Ruling, 16 F.C.C.R. at 19164-65.  
On appeal the FCC offers three newly-discovered reasons 
why the second clause does not change its analysis.  First, 
the FCC argues that AT&T voluntarily connected with the 
CLECs and thus there was no need for the FCC to decide 
whether AT&T had a duty to connect under the second clause 
of s 201(a).  See Brief for Respondents at 27.  Second, the 
FCC asserts that the Specialized Common Carrier rulemak-

ing proceeding requires LECs and IXCs to interconnect their 
networks.  See id. at 28 (citing Specialized Common Carrier, 
29 F.C.C.2d 870 (1971)).  Third, the FCC claims that 
s 251(a)(1) of the Act, which requires telecommunications 
carriers to interconnect with the facilities and equipment of 
other carriers, imposes an interconnection duty on AT&T. See 
Brief for Respondents at 31 (citing 47 U.S.C. s 251(a)(1)).  
None of these three assertions were relied upon--or for that 
matter even discussed--in the FCC's declaratory ruling, and 
we therefore will not consider them.  See SEC v. Chenery, 
318 U.S. 80, 88 (1943).

     The petition for review is granted.  The declaratory ruling 
of the FCC is vacated.

                                                                 So ordered.

        