                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                     Decided August 30, 2002

                           No. 01-1299

          Alabama Municipal Distributors Group, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

             American Public Gas Association and the 
               Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia, 
                           Intervenors

                         On Motion to Dismiss

                                    --------

     BEFORE:  Randolph and Rogers, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed Per Curiam.

     Per Curiam:  Pursuant to the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. 
s 717r, the Alabama Municipal Distributors Group, the Aus-
tell Gas System, and the Southeast Alabama Gas District 

(collectively the "Municipals") have petitioned for review of 
two orders of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
("FERC").  Without objection, the American Public Gas As-
sociation and the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia were 
granted leave to intervene in support of the petitioners and 
joined in the petitioners' principal brief.  FERC now con-
tends that the intervenors should be dismissed from the case 
because they did not seek rehearing by FERC of the orders 
on review.  We hold that an application for rehearing by 
FERC is not a condition precedent for intervention in a 
petition for review under the Natural Gas Act where the 
intervenors are not attempting to substitute for the petition-
ers or to expand the issues on review.  Accordingly, we deny 
the motion to dismiss.

                                I.

     In the orders on review, FERC approved discounted trans-
portation rates proposed by the Southern Natural Gas Com-
pany ("Southern"), and authorized Southern to construct and 
operate the South System Expansion Project and to abandon 
some of its current facilities in conjunction with that expan-
sion.  Southern Natural Gas Co., 94 FERC p 61,297 (2001);  
95 FERC p 61,220 (2001).  As customers of Southern, the 
Municipals intervened in FERC's proceedings to protest 
Southern's application.  Following FERC's initial decision, 
the Municipals jointly moved for rehearing, which was denied, 
then timely petitioned for review in this court.

     In addition to the petitioners, the American Public Gas 
Association ("APGA") and the Municipal Gas Authority of 
Georgia ("Gas Authority") were granted leave to intervene in 
the Southern proceedings before FERC, but they did not 
seek rehearing of the order.  The APGA is a national associa-
tion of publicly owned natural gas distribution systems--
mostly small municipal utilities, and Georgia's Gas Authority 
also is composed of municipalities.  After the Municipals' 
petition for review was filed, the APGA and Gas Authority 
each filed a timely motion to intervene before the court under 
Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 15(d).  Unopposed, the 

motions were granted, and the intervenors joined in the 
principal brief for petitioners.  Thereafter, FERC moved to 
dismiss the APGA and the Gas Authority as intervenors on 
the ground that they did not apply to FERC for rehearing of 
the orders on review and, therefore, are precluded from 
challenging them.

                               II.

     Under the Natural Gas Act, a litigant seeking judicial 
review of a FERC order must have been a party to the 
proceeding before the Commission and must have applied for 
agency rehearing.1  See 15 U.S.C. s 717r(a), (b);  Process Gas 
Consumers Group v. FERC, 912 F.2d 511, 514 (D.C. Cir. 
1990) (per curiam).  FERC contends that the statutory pre-
requisites for obtaining judicial review apply to intervenors 
and petitioners alike.  But the Natural Gas Act itself does not 
so state, and the two cases that FERC cites cannot fairly be 
stretched that far.  See Murphy Exploration & Prod. Co. v. 
United States Dep't of the Interior, 252 F.3d 473, 478-80 
(D.C. Cir. 2001) (no deference should be paid to an agency's 
interpretation of a statute granting jurisdiction to Article III 
courts).

     For petitions arising under the Natural Gas Act, interven-
tion in this court is governed by Federal Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 15(d), and that rule does not hold a would-be 
intervenor to the same statutory requirements as a party 
filing a petition for review.  See Fed. R. App. P. 15(d);  
Process Gas, 912 F.2d at 514.  For example, a motion for 
leave to intervene may be filed up to 30 days after the 
petition for review is filed, thus allowing intervention outside 
the jurisdictional 60-day filing period for a petition for re-

__________
     1  FERC's motion to dismiss is mistakenly predicated on the 
Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. s 825l, when the petition actually 
arises under the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. s 717r.  The mistake is 
inconsequential, however, because the provisions for judicial review 
are the same under both statutes.  See Platte River Whooping 
Crane Critical Habitat Maintenance Trust v. FERC, 876 F.2d 109, 
113 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1989).

view.  See id. at 514-15.2

     In Process Gas, the court barred an intervenor from ob-
taining judicial review when it had not participated in the 
proceedings before FERC, did not seek rehearing on the 
issues it sought to raise before the court, and had not timely 
petitioned for review.  See id. at 512, 516.  The restrictions 
applied to the intervenor not because of its intervenor status, 
but because the intervenor was attempting to obtain review of 
a FERC order after the original petitioner withdrew.  See id. 
at 513.  In such a case, the intervenor must satisfy the 
statutory prerequisites for obtaining judicial review in order 
to continue prosecuting the petition on its own.  See id. at 
512-14.  Because they are participating as intervenors while 
the original petitioners remain in the case, the APGA and Gas 
Authority are not held to the jurisdictional requirements of 
the Natural Gas Act, 15 U.S.C. s 717r(a).

     The Commission's reliance on Platte River Whooping 
Crane Critical Habitat Maintenance Trust v. FERC, 962 
F.2d 27 (D.C. Cir. 1992), is equally unavailing.  In that case, 
the court declined to reach arguments raised by two interve-
nors on the ground that no other party had raised the claims 
before the court.  Id. at 37 n.4.  The court then noted that 
the issues intervenors sought to raise were not preserved in 
their own petitions for rehearing before FERC.  See id. 
Presumably in reliance on this language, FERC cites Platte 
River for the proposition that an intervenor may raise on 
appeal only those matters it raised in its own application for 
rehearing.

__________
     2  An intervenor must, however, satisfy the requirements of 
Article III standing imposed on petitioners.  See Rio Grande 
Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 178 F.3d 533, 538-39 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  The 
APGA's and Gas Authority's standing to participate as intervenors 
is uncontested and self-evident.  See Mississippi Valley Gas Co. v. 
FERC, 68 F.3d 503, 507-08 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (customer of Southern 
had standing under the Natural Gas Act and Article III to chal-
lenge FERC's approval of Southern's gas transportation rate dis-
counts).

     That seems to take the case a bit too far.  The footnote in 
Platte River stands for the well-established principle that, 
absent extraordinary circumstances, intervenors "may join 
issue only on a matter that has been brought before the court 
by another party."  Illinois Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 911 F.2d 
776, 786 (D.C. Cir. 1990), cited in Platte River, 962 F.2d at 37 
n.4.  Beyond that, if an intervenor wishes to raise a specific 
claim not raised by petitioners, the court recaps the point 
("As explained in Part II above") that the intervenor must 
preserve the issue in its own petition for rehearing and thus 
satisfy the statutory requirements for petitioners seeking 
judicial review of FERC orders.  962 F.2d at 37 n.4;  see id. 
at 34-35 (quoting the Federal Power Act's judicial review 
provision, 16 U.S.C. s 825l(b));  accord Rio Grande Pipeline 
Co. v. FERC, 178 F.3d at 539 (intervenors are normally 
limited to the scope of the original petition for review, so they 
must "petition for review directly" if they desire to raise any 
additional issues).3  That is not the situation here.  The 
APGA and Gas Authority have not asserted any claims in 
addition to those asserted by the petitioners.  Thus, Platte 
River offers no basis for dismissing these intervenors.

     Accordingly, because the APGA and the Gas Authority are 
not required to seek rehearing of the FERC orders on review 
in order to participate as intervenors in this case, we deny the 
motion to dismiss.

__________
     3  Rio Grande involved a petition for review arising under the 
Energy Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. s 7172;  judicial review was under the 
Hobbs Act, 28 U.S.C. ss 2321, 2341-51, and intervention was 
governed by s 2348, which does not require a party to seek 
rehearing as is required under the Natural Gas Act.  See Associa-
tion of Oil Pipe Lines v. FERC, 83 F.3d 1424, 1432 n.14 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  Accordingly, Rio Grande's analysis of the intervenor's sta-
tus does not touch on the question whether a rehearing application 
is a condition precedent for intervention.

