                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued February 6, 2001     Decided March 30, 2001 

                           No. 00-5128

                     Center for Auto Safety, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

     National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv01759)

     Allison M. Zieve argued the cause for appellant.  With her 
on the briefs was Michael Tankersley.

     Lisa S. Goldfluss, Assistant United States Attorney, ar-
gued the cause for appellee National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. Lewis, 
United States Attorney, R. Craig Lawrence, Assistant United 
States Attorney, Lloyd S. Guerci, Assistant Chief Counsel for 

Litigation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
and Enid Rubenstein, Attorney.

     Erika Z. Jones argued the cause for appellees Volvo Cars 
of North America, Inc., et al.  With her on the brief were 
Adam C. Sloane, Karen L. Manos, Paul Jackson Rice, 
Christopher H. Grigorian, Scott T. Kragie, and Andrew W. 
Cohen.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  In December 1997, the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration ("NHTSA") issued an 
Information Request to nine airbag manufacturers and im-
porters seeking information on airbag systems used in years 
1990-98.  Subsequently, the Center for Auto Safety ("Cen-
ter") sought access to the information pursuant to the Free-
dom of Information Act ("FOIA"), 5 U.S.C. s 552 (1994).  
NHTSA released some of the information to the Center, but 
asserted that the remaining submissions were protected from 
disclosure under Exemption 4 of FOIA, 5 U.S.C. s 552(b)(4) 
(1994), which excludes from disclosure "trade secrets and 
commercial or financial information obtained from a person 
and privileged or confidential."

     The Center filed suit in District Court, asserting that the 
disputed documents were subject to disclosure under FOIA, 
because the submissions to the Government had been manda-
tory and disclosure of the information would not cause impair-
ment to the Government or substantial competitive harm to 
the respondents.  The Center also submitted evidence pur-
porting to demonstrate that the intervenor-defendants had 
customarily disclosed information of the same type at issue 
here.

     On summary judgment, the District Court found that, 
because NHTSA's Information Request violated the Paper-
work Reduction Act, 44 U.S.C. s 3501 (1994), NHTSA had no 
authority to enforce the request, and as a result the submis-
sions should be considered voluntary.  Center for Auto Safety 

v. Nat'l Highway Traffic Safety Admin., No. 99-1759, Mem. 
Op.  at 35-36 (D.D.C. Feb. 28, 2000) ("Mem. Op.").  The 
District Court found that some of the disputed documents 
qualified as trade secrets, and therefore were protected as 
such from disclosure.  Analyzing the remaining information 
as voluntary submissions, the District Court evaluated the 
submissions under the standards laid out in Critical Mass 
Energy Project v. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 975 F.2d 
871 (D.C. Cir. 1992), and Niagara Mohawk Power Corp. v. 
United States Department of Energy, 169 F.3d 16 (D.C. Cir. 
1999).  Pursuant to Critical Mass, the District Court consid-
ered whether, in the past, the manufacturers and importers 
had customarily disclosed the same type of information at 
issue here, and determined that they had not.

     We agree with the District Court that, because NHTSA 
violated the Paperwork Reduction Act, the agency's Informa-
tion Request was not enforceable.  Accordingly, because 
NHTSA lacked legal authority to enforce its request for 
information, the submissions cannot be considered mandatory 
even if the parties reasonably believed the Information Re-
quests were mandatory at the time of submission.  When an 
agency obtains information from private entities by asserting 
legal authority which it cannot enforce, private-party submis-
sions are entitled to the same protection from disclosure as 
voluntary submissions.

     Although the District Court appropriately analyzed disclo-
sure under the voluntary, rather than mandatory standard, 
we find that the District Court misstated the appropriate 
legal standard.  In addressing customary disclosure, the trial 
court appeared to indicate that the Center was required to 
prove that intervenor-defendants have previously released 
identical information.  This is not a correct statement of the 
law.  As a result, questions remain as to whether certain of 
the disputed information must be released because it has 
been customarily disclosed in the past.  Accordingly, we 
remand the case to the District Court for further proceedings 
consistent with the opinion.

                          I. Background

     This controversy dates back to December 17, 1997, when 
NHTSA issued an Information Request to nine airbag manu-
facturers and importers:  DaimlerChrysler Corporation, Ford 
Motor Company, General Motors Corporation, American 
Honda Motor Company, Mercedes-Benz USA, Nissan North 
America, Toyota Technical Center USA, Volkswagen of 
America, and Volvo Cars of North America.  The companies 
were directed to respond by February 17, 1998, and NHTSA 
subsequently posted some of the information on the agency's 
website.  Mem. Op. at 2.  On January 19, 1999, the Center 
submitted a FOIA request for all material the agency had 
received but not yet made public.  On February 16, 1999, 
NHTSA responded that Exemption 4 of FOIA barred disclo-
sure of the disputed information.  On March 10, 1999, the 
Center appealed NHTSA's decision.  Id. at 3.  On June 18, 
1999, NHTSA granted the appeal in part, and then released 
some, but not all, of the disputed information.  The Center 
filed the underlying FOIA suit on June 29, 1999.  Subsequent 
to the filing, NHTSA released additional information.  There 
are now 33 items of information remaining in dispute.  Id.  
The items fall into six general categories, including airbag 
deployment, airbag cover, airbag system components, seat-
belts, crash sensors, and system performance.

     The District Court determined that NHTSA did not have to 
disclose any of the 33 items of information.  The District 
Court found that 10 of the information items were protected 
from disclosure as trade secrets, including information re-
garding the tear pattern of the airbag, the fold pattern of the 
airbag, the number and location of the tethers, the type of 
inflator and gas generant, the number of inflation stages, the 
various tank tests used to measure inflator characteristics, 
and the engineering specifications provided to suppliers for 
development of algorithms.  Id. at 29-32.  The District Court 
explained that the remaining 23 information items were ex-
empt from disclosure because the information was voluntarily 
submitted and constituted confidential commercial informa-
tion that was not customarily disclosed.  The District Court 
concluded that the information at issue had been disclosed in 

the past only when necessary, and always with a confidentiali-
ty agreement or protective order.  Id. at 38.

     The Center argued that the information was customarily 
disclosed, because most of the information could be ascer-
tained through physical inspection.  The District Court re-
jected this claim;  the time, expense and risk of gathering the 
relevant information are substantial, and simply selling a 
vehicle to the public does not constitute revealing the detailed 
physical characteristics of airbags.  Id. at 32.

     The Center also argued that the manufacturers had previ-
ously disclosed the same type of information, and submitted 
extensive, detailed evidence to the District Court of prior 
instances of disclosure.  The District Court rejected this 
claim as well, and concluded that, in each instance highlighted 
by the Center, the evidence indicated only discrete disclo-
sures to entities requiring the information, not customary 
disclosure.  Furthermore, the information disclosed was gen-
eral and merely approximated the information submitted to 
NHTSA.  Id. at 39.  In addition, the District Court held that 
the Center failed to show that the previously disclosed infor-
mation was the same type of information that the Center now 
seeks.  On this latter point, the District Court noted that the 
Center "must" demonstrate that the information is "identi-
cal."  Id.  Based on this analysis, the District Court granted 
NHTSA's and intervenor-defendants' motion for summary 
judgment.  We review the District Court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo.  Rockwell Int'l Corp. v. United States 
Dep't of Justice, 235 F.3d 598, 602 (D.C. Cir. 2000).

                           II. Analysis

A.   Voluntary or Mandatory Submissions

     FOIA expresses a fundamental commitment to full agency 
disclosure of government documents.  Public access, not se-
crecy, is the main purpose of FOIA.  United States Dep't of 
Defense v. Fed. Lab. Relations Auth., 510 U.S. 487, 494 (1994) 
(quoting Department of Air Force v. Rose, 425 U.S. 352, 361 
(1976)).  Although FOIA is intended to expose agency action 

to public scrutiny, FOIA permits an agency to withhold 
information if it falls within any one of nine categories of 
exempted material.  McCutchen v. United States Dep't of 
Health and Human Services, 30 F.3d 183, 184 (D.C. Cir. 
1994).

     NHTSA asserted that the information requested by the 
Center was protected from disclosure under Exemption 4, 
which excludes "trade secrets and commercial or financial 
information obtained from a person and privileged or confi-
dential."  5 U.S.C. s 552(b)(4).  This court has on a number 
of occasions addressed the standards governing determina-
tions of whether information qualifies under Exemption 4.  
The judgment of the court sitting en banc in Critical Mass is 
our most significant statement on the subject.

     In Critical Mass, the court held that material may be 
withheld as "financial or commercial" information under Ex-
emption 4 of FOIA under two circumstances.  First, "finan-
cial or commercial information provided to the Government 
on a voluntary basis is 'confidential' for the purpose of 
Exemption 4 if it is of a kind that would customarily not be 
released to the public by the person from whom it was 
obtained."  975 F.2d at 879 (emphasis added).  Second, finan-
cial or commercial information provided to the Government 
on a mandatory basis is "confidential" if "disclosure would be 
likely either '(1) to impair the Government's ability to obtain 
necessary information in the future;  or (2) to cause substan-
tial harm to the competitive position of the person from whom 
the information was obtained.' "  Id. at 878.  "[W]hen dealing 
with a FOIA request for information the provider is required 
to supply, the governmental impact inquiry will focus on the 
possible effect of disclosure on its quality."  Id.

     The decision in Critical Mass explains that, with respect 
to information voluntarily submitted, the party opposing dis-
closure bears the burden of proving the information is confi-
dential.  Id. at 879.  In addition, in assessing customary 
disclosure, the court will consider how the particular party 
customarily treats the information, not how the industry as 
a whole treats the information.  Id. at 872, 878-80.  A 

party can voluntarily make protected disclosures of informa-
tion, and as long as the disclosures are not made to the 
general public, such disclosures do not constitute customary 
disclosures.  Id. at 874, 880.

     The court further noted that disclosure under FOIA bal-
ances the public's interest in maintaining "an informed citi-
zenry, vital to the functioning of a democratic society," with 
the Government's interest in access to data in making "intelli-
gent well informed decisions," and private interests in protec-
tion from the "competitive disadvantages" that would result 
from disclosure.  Id. at 872-73 (citations omitted).  When the 
Government obtains information as part of a mandatory 
submission, the Government's access to the information nor-
mally is not seriously threatened by disclosure;  the private 
interest is the principal factor tending against disclosure, and 
the harm to the private interest must be significant to pre-
vent public access to information.  Id. at 878.  However, 
when the Government receives information voluntarily, it has 
a strong interest in ensuring continued access, and therefore 
both the Government and private interests weigh against 
overly broad disclosure.  Id.

     With this framework in mind, we agree with the District 
Court that the submissions in this case should not be treated 
as mandatory.  At the same time, we note that this case does 
not involve a typical voluntary information submission--it 
involves a mistaken submission.  NHTSA's request for infor-
mation appeared mandatory on its face.  The Information 
Request stated that "NHTSA hereby requires" the recipient 
to submit the information and explained that the recipient, 
"must respond to the enclosed Information Request."  Infor-
mation Request, reprinted in Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 323.  
Furthermore, the Information Request explained, "[f]ailure to 
respond promptly and fully to this Information Request could 
subject [recipient] to civil penalties pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 
s 30165 or lead to an action for injunctive relief pursuant to 
49 U.S.C. s 30163."  Id.  The language of the Information 
Request clearly communicates to the recipient that submis-
sion of material was mandatory.

     Nevertheless, NHTSA's request was not enforceable as a 
result of the Paperwork Reduction Act and, therefore, we find 
that the submissions cannot be considered mandatory.  Un-
der the Paperwork Reduction Act, if NHTSA seeks to collect 
information from 10 or more persons or entities, NHTSA 
must obtain prior approval from OMB.  44 U.S.C. 
s 3502(3)(A)(i) (Supp. IV 1998).  If NHTSA fails to obtain 
prior approval from OMB, the request for information can be 
ignored without penalty.  44 U.S.C. s 3512(a) (Supp. IV 
1998).  OMB regulations specifically explain that "10 or 
more" includes any "independent entities to which the initial 
addressee may reasonably be expected to transmit the collec-
tion of information."  5 C.F.R. s 1320.3(c)(4) (2000).

     On the record at hand, it is clear that NHTSA expected 
that the Information Request would be submitted to 10 or 
more entities.  For example, the District Court pointed out 
that Volkswagen of America, as an importer, had to submit 
the Information Request to Volkswagen AG and Audi AG in 
order to respond to the questions, and all nine manufacturers 
who received the Information Request had to collect informa-
tion from their suppliers.  Mem. Op. at 36.  This finding was 
also supported by the declaration of the executive director of 
NHTSA, L. Robert Shelton, who explained that NHTSA 
expected the recipients to send the request to their foreign 
parents, subsidiaries and affiliates.  Declaration of L. Robert 
Shelton, reprinted in J.A. 463-65.

     Although NHTSA expected that the Information Request 
would be submitted to 10 or more entities, NHTSA did not 
get prior approval from OMB.  As a result, NHTSA had no 
authority to enforce the information request.  Had the inter-
venor-defendants ignored the agency's request for informa-
tion, NHTSA could not have compelled them to respond to 
the request.  Because NHTSA could not enforce its Informa-
tion Request, the material submitted in response to the 
Information Request cannot be considered mandatory.

     In determining that the submission was not mandatory, we 
hold that actual legal authority, rather than parties' beliefs or 
intentions, governs judicial assessments of the character of 

submissions.  We reject the argument that, in assessing 
submissions for the purpose of Exemption 4 analysis, we 
should look to subjective factors, such as whether the respon-
dents believed that the Information Request was voluntary, 
or whether the agency, at the time it issued the request for 
information, considered the request to be mandatory.  Focus-
ing on parties' intentions, for purposes of analyzing submis-
sions under Exemption 4, would cause the court to engage in 
spurious inquiries into the mind.  On the other hand, linking 
enforceability and mandatory submissions creates an objec-
tive test;  regardless of what the parties thought or intended, 
if an agency has no authority to enforce an information 
request, submissions are not mandatory.

     In distinguishing between voluntary and mandatory sub-
missions, the court in Critical Mass emphasized that the 
Supreme Court has favored "the development of categorical 
rules whenever a particular set of facts will lead to a general-
ly predictable application of FOIA."  Critical Mass, 975 F.2d 
at 879 (discussing United States Dep't of Justice v. Reporters 
Comm. for Freedom of the Press, 489 U.S. 749, 779 (1989)).  
We also noted the Court's suggestion of a "practical ap-
proach" in interpreting FOIA, and defended the voluntary 
versus mandatory distinction as an objective test.  Critical 
Mass, 975 F.2d at 879 (quoting John Doe Agency v. John Doe 
Corp., 493 U.S. 146, 157 (1989)).  The distinction between 
voluntary and mandatory submissions that was delineated in 
Critical Mass was rooted in the importance of establishing 
clear tests in interpreting FOIA, and we continue in that 
tradition today.

     We cannot accept the Center's argument that if recipients 
do not assert that a submission is voluntary before submit-
ting information in response to an agency's request, they 
have implicitly waived their entitlement to subsequently as-
sert that the submission was not mandatory.  Critical Mass 
emphasizes our concern with an agency's "continuing ability 
to secure ... data on a cooperative basis."  Critical Mass, 
975 F.2d at 879.  Although NHTSA in this case purported 
to seek data pursuant to its statutory mandate, the response 
by the manufacturers was certainly "cooperative" in the 

sense that they readily supplied the data without making 
legal objections.  Indeed, at least two of the manufacturers 
acquiesced while maintaining that their responses were vol-
untary.  Surely there is an important policy interest in mini-
mizing resistance by a manufacturer to an agency's request 
for information;  insisting that a respondent identify and air 
legal objections in response to any request in order to pre-
serve its rights would tend to frustrate the "cooperati[on]" 
that Critical Mass values.  Beyond, that it would needlessly 
waste resources to require that respondents identify legal 
defects that have no practical bearing unless and until a 
FOIA dispute materializes.

     The Center also argues that intervenor-defendants have 
waived their entitlement to assert a claim under the Paper-
work Reduction Act because claims under the Paperwork 
Reduction Act cannot be raised once the information is sub-
mitted.  Permitting a party to raise a Paperwork Reduction 
Act claim after having submitted information to an agency 
does not support the purpose of the Paperwork Reduction 
Act;  after information is submitted, the Paperwork Reduction 
Act's goal of reducing paperwork by mandating OMB review 
is moot.  We disagree.

     The Paperwork Reduction Act directly addresses when a 
claim can be raised.  Although it does not expressly refer to 
claims arising after submission of the information, the statute 
provides that "[t]he protection provided by this section may 
be raised in the form of a complete defense, bar, or otherwise 
at any time during the agency administrative process or 
judicial action applicable thereto."  44 U.S.C. s 3512(b) 
(Supp. IV 1998).  In Saco River Cellular, Inc. v. FCC, 133 
F.3d 25, 31 (D.C. Cir. 1998), we explained that, by explicitly 
allowing parties to raise a Paperwork Reduction Act claim at 
any time during ongoing proceedings, the Paperwork Reduc-
tion Act "prevents an agency or court from refusing to 
consider a [Paperwork Reduction Act] argument on the 
ground that it is untimely."

     Saco River is not directly on point, as it involved a Paper-
work Reduction Act defense that was raised when the party 

had not submitted the information.  However, the expansive 
language of the Paperwork Reduction Act itself, along with 
this court's explication in Saco River, militates against the 
Center's position and supports our finding that a Paperwork 
Reduction Act claim can be raised after information has been 
submitted.  In addition, the Center's argument ignores the 
deterrence effect that permitting parties to raise their Paper-
work Reduction Act claim can have on future agency actions.  
Although the paperwork may already have been produced in 
response to the particular Information Request, permitting 
parties to raise their Paperwork Reduction Act claim, even 
after submitting the information, further encourages agencies 
to comply prospectively with the Paperwork Reduction Act.

B.   Customary Disclosure

     If this were an ordinary FOIA case involving the invocation 
of Exemption 4 with respect to information that had been 
voluntarily submitted to the Government, we would consider 
whether the information at issue has been customarily dis-
closed.  Here, however, we are confronted with information 
that was submitted under false pretenses.  That is, the 
Government claimed that it had the authority to compel the 
submission of the information when in fact no such authority 
existed.  As noted above, applications of Exemption 4 attempt 
to balance private interests in protection from disclosure, 
governmental interests in access to data, and public interest 
in transparent governmental decision-making.  In this case, 
the agency essentially "flashed its badge" to gain entrance to 
a private sphere when it had no legal authority to do so, and 
this misrepresentation must tip the balance of interests in 
favor of the private parties.  Given this unusual situation--
i.e., submissions made under false pretenses--we cannot treat 
the submissions as "mandatory."  As a result, we apply the 
same standard we use in evaluating voluntary submissions.  
Thus, treating the information as having been submitted 
voluntarily, we turn to the question of whether the informa-
tion is customarily disclosed.

     As a preliminary matter, we note that the District Court 
found that 10 information items involved protected trade 

secrets.  We have defined a trade secret as a "secret, com-
mercially valuable plan, formula, process, or device that is 
used for the making, preparing, compounding, or processing 
of trade commodities and that can be said to be the end 
product of either innovation or substantial effort."  Pub. 
Citizen Health Research Group v. FDA, 704 F.2d 1280, 1288 
(D.C. Cir. 1983).  On appeal, the Center argues that the 
information at issue addressed the physical and performance 
characteristics of airbags, not how airbags are manufactured, 
and, therefore, the information cannot qualify as trade se-
crets.  Intervenor-defendants defend the trade secrets ruling.  
NHTSA does not defend the trade secrets ruling and instead 
urges the court to find that the submissions were voluntary 
and involved commercial information not customarily dis-
closed to the public.  We agree with the Center that the 
information at issue does not qualify as trade secrets, but also 
agree with NHTSA that the information may nonetheless 
qualify for protection under Critical Mass.  Our Decision in 
Public Citizen narrowly cabins trade secrets to information 
relating to the "productive process" itself, see id. at 1288;  yet 
these 10 categories of information relate only to the end 
product--what features an airbag has and how it performs--
rather than to the production process, how an airbag is made.  
To be sure, the manufacturers persuasively argue that the 
information is valuable to competitors and not readily ob-
tained.  That, however, goes to whether the information is 
customarily disclosed.  Therefore, the question to be decided 
here is whether the information is independently protected 
under Critical Mass.  We therefore turn to that issue.

     The Center asserts that with respect to 18 of the 33 
disputed items of information, at least one of the companies 
has customarily disclosed the same type of information in the 
past.  The Center also claims that, because the information at 
issue relates to products that are sold on the public market, 
most of the information can be ascertained by examining an 
airbag, performing a routine test, or watching a publicly 
accessible videotape.

     We reject the Center's argument that the mere selling of a 
product on the open market can constitute evidence of cus-
tomary disclosure.  The District Court correctly determined 
that the fact that intervenor-defendants sold cars with air-
bags to the public does not constitute evidence of customary 

disclosure.  The District Court explained that dismantling 
airbags is "dangerous, time-consuming and expensive," and 
the information at issue in this case cannot be discovered 
simply by looking inside a car or taking apart a steering 
column or dashboard.  Mem. Op. at 32.  We agree--indeed, 
to find otherwise would so dilute the meaning of customary 
disclosure, as to render the requirement meaningless.  The 
Information Requests specified that respondents must submit 
information for each vehicle, make, and model manufactured 
or imported into the United States between 1990 and 1998.  
Information Request, reprinted in J.A. 328.  The fact that 
airbags can be bought on the open market and inspected 
certainly does not establish that information describing the 
physical characteristics of every vehicle produced over many 
years is customarily disclosed.

     Although we agree that the mere sale of a product to the 
public does not constitute customary disclosure, there is one 
aspect of the District Court's opinion that is flawed.  In 
Niagara Mohawk, this court held that information must be 
disclosed if identical information is in the public domain.  "[I]f 
identical information is truly public, then enforcement of an 
exemption cannot fulfill its purposes."  Niagara Mohawk, 169 
F.3d at 19.  The "identical information" basis for disclosure 
is, however, entirely distinct from the "customary disclosure" 
standard.  Under the former test, the party favoring disclo-
sure has the burden of demonstrating that the information 
sought is identical to information already publicly available;  
under the latter test, the burden is on the party opposing 
disclosure to prove that the information is of a kind that 
would customarily not be released to the public.  Critical 
Mass, 975 F.3d at 879.  In this case, the District Court 
appeared to hold that the Center could obtain release of the 
information only if information of that kind is customarily 
disclosed and the identical information has been disclosed.  
Mem. Op. at 39.  This is not a correct statement of the law.

     Despite this legal error, the District Court correctly reject-
ed much of the Center's purported evidence of customary 
disclosure.  The Center contends that customary disclosure is 
shown by the fact that many of the submissions to NHTSA 

had nothing more than detail to distinguish them from mate-
rials previously disclosed by the respondents.  In other 
words, the Center argues that a difference in level of detail is 
inadequate to establish a difference in type of information.  
This argument is unpersuasive.  In truth, substantial differ-
ences in level of detail can produce a difference in type of 
information.  Thus, for example, a one time disclosure of 
information regarding a single model in a particular year will 
not likely create a genuine issue of material fact regarding 
the customary disclosure of multi-year, multi-model informa-
tion.

     The fallacy of the Center's claim is manifest even in the 
evidence that the Center itself highlights.  The Center cites a 
declaration by Tamio Arakawa as evidence that Toyota cus-
tomarily disclosed information which Center now seeks.  Ara-
kawa explained,

     The information contained in [Center for Auto Safety's 
     exhibit] is general information for a generic 1993-94 
     Toyota vehicle.  Unlike the information contained in 
     Toyota's response to NHTSA's information request, 
     [Center for Auto Safety's exhibit] does not contain specif-
     ic data for particular Toyota vehicles or for model years 
     1990-98.  For example, the information described in 
     [plaintiff's exhibit] regarding sensor and deployment 
     thresholds is limited to head-on collisions.  Deployment 
     thresholds are not determined by only head-on collision 
     data.  The information that Toyota is seeking to protect 
     from disclosure in this litigation include threshold values 
     for various types of collisions for every 1990-98 Toyota 
     Vehicle.
     
Arakawa Supp. p 8, reprinted in J.A. 574-75.  Contrary to 
the Center's assumptions, it was eminently reasonable for the 
District Court to conclude that the differences described by 
Arakawa show that the difference between the disclosed 
information and the submitted information is a difference in 
type.  The Center pointed to information Toyota disclosed 
regarding a generic 1993-94 Toyota vehicle;  the information 
at issue covers data for every 1990-98 Toyota vehicle.  The 
former is not evidence of customary disclosure of the latter.

     In sum, most of the District Court's findings on customary 
disclosure are supported by the record and consistent with 
applicable law.  However, as a result of the District Court's 
misapplication of the Niagara Mohawk legal standard, some 
questions still remain regarding whether the intervenor-
defendants customarily disclosed certain information at issue.  
For example, the Center submitted evidence that "GM public-
ly disclosed a chart listing, by vehicle model for MY 1993-
1996, the driver and passenger airbag material and weave."  
Appendix A, reprinted in J.A. 337.  At oral argument, coun-
sel for intervenor-defendants was unable to explain why this 
multi-year, multi-model information should not constitute evi-
dence of customary disclosure.  Following argument counsel 
submitted a letter to the court pointing to the supplemental 
declaration of C. Thomas Terry in response.  Terry's supple-
mental declaration asserted that GM's release of information 
did not reflect a policy of customary disclosure of the type of 
information GM provided in response to the Information 
Request.  According to Terry, the comments were an "isolat-
ed release of information" and differed in "specificity, mea-
surement criteria, and other material respects."  Supplemen-
tal Declaration of C. Thomas Terry, reprinted in J.A. 505, p 4, 
507, p 14.  Aside from these general claims, Terry presented 
nothing concrete to support this position.  Furthermore, Ter-
ry noted that "[a]ny information in the comments that was 
identical to specific responses to the Information Requests 
has been disclosed."  Id. at 505, p 4.  As we have explained, 
however, the information need not have been identical to 
constitute customary disclosure.

     Applying the appropriate legal standard on remand, the 
District Court must determine whether Terry's declaration, 
and any other relevant responses by intervenor-defendants, 
are adequate to defeat any claim of customary disclosure.  
The same inquiry must be made with respect to the 10 
information items the District Court held were trade secrets 
and any other information item that is questionable due to the 
District Court's error in applying Niagara Mohawk.  On 

remand, the District Court need not retry the entire case, for, 
as we have noted, most of the findings at issue easily survive 
challenge.  It will be up to the Center to identify any other 
disputed material, like the aforecited material discussed in 
the Terry Declaration, that may have been analyzed pursuant 
to an incorrect legal standard by virtue of the District Court's 
flawed application of Niagara Mohawk.

                         III. Conclusion

     Based on the foregoing analysis, the case is remanded to 
the District Court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.

                                                                   