                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued May 8, 2001      Decided June 29, 2001 

                           No. 00-1171

                 Honeywell International, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

       International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace & 
       Agricultural Implement Workers of America, AFL-CIO, 
                            Intervenor

                           -----------

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

                           -----------

     Philip Allen Lacovara argued the cause for petitioner 
Honeywell International, Inc. With him on the briefs was 
Charles P. O'Connor.

     Harold P. Coxson and Stanley R. Strauss were on the brief 
for amicus curiae Council on Labor Law Equality.

     David A. Fleischer, Senior Attorney, National Labor Rela-
tions Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With him on 

the brief were John H. Ferguson, Associate General Counsel, 
and Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate General Counsel.  
David S. Habenstreit, Attorney, entered an appearance.

     Thomas W. Meiklejohn was on the brief for intervenor 
International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace & Agri-
cultural Implement Workers of America.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Sentelle and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

       Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  Honeywell International Inc. 
("Honeywell") petitions for review from a decision of the 
National Labor Relations Board ("NLRB" or "Board") hold-
ing that the company violated ss 8(a)(1) and (5) of the 
National Labor Relations Act ("NLRA" or "Act") by unilater-
ally terminating severance benefits allegedly owed to bargain-
ing unit employees.  In 1994, Honeywell purchased Textron's 
military and commercial engine manufacturing operations at 
the Stratford Army Engine Plant in Stratford, Connecticut.  
At the time of the sale, Honeywell assumed the collective 
bargaining agreements that had been executed by Textron 
and the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace 
and Agricultural Implement Workers of America ("UAW" or 
"Union"), and its Local 376 and Local 1010.  The collective 
bargaining arrangement consisted of a core agreement, a 
Competitiveness Agreement ("CA"), covering relocation deci-
sions, and an Effects Bargaining Agreement ("EBA"), cover-
ing insurance, pension, severance, and other such benefits to 
deal with the economic impact and effects of a potential sale 
of Textron assets.  At issue before us is whether the sever-
ance benefits under the EBA were subject to the rule enunci-
ated in NLRB v. Katz, 369 U.S. 736 (1962).

     Pursuant to Katz, it is generally held that, absent impasse 
or waiver, "an employer's unilateral change during the course 
of a collective bargaining relationship of a matter that is a 
mandatory subject of bargaining is a per se violation of the 
[NLRA]."  The Developing Labor Law 266-69 (Christopher 
T. Hexter et al., eds., 3d ed. 1999 Cumulative Supplement).  

"The Katz doctrine has been extended as well to cases where, 
as here, an existing agreement has expired and negotiations 
on a new one have yet to be completed."  Litton Fin. 
Printing Div. v. NLRB, 501 U.S. 190, 198 (1991).  Severance 
pay is indisputably a mandatory subject of bargaining;  it was 
an established term of employment under the parties' EBA;  
and it is not among the categorical exceptions to the Katz rule 
noted in Litton.  It is therefore clear that Honeywell was 
barred from unilaterally terminating severance benefits at the 
expiration of the EBA, absent an impasse in bargaining with 
the Union or a waiver by the Union of the right to claim 
severance benefits on behalf of bargaining unit employees.  
The Board properly found no exception to the Katz rule in 
this case.

     In challenging the Board's decision, Honeywell contends, 
first, that the "contract coverage" doctrine should trump the 
unilateral change doctrine in this case.  In other words, 
Honeywell argues that, by the terms of the parties' agree-
ment, severance benefits expired with the termination of the 
EBA.  This argument fails, because severance benefits in the 
EBA are not limited to a time certain.  The EBA contains a 
contract duration clause at the end of the document.  Under 
Katz, however, an expiration date in a standard contract 
duration clause cannot defeat the unilateral change doctrine.  
Indeed, as the Court made clear in Litton, the Katz rule often 
presupposes the end of a collective bargaining agreement and 
guarantees the continuation of existing benefits as a matter of 
law.  To hold that a general contract duration clause "covers" 
and vitiates a Union's statutory claim to continued status quo 
benefits, would be to drain the unilateral change doctrine of 
any coherent meaning.

     Honeywell also claims that the express terms of the EBA 
clearly and unmistakably waived any right to post-expiration 
eligibility for severance.  We agree with the Board that this 
argument fails.  Honeywell's final argument, suggesting that 
this dispute should have been settled in arbitration, is fore-
closed by 29 U.S.C. s 160(e).

     Accordingly, we deny Honeywell's petition for review of the 
Board's order.

                          I. Background

     In 1993, Honeywell, known at the time as Allied Signal, 
entered into negotiations to purchase Textron Inc., which 
produced mainly helicopter and tank engines for military and 
commercial purposes at the Stratford Army Engine Plant in 
Stratford, Connecticut.  In 1994, Textron began negotiating 
new collective bargaining agreements with the UAW and its 
Local 376 and Local 1010.  Although Textron owned the 
business at the time of the labor negotiations, Honeywell 
committed to adopting the agreements if they were competi-
tive.  AlliedSignal Aerospace, 330 N.L.R.B. No. 176 at 4 
(Apr. 12, 2000).

     After Honeywell and Textron announced the intended sale, 
the Union demanded to bargain over the effects on bargain-
ing unit employees.  Transcript (Oct. 6, 1998), reprinted in 
J.A. 98. Formal negotiations over the EBA took place be-
tween May 20 and July 13, 1994.  During these negotiations, 
"the Union gave Textron an 'Effects Proposal' which included 
severance pay calculated on the basis of 40 hours of [pay] for 
each year of employment, with a graduated payment scale 
based on [an employee's] number of years of service." 
AlliedSignal Aerospace, at 4.  The severance proposal was 
tied to a Supplementary Unemployment Benefit Plan 
("SUB") that was in existence in the parties' expiring collec-
tive bargaining contract.  Id.  In the past, money in the SUB 
"had run out because of the large number of layoffs in 1991 
and 1992.  The union team was looking for an alternative to 
the SUB plan and thus [was] interested in working out a 
severance program."  Id. at 5.

     As a part of its Effects Proposal, the Union suggested that 
employees laid off because of the sale or laid off in the three-
year period before the sale, and impacted by the sale, should 
be eligible for severance benefits.  Effects Proposal (May 20, 
1994), reprinted in J.A. 599-606.  Textron responded on May 
28 with a "declining balance" proposal.  Under this plan, the 

employees laid off earliest would receive the greatest sever-
ance pay;  the pay would gradually decrease over the period 
of the agreement, declining to zero benefits upon expiration of 
the EBA.  AlliedSignal Aerospace at 5.  This proposal also 
maintained a modified version of the SUB plan.  Company 
Proposal (May 28, 1994), reprinted in J.A. 608-10.  The 
employer's plan stipulated that only employees who had 
worked at least one year prior to the sale and who were laid 
off as a direct result of a transfer of bargaining unit work 
would be eligible for severance benefits.  Id. at 609.

     The Union rejected the company's proposal, because, under 
existing seniority rules, the most junior employees were laid 
off first and would therefore receive the most in severance 
benefits.  AlliedSignal Aerospace at 5;  Transcript (Oct.  6, 
1998), reprinted in J.A. 150.  However, the Union indicated 
that it was willing to adopt the eligibility criteria proposed by 
Textron.  Employees on the active payroll with at least one 
year of employment at the time of purchase by Honeywell, 
and who were subsequently laid off as a direct result of a 
transfer of bargaining unit operations by the company, would 
be eligible for severance pay.

     On June 2, Textron responded with a revised draft which 
retained the "declining balance" plan and included a duration 
clause stating that the EBA would "remain in effect until the 
date of expiration of the new 1994 labor agreement between 
the parties, but not thereafter unless renewed or extended in 
writing by the parties."  AlliedSignal Aerospace at 5;  Com-
pany Proposal (June 2, 1994), reprinted in J.A. 691-705.  The 
Union rejected the duration clause.  David Kelly, then-
president of Local 1010, testified that the Union was con-
cerned about employees laid off shortly before the EBA 
expired.  Employees had to wait 12 months after being laid 
off to apply for severance benefits.  Under the terms of the 
proposed duration clause, the Union was concerned that if an 
employee was laid off six months before the end of the 
agreement, the employee would not be able to apply for 
benefits.  AlliedSignal Aerospace at 5-6;  Transcript (Oct. 6, 
1998), reprinted in J.A. 103.

     Textron subsequently proposed the addition of the follow-
ing language:

     It is understood that expiration of this Agreement shall 
     not foreclose the post-expiration payment to employees 
     of bonuses or other benefits which accrued to them 
     because of lay off during the term of this agreement, or 
     the post-expiration presentation in a timely fashion of 
     claims regarding matters arising out of the application of 
     its terms prior to the expiration date.
     
AlliedSignal Aerospace at 6.  The company also removed the 
declining balance provision, increased the severance benefit to 
45 hours per year of service, and agreed that any employee 
with at least one year of seniority on the effective date of the 
agreement would be eligible for severance.  Id.  Final and 
Definitive Company Proposal (June 5, 1994), reprinted in J.A. 
827.

     The parties signed the EBA draft on June 9, 1994.  This 
included an agreement by Local 1010 waiving its "right to 
bargain over any future work transfer, reduction in the 
working force (regardless of its scope), and any partial or 
total shutdown or closure of the Stratford Plant."  AlliedSig-
nal Aerospace at 6.  The EBA also suspended the SUB fund 
during the term of the new agreement.  Id. at 5 n.9.

     Subsequently, an internal company planning document 
dealing with plant relocation was leaked to the Union.  The 
document stated:  "Best assumption today is that the Army 
will not buy any new tank engines.  We need to evaluate the 
barriers to closing the plant in case that it eventually becomes 
expedient."  Id. at 6;  Internal Memorandum (June 6, 1994), 
reprinted in J.A. 204-07.  When Union officials expressed 
concerns over the possibility of relocation, the parties negoti-
ated the CA and revised the EBA, deleting the waiver 
provision.  Transcript (Oct. 6, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 60-62.  
The final version of the EBA was signed by the company and 
Local 1010 on July 13 and ratified on July 21, 1994.  Local 
376 signed the EBA on July 28, 1994.  In October 1994, 

Honeywell purchased Textron and assumed these agree-
ments.

     The eligibility portion of the severance provision in the 
EBA provides that:

     ... employees who are hereafter laid off shall be eligible 
     for a severance bonus ... as specified in this Sec-
     tion....  
               An employee who shall be laid off without being re-
     called for a period of twelve (12) full consecutive months 
     thereafter shall be entitled to a severance bonus if the 
     employee was on the active payroll with one year or 
     more of seniority on the effective date of this Agreement, 
     or was on leave of absence granted or approved in 
     accordance with the terms of the collective bargaining 
     agreement on such date....  
     
          This severance bonus shall be payable to an otherwise 
     eligible employee who is laid off after the effective date 
     of this Agreement by either [Textron] or AlliedSignal 
     [Honeywell], provided that an asset sale by [Textron] to 
     such AlliedSignal shall, in fact, occur.
     
Effects Bargaining Agreement (July 13, 1994), reprinted in 
J.A. 512-13.  There is nothing in the severance provision 
saying that severance benefits are terminated at the expira-
tion of the EBA, or on any other date for that matter.  
Rather, the severance provision merely states that an em-
ployee must have been "laid off without being recalled for a 
period of twelve (12) full consecutive months" and been "on 
the active payroll with one year or more of seniority on the 
effective date" of the EBA in order to be eligible for sever-
ance pay.  Id.

     The duration clause appearing at the end of the EBA 
specifies that the EBA expires on June 6, 1997, unless the 
agreement is renewed in writing.  The EBA's duration clause 
reads as follows:

     The Effects Bargaining Agreement shall be effective as 
     of May 30, 1994, and shall remain in effect until midnight 
     on June 6, 1997, but not thereafter unless renewed or 
     extended in writing by the parties.  It is understood that 
     expiration of this Agreement shall not foreclose the post-
     
     expiration payment to employees of bonuses or other 
     benefits which accrued to them because of layoff during 
     the term of this Agreement, or the post-expiration pre-
     sentation in a timely fashion of claims regarding matters 
     arising out of the application of its terms prior to the 
     expiration date.
     
Id. at 528.  This clause mirrors the "June 6, 1997" expiration 
date in the parties' core collective bargaining agreement.

     In September 1995, Honeywell announced that it intended 
to close the Stratford plant and terminate the CA.  Allied- 
Signal Aerospace at 8.  The Company was unclear, however, 
regarding whether employees would be paid severance bene-
fits after the expiration of the EBA.  For example, in Janu-
ary 1997, Honeywell wrote a letter to employees saying that 
"[q]uestions concerning layoffs after June 6, cannot be an-
swered at this time, nor can we advise you of what benefits 
will be available after June 6.  Benefits such as severance pay 
are subjects for negotiation."  Id. at 9.

     There is some dispute over when Honeywell first informed 
the Union that it intended to terminate severance benefits as 
of June 7, 1997.  It is certain, however, that the Union had 
notice as of May 1997, when Allan Bocik, the company's vice 
president for labor relations, told Union officials that sever-
ance under the EBA would not continue after June 6, 1997.

     The company informed the Union on June 13, 1997 that the 
decision to close the Stratford plant was final.  Severance 
benefits were paid to employees who were laid off during the 
term of the EBA, but denied to employees laid off after June 
6, 1997.

     The Union filed a complaint with the NLRB alleging that 
the company violated ss 8(a)(1) and (5) by unilaterally termi-
nating severance benefits under the EBA.  The ALJ deter-
mined that Honeywell had unilaterally changed the terms and 
conditions of employment in violation of s 8(a)(1) and (5) of 
the NLRA when it cut off severance benefits on June 7, 1997.  
With one member dissenting, the Board affirmed the ALJ's 
decision and held that Honeywell had a statutory obligation to 

maintain the status quo.  The Board held that the contract 
coverage doctrine did not apply and that the Union had not 
waived any right to employees' post-expiration eligibility for 
severance pay.

                          II. Discussion

A.   Unilateral Change Doctrine

     Under the NLRA, the obligation to bargain collectively 
includes the duty to "confer in good faith with respect to 
wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employ-
ment."  29 U.S.C. s 158 (d).  In Katz, the Supreme Court 
held that a unilateral change by an employer during the 
course of a collective bargaining relationship concerning a 
matter which is a proper subject of bargaining is an unlawful 
refusal to bargain under the NLRA.  Thus, an employer may 
not unilaterally alter a term or condition of employment 
unless the parties reach a new agreement or bargain to 
impasse.

     The rationale for the Katz rule is simple:

     A unilateral change not only violates the plain require-
     ment that the parties bargain over "wages, hours, and 
     other terms and conditions," but also injures the process 
     of collective bargaining itself.  "Such unilateral action 
     minimizes the influence of organized bargaining.  It in-
     terferes with the right of self-organization by emphasiz-
     ing to the employees that there is no necessity for a 
     collective bargaining agent."
     
NLRB v. McClatchy Newspapers, 964 F.2d 1153, 1162 (D.C. 
Cir. 1992) (quoting May Dep't Stores Co. v. NLRB, 326 U.S. 
376, 385 (1945)).

     As noted above, the Katz rule applies in situations where 
"an existing agreement has expired and negotiations on a new 
one have yet to be completed."  Litton, 501 U.S. at 198.  In 
other words, the unilateral change doctrine is premised on a 
statutory right.  The right may be waived by contract and it 
may be vitiated if the parties reach an impasse in collective 

bargaining.  And it applies only with respect to mandatory 
subjects of bargaining, excluding certain categorical excep-
tions recognized by the courts and the Board.  See, e.g., 
Litton, 501 U.S. at 199-200, Acme Die Casting v. NLRB, 93 
F.3d 854, 857 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Beyond these conditions, 
however, the Katz rule is an inviolate principle of collective 
bargaining.

     The company does not dispute that severance pay is a 
mandatory subject of bargaining;  nor does it dispute that 
severance pay was an established term or condition of em-
ployment under the EBA.  The Katz rule barring unilateral 
changes therefore applies.  The company had no right, even 
after the expiration of the EBA, to terminate or otherwise 
modify the severance provision absent an impasse in bargain-
ing or a new agreement with the Union.

     The company does not claim that it reached an impasse in 
negotiations over severance and it does not contend that the 
parties executed a new agreement to replace the EBA.  In-
stead, the company claims (1) that the parties expressly 
agreed that the severance provision was to terminate with the 
expiration of the EBA, or (2) that the Union clearly and 
unmistakably waived any right of employees to claim post-
expiration eligibility for severance pay.  Bare nuances distin-
guish these arguments.  The bottom line, however, is that 
both arguments are wrong.

B.   The Contract Coverage Doctrine

     Honeywell argues that severance pay was "covered" by the 
EBA and, under the terms of the parties' agreement, it is 
clear that severance benefits terminate with the expiration of 
the EBA.  Thus, according to Honeywell, the Board had no 
business interfering in the parties' dispute over the meaning 
of their contract.  See, e.g., NLRB v. United Postal Service, 8 
F.3d 832, 837 (D.C. Cir. 1993) ("where the employer acts 
pursuant to a claim of right under the parties' agreement, the 
resolution of the refusal to bargain charge rests on an inter-
pretation of the contract at issue .... [n]ormally, under 
federal labor laws, arbitrators and the courts, rather than the 
Board, are the primary sources of contract interpretation").

     There are two problems with Honeywell's argument.  
First, as discussed in part "D." below, the company never 
suggested to the Board that this case should have been 
resolved pursuant to a contractual grievance procedure.  
Therefore, "it is clear that, in this case, the Board had the 
authority to interpret the [EBA] to resolve the pending unfair 
labor practice charge."  Id.  Of course the courts remain "the 
ultimate arbiter[s] of contract disputes."  Id.  This is true 
because "defer[ring] to the Board's contract interpretation 
would risk the development of conflicting principles for inter-
preting collective bargaining agreements."  Id. (citations 
omitted).

     Second, and more importantly, the company is wrong in its 
claim that "[t]he status quo obligations of the Act did not 
apply to the EBA benefits," because "[t]he Unions had no 
right to the continuation of eligibility for those benefits after 
the termination date of the agreement."  Petitioner's Br. at 
32.  To support this argument, the company contends that 
"[t]he Duration Clause [in the EBA] stated in the plainest 
terms both (1) the precise moment in time when the eligibility 
to qualify for EBA benefits would terminate and (2) precisely 
what would happen to benefit eligibility when the EBA 
expired."  Id. at 37.  As noted above, however, the disputed 
severance provision does not say that severance benefits are 
terminated at the expiration of the EBA.  In fact, the sever-
ance provision does not tie benefits to dates certain, apart 
from saying that an employee must have been "laid off 
without being recalled for a period of twelve (12) full consecu-
tive months" and been "on the active payroll with one year or 
more of seniority on the effective date" of the EBA in order 
to be eligible for severance pay.  Effects Bargaining Agree-
ment (July 13, 1994), reprinted in J.A. 512-13.

     Honeywell's argument rests solely on the terms of the 
duration clause, not the severance provision.  Under Katz 
and Litton, however, an expiration date in a standard con-
tract duration clause without more, cannot defeat the unilat-
eral change doctrine.  As the Supreme Court made clear in 
Litton, the Katz rule often presupposes the end of a collective 
bargaining agreement, ensuring the continuation of existing 

benefits beyond the term of the agreement as a matter of law.  
We would effectively drain the unilateral change doctrine of 
any coherent meaning were we to hold that a general contract 
duration clause "covers" and thereby vitiates a Union's statu-
tory claim to continued status quo benefits.  We therefore 
reject Honeywell's construction of the Katz rule.

     Honeywell suggests that this case is unusual, because, 
apart from its expiration date, the duration clause in the EBA 
also states that

     expiration of [the EBA] shall not foreclose the post-
     expiration payment to employees of bonuses or other 
     benefits which accrued to them because of layoff during 
     the term of this Agreement, or the post-expiration pre-
     sentation in a timely fashion of claims regarding matters 
     arising out of the application of its terms prior to the 
     expiration date.
     
Effects Bargaining Agreement (July 13, 1994), reprinted in 
J.A. 528.  According to Honeywell, this language conclusively 
proves that the severance benefit was limited:  the Union 
insisted on the language, because the Union "necessarily 
understood" that eligibility for severance benefits terminated 
with the end of the EBA.  Petitioner's Br. at 46.  However, 
the cited language supports no such conclusion.  Union offi-
cial David Kelly testified that this language was prompted by 
the Union's concern that an employee could be laid off prior 
to June 6, 1997, but before the 12-month waiting period to 
apply for severance pay had passed, and the company could 
then "propose either the elimination or the reduction of those 
benefits."  Transcript (Oct. 6, 1998), reprinted in J.A. 103.  
The Union insisted on these terms so that even after the 
EBA expired and the parties bargained to impasse, or 
reached a new agreement, employees laid off during the term 
of the EBA could continue to receive the severance benefits 
as defined under the EBA.

     Honeywell is correct in asserting that, in order to be 
eligible for severance pay, an employee must be "laid off 
without being recalled for a period of twelve (12) full consecu-
tive months" and have been "on the active payroll with one 

year or more of seniority on the effective date" of the EBA.  
Effects Bargaining Agreement (July 13, 1994), reprinted in 
J.A. 512-13.  The company is wrong, however, in contending 
that eligibility could not be established after June 6, 1997.  
Under Katz and Litton, continuation of severance benefits 
was ensured absent an impasse in bargaining or a new 
agreement.  In short, the company's claim that the duration 
clause of the EBA somehow superceded the unilateral change 
doctrine fails.

C.   Waiver

     Honeywell's second principal argument is that the express 
terms of the EBA waived any employees' right to post-
expiration eligibility for severance.  We find no merit in this 
claim.

     There is no doubt that a union may waive its statutory 
protection against unilateral changes in mandatory subjects 
of bargaining.  Cauthorne Trucking, 256 N.L.R.B. No. 115 
(June 19, 1981), enf'd in part, 691 F.3d 1023 (D.C. Cir. 1982).  
However, any such waiver must be "clear and unmistakable."  
Metro. Edison v. NLRB, 460 U.S. 693, 703 (1983).  On the 
record in this case, the Board correctly concluded that the 
Union did not clearly and unmistakably waive its protection 
against post-expiration unilateral termination of severance 
benefits by the company.

     In arguing for waiver, Honeywell points again to the dura-
tion clause, claiming that the express language of the clause 
shows that "the parties decided to terminate eligibility for 
severance benefits at midnight on June 6, 1997, and to waive 
any statutory right to have eligibility continue indefinitely 
thereafter until another round of bargaining took place." 
Petitioner's Br. at 45.  If these words--which are found in 
the company's brief--had been included in the EBA, then 
Honeywell's waiver argument might have merit.  But the 
aforecited words are not in the EBA.  The language of the 
duration clause in the EBA makes it clear that the Union's 
contractual right to severance benefits ended on June 6, 1997;  
but the provision is silent on the Union's statutory rights 

under Katz and Litton.  In other words, the duration clause 
in no way evinces a clear and unmistakable waiver by the 
Union.

     Honeywell also argues that the parties' bargaining history 
demonstrates waiver.  Honeywell originally offered a declin-
ing balance approach to calculating severance benefits.  Un-
der this approach, the severance paid to laid-off employees 
would have declined over the term of the contract, reaching 
zero when the contract expired.  The Union rejected Honey-
well's declining balance plan.  Honeywell argues that the 
duration clause replaced the declining balance proposal and, 
as a result, acceptance of the duration clause reveals that the 
Union waived its rights to claim severance benefits after the 
EBA expired.  This argument fails, just as Honeywell's claim 
that the duration clause itself constitutes waiver also fails.  
Acceptance of the duration clause, following the Union's 
rejection of the declining balance proposal, reveals only that 
the Union agreed that its contractual basis for receiving 
severance benefits would terminate on June 6, 1997.  But this 
bargaining history does not demonstrate that the Union 
waived its statutory claims for protection from unilateral 
change in terms or conditions of employment following expi-
ration of the contract.

     Honeywell also points to some communications between the 
Union and its members, as if to suggest that the Union 
acknowledged that severance benefits ended with the termi-
nation of the EBA.  For example, in a document written on 
July 21, 1994, the Union advised employees that "[t]he follow-
ing benefits will be provided to all Local 1010 employees and 
retirees who are laid off during the agreement."  Local 1010 
UAW Decision & Effects Agreement, reprinted in J.A. 255.  
The statement is ambiguous regarding post-agreement lay-
offs and does not prove that the Union intended to waive its 
statutory rights in signing the EBA.  Furthermore, in the 
same document, in answer to the question "Who Can Get 
Severance Bonus?", the Union answered:  "any employee with 
at least one year of service who is permanently laid off after 
the date of this agreement."  Id. at 256.  In short, there is no 
good evidence that the Union waived its claim to protection 
from unilateral change following termination of the EBA.

D.   Arbitration

     In a final, futile gesture to save the day, Honeywell argued 
to this court that any dispute between the parties over the 
meaning of the severance provision and duration clause in the 
EBA should have been submitted to arbitration, not the 
NLRB.  This is a specious claim.

     Disputes that arise under a collective bargaining agreement 
can be arbitrated even after the contract itself has expired.  
See Nolde Bros., Inc. v. Bakery Workers, 430 U.S. 243 (1977) 
(holding employees' claim for severance pay arose under the 
collective bargaining contract and was subject to arbitration 
terms even though it arose after the contract was terminat-
ed).  Therefore, employees who were laid off before June 6, 
1997, and who had grievances regarding their severance pay, 
arguably could have pursued those claims through arbitration 
even after the EBA was no longer in effect.  However, the 
unilateral change doctrine does not apply to arbitration provi-
sions in expired collective bargaining agreements:  once the 
contractual basis for an arbitration agreement expires, the 
arbitration agreement expires.  Litton, 501 U.S. at 210.  Par-
ties are free to draft a contract agreeing to resolve post-
expiration disputes through arbitration;  absent such agree-
ment, however, arbitration is not available.  Thus, employees 
who were laid off after June 6, 1997--i.e., the employees at 
issue in this case--could not have pursued arbitration to 
challenge the company's unilateral termination of severance 
benefits at the expiration of the EBA.

     Furthermore, the company's argument comes too late.  
Under s 10(e) of the NLRA, "[n]o objection that has not been 
urged before the Board, its member, agent, or agency, shall 
be considered by the court, unless the failure or neglect to 
urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordinary 
circumstances."  29 U.S.C.  s 160(e);  see, e.g., Quazite v. 
NLRB, 87 F.3d 493, 497-98 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (refusing to 
consider employer's argument that Board did not adequately 
explain need for bargaining order because employer did not 
raise objection before Board).  Honeywell did not raise the 
availability of grievance procedures and arbitration before the 

Board and no "extraordinary circumstances" have been cited 
to excuse this failure.  Therefore, this court cannot consider 
the argument.

     The company was silent on the subject of contractual 
grievance and arbitration procedures in the three documents 
submitted to the Board following the ALJ's ruling.  Honey-
well did not invoke the availability of grievance procedures or 
arbitration in its Exceptions of Respondent Allied Signal Inc. 
to the Decision of the Administrative Law Judge (No. 34-CA-
7898-2), its Brief in Support of Exceptions of Respondent 
Allied Signal Inc. to the Decision of the Administrative Law 
Judge (No.  34-CA-7898-2), or its Reply Brief of Respondent 
Allied Signal Inc. (No. 34-CA-7898-2).

     Before this court, the company did not refer to the avail-
ability of contractual grievance and arbitration procedures in 
its Preliminary Statement of Issues to be Raised. The matter 
was noted in passing in the company's initial brief to this 
court, where it was observed that "[d]isputes between em-
ployers and unions over the interpretation of contracts are 
matters for federal courts or, when the parties agree, by 
arbitration."  Petitioner's Br. at 39.  And, in its reply brief, 
the Company meekly suggested that, "[i]f there is a fair 
dispute about the meaning of a contract, with potential conse-
quences that would survive the contract's expiration, nothing 
bars a court, acting under Section 301 of the Labor- 
Management Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. s 185 (1982), or a 
grievance arbitrator from interpreting the contract and pro-
viding relief to the wronged party."  Petitioner's Reply Br. at 
15.  The company never contended that the Board erred in 
refusing deferral to arbitration.  Even if we could tease such 
an argument out of the company's cryptic one-liners in its two 
briefs to the court, 29 U.S.C. s 160(e) bars us from consider-
ing the argument.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons we deny the company's petition 
for review of the Board's order.

                                                            