                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued December 2, 2002    Decided January 24, 2003 

                           No. 01-3071

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                          Gary Bailey, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00164-04)

     David B. Smith, appointed by the court, argued the cause 
and filed the brief for appellant.

     Susan A. Nellor, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee.  With her on the brief were Roscoe C. Howard, 
Jr., U.S. Attorney, John R. Fisher, Thomas J. Tourish, Jr., 
and John Crabb, Jr., Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Randolph and Garland, Circuit Judges, and 
Williams, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Williams.

     Williams, Senior Circuit Judge:  A jury convicted Gary 
Bailey of conspiracy to distribute 500 grams or more of 
cocaine, in violation of 21 U.S.C. ss 846, 841(a)(1), 
841(b)(1)(B)(ii) (2000).  The court sentenced Bailey to 130 
months' imprisonment and to eight years of supervised re-
lease.  In this appeal, Bailey challenges three evidentiary 
rulings by the district court.  We affirm the district court, 
finding that while two of Bailey's challenges have merit, the 
errors were harmless.

     According to the government's evidence, Bailey supplied 
five kilograms of powder cocaine to Daniel Clayton on April 
15, 1999 for use in a drug deal near the Watergate Hotel.  
Bailey owned the cocaine, and Clayton (who pled guilty and 
testified for the government) served as a "broker" for its sale.  
Clayton drove the cocaine from New York to Washington in a 
Honda with a secret compartment (a "trap") installed by a 
third defendant, Darryl Simmons, who flew down to D.C. 
separately.  Bailey followed Clayton in an Acura.  Bailey and 
Clayton later picked up Simmons from the airport in D.C., 
and the two cars went on to the Watergate area.  Though the 
deal was originally for five kilos of crack cocaine (apparently 
Simmons was going to "cook" the powder cocaine in D.C. to 
make it crack once it was clear that the sale would go 
through), the quantity was for some reason later reduced, and 
the police were given four kilos of powder.  Clayton and 
another defendant gave the cocaine to the "buyer," Kevin 
Goode, a Drug Enforcement Administration "cooperator."  
After inspecting the contents, Goode gave the signal, and 
officers arrested Clayton, Bailey and another defendant.  
Simmons escaped initially but was eventually arrested in New 
York.

     Several items of evidence linked Bailey to the drug transac-
tion.  When Bailey was arrested, he was in the Acura, which 
several officers had seen driving in tandem with the Honda--
arriving at the Watergate area, proceeding to the airport to 

pick up Simmons (who knew how to get the cocaine out of the 
trap), and returning to the Watergate area.  Throughout 
these peregrinations the Acura that Bailey drove stuck with 
the Honda that contained the cocaine;  observing officers saw 
the vehicles making U-turns together, indeed virtually 
"bumper locked."  In the Acura was a piece of paper with 
Clayton's cell phone number, and Bailey's cell phone records 
showed five calls to Clayton's cell phone on April 15, and two 
on the day before.  Clayton testified extensively about Bai-
ley's involvement.  Simmons testified that he let Clayton use 
his Honda with the secret compartment to carry the drugs, 
and that while Clayton was in the Honda in New York, 
Simmons saw Clayton transfer the drugs from a car that 
Bailey was driving and put them into the Honda.

     The government also introduced evidence of other drug 
deals of Bailey's.  First, Clayton testified that before the 
April 15 deal, he had made between seven and twelve powder 
cocaine deals with Bailey over a nine-month period, ranging 
from three ounces to three quarters of a kilogram.  There 
was also testimony of two specific drug episodes in New York.  
First, an officer testified about finding two small bags of 
cocaine on Bailey, totaling about 50 grams, on February 2, 
2000.  Second, several witnesses testified to a cocaine trans-
action in the Bronx on June 12, 1998, in which 225 grams of 
cocaine were found in Bailey's car.  Both Clayton's vague 
reference (the seven to twelve deals) and the two New York 
transactions were admitted under Rule 404(b) of the Federal 
Rules of Evidence to show knowledge, motive, opportunity, 
intent, and plan.  There is no dispute about those admissions 
or the court's instruction allowing that use.  But there was 
also an instruction--hotly contested--allowing the jury to 
consider the two New York transactions to corroborate Clay-
ton's testimony about his prior drug transactions with Bailey.

     Finally, the government produced an expert witness, De-
tective Tyrone Thomas, who testified as to the modus operan-
di of drug dealers.  The testimony tended to explain the 
maneuvers of Bailey and his colleagues in terms of the 

purposes and problems facing participants in major drug 
deals.

     The defense was skimpy.  Bailey did not testify at all.  The 
core of his defense appeared to rest on evidence that a 
number of ladies' clothes, including undergarments, were 
found in the Acura.  He was apparently trying to show that 
he had come to the District to have a tryst with a woman--
though he offered no evidence that such a project was mutu-
ally exclusive with a drug deal.  In cross-examination he 
severely attacked the credibility of Clayton.

     Bailey raises three challenges.  First, he argues that it was 
error to prevent him from eliciting testimony that he had not 
yet been tried on his two New York offenses.  Second, he 
argues that the jury should not have been instructed that it 
could use the evidence of his two prior New York offenses to 
corroborate Clayton's testimony.  Finally, he argues that 
Detective Thomas's testimony violated Rule 704(b) by sug-
gesting that the witness had some special insight into Bailey's 
mental processes.

                             *  *  *

Admissibility of  the Legal Status of Bailey's Past Acts

     Bailey first argues that he should have been allowed to 
elicit testimony that he had not yet been tried for the two 
New York offenses that were introduced under Federal Rule 
of Evidence 404(b).  We review this claim for abuse of 
discretion.  See United States v. Clarke, 24 F.3d 257, 267 
(D.C. Cir. 1994).

     Since the government has given us no affirmative reason 
for excluding the evidence of the legal status of defendant's 
other acts, the question is whether that evidence is relevant 
under Federal Rule of Evidence 401.  It defines relevant 
evidence as "evidence having any tendency to make the 
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determina-
tion of the action more probable or less probable than it 
would be without the evidence."  Fed. R. Evid. 401.  At first 
glance, the relevance of the fact that Bailey had not yet been 

tried for the other crimes appears feeble to non-existent.  
While an affirmative government decision not to prosecute 
may suggest weakness in the government's evidence, the 
simple fact that the prosecution will likely take place in the 
future supports no such inference.

     But Bailey argues that the jury would speculate about 
whether or not he had been convicted of the 404(b) crimes, 
and would likely infer conviction from silence.  The govern-
ment's evidence of the crimes took the form of the arresting 
officers' testimony about the narcotics transactions and the 
ensuing arrests.  It seems plausible that not a few jurors 
would have speculated that conviction followed.  We can find 
no case directly holding that evidence is relevant solely to 
refute a likely mistaken jury inference (though there are a 
few where that appears to be the dominant purpose, see, e.g., 
United States v. Powell, 226 F.3d 1181, 1199 (10th Cir. 2000);  
United States v. Johnson, 802 F.2d 1459, 1463-64 (D.C. Cir. 
1986));  one case, United States v. Jones, 808 F.2d 561 (7th 
Cir. 1986), mentions the possible use of an acquittal for the 
specific purpose of correcting jury speculation that the defen-
dant had been convicted, but reaches no conclusion on rele-
vance, id. at 566-67.  Our own closest case, United States v. 
Thomas, 114 F.3d 228 (D.C. Cir. 1997), also considers the 
admissibility of an acquittal, but not its possible relevance to 
rebut an inference of conviction, and in any event ultimately 
goes off on narrow factual grounds.  Id. at 249-50.  We think 
that if the jury inference is plausible, evidence to rebut that 
inference is relevant.  A similar theory may underlie the 
Supreme Court's positive emphasis, in Dowling v. United 
States, 493 U.S. 342 (1990), on the trial court's having twice 
instructed the jury that the defendant had been acquitted on 
the 404(b) crime, id. at 345-46, 353.

     Jones, mentioned above as entertaining the possible rele-
vance of acquittal for refuting mistaken jury speculation, in 
the end upheld exclusion on the grounds of possible prejudice, 
808 F.2d at 566-67, presumably the risk that the jury might 
overread acquittal to signify innocence rather than merely 
failure of the government to show guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  Plainly the risk of prejudice (which under Rule 403 

would support exclusion) is far less in the case of mere 
evidence that the defendant hasn't yet been tried;  indeed, as 
we said earlier, the government never adduced any affirma-
tive reason to exclude the evidence.

     Evidence that no trial has occurred need not raise the sort 
of hearsay issues posed by convictions or acquittals.  Where 
either of those is offered to show commission or non-
commission of the acts in question, they are hearsay:  in effect 
they simply quote the assertion of 12 jurors (who did not 
themselves perceive the acts charged) that the person did or 
didn't do the acts.  But convictions come into evidence all the 
time--thanks to the Rules' explicit provision of a hearsay 
exception, Federal Rule of Evidence 803(22).  No comparable 
exception exists for acquittals, though other exceptions, such 
as the one for public records, see Rule 803(8), may allow some 
uses of acquittals.  But evidence that a defendant has not 
been tried on a charge, where offered simply as proof that he 
has not been tried and convicted, is not hearsay.  Obviously 
the defendant knows that directly;  non-hearsay reports as to 
the absence of relevant court records provide an alternative 
means.  In most cases, we should expect, the parties could 
resolve it by stipulation.

     Having found that the evidence was relevant and that there 
was no affirmative reason for exclusion, we believe the exclu-
sion was error--though we hesitate to find abuse of discre-
tion, given the narrow purpose the evidence would have 
served.  In any event any error was harmless.

     For nonconstitutional error, an appellate court must deter-
mine with "fair assurance ... that the judgment was not 
substantially swayed by the error."  Kotteakos v. United 
States, 328 U.S. 750, 765 (1946).  The judge here expressed 
his concern that there might be an "improper [jury] inference 
that Mr. Bailey was convicted of these charges which are now 
still pending," 2 Trial Tr. at 250, and sought to cure the 
problem by instructing the jury, "You may not consider or 
speculate about the status of any charges against the defen-
dant in that case."  5 Trial Tr. at 234.  We think this 

considerably reduced the risk that the jury might leap to the 
conclusion that the defendant had been convicted.

     Beyond the judge's instruction, the government's evidence 
was quite strong, both on the whole and as to these past 
incidents.  Several law enforcement officers testified to the 
June 12, 1998 offense.  They had been surveilling one Robert 
Hunt, who had agreed to sell cocaine to an undercover police 
officer.  They saw Bailey conferring with Hunt immediately 
before Hunt made the sale.  As the police were arresting the 
participants and searching the apartment where the sale 
occurred, Bailey looked in the direction of the police, threw 
his keys on the ground, and walked away.  Inside the car that 
matched the keys, the police found 225 grams of cocaine, and 
inside Bailey's wallet they found a registration for the car in 
Bailey's mother's name.  For the February 2, 2000 incident, 
the police found two bags of cocaine1 in Bailey's pocket.  It is 
highly likely that the jury would have found these incidents to 
be true even if it had been told that Bailey hadn't yet been 
tried.  Further, the government's case as a whole was strong, 
consisting of both the direct testimony of Clayton and Sim-
mons, the strong circumstantial evidence, and the expert 
testimony of Detective Thomas.  For these reasons, we have 
a fair assurance that the judgment was not substantially 
swayed by the error.

Use of Rule 404(b) Evidence for Corroboration

     The two New York incidents are the source of another 
argument--that the court erred in instructing the jury that it 
could use the incidents to corroborate Clayton's testimony 
that he had engaged in prior cocaine deals with Bailey, and 
thus his story about the crime actually charged.  The parties 
agree that the two incidents were properly admitted under 
Rule 404(b) to show knowledge, motive, opportunity, intent 
and plan, and dispute only the corroboration instruction.  We 
review for abuse of discretion.  Cf. United States v. Bowie, 

__________
     1 The testimony as to the exact amount of cocaine is obscurely 
worded:  "Two-one-eighths ounce plus forty-seven-point-four 
gram[s]."  4 Trial Tr. 246.

232 F.3d 923, 926-27 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (stating standard of 
review for admission of 404(b) evidence).

     Bailey argues that before evidence is used under Rule 
404(b) for corroboration it should have to pass two extra 
screens imposed by two other circuits--that the corroboration 
be direct and the corroborated matter be significant.  See 
United States v. Pitts, 6 F.3d 1366, 1370-71 (9th Cir. 1993);  
United States v. Everett, 825 F.2d 658, 660 (2d Cir. 1987).  
But we rejected the approach of these circuits in Bowie, 232 
F.3d at 933 n.7, reasoning that any special concerns were 
properly addressed in balancing probative value against prej-
udice, etc. under Rule 403.  Bailey attempts to distinguish 
Bowie on the ground that there the corroboration was of the 
act actually charged in the indictment, while in this case, the 
corroboration is only of other acts admitted under 404(b) 
(Clayton's prior seven to twelve cocaine deals with Bailey).  
But Bowie itself makes no such distinction, and no language 
in Rule 404(b) supports it.

     Nonetheless, use of 404(b) evidence for corroboration does 
have inherent complications.  Corroboration, in and of itself, 
is not a separate purpose belonging in the open class of 
permissible purposes referred to in Rule 404(b)'s second 
sentence.  If it were, evidence could slide past the rule 
against improper character evidence.  To decide if Rule 
404(b) evidence is admissible for corroboration, the court 
must determine what is being corroborated and how.  If 
similar past acts were corroborative only because they 
showed the defendant's character and the likelihood of "action 
in conformity therewith," plainly the rule would call for 
exclusion.  On the other hand, evidence might corroborate a 
witness's testimony by showing plan, purpose, intent, etc. and 
therefore be admissible under 404(b).  The label "corrobora-
tion" thus merely invites a closer look at exactly how the 
evidence may be probative.

     Clayton, it will be recalled, was not himself a part of 
Bailey's two New York drug deals.  The only legitimate way 
for that evidence to corroborate Clayton's testimony was to 
help show Bailey's knowledge, intent, etc. as to the seven to 

twelve Rule 404(b) drug deals that Clayton mentioned.  In 
other words, they were 404(b) evidence for Clayton's 404(b) 
evidence.

     As to Bailey's intent or purpose in the seven to twelve 
incidents, it is hard to see how the New York deals could add.  
Clayton had summarily described the deals, making clear that 
they involved cocaine and that Bailey was selling to him, see 4 
Trial Tr. 7-11, but Clayton had never in any way put Bailey's 
state of mind in issue.  Bailey could have been a zombie 
throughout the seven to twelve deals, and the fact would not 
have contradicted Clayton's testimony in the slightest.  But 
the incidents do help to show that Bailey had opportunities to 
acquire cocaine, and at least the 1998 incident (involving some 
semblance of a drug deal rather than mere possession) seems 
relevant to show knowledge of how to deal in cocaine.

     In the weighing required by Rule 403, however, the evi-
dence had little probative value for permissible corroborative 
purposes.  Given the vague nature of Clayton's testimony 
about the seven to twelve past deals with Bailey, jury interest 
in the sort of opportunity and knowledge described was likely 
minimal.  On the other side, by contrast, there were risks of 
unfair prejudice, confusion and misleading the jury.  The 
permissible link is subtle, the impermissible one obvious and 
likely to be salient.  The likelihood of confusion and prejudice 
seems overwhelming, at least in the absence of a clear and 
emphatic instruction, the framing of which strikes us as a 
daunting task.  In any event, no such instruction was even 
attempted here, rendering the corroboration instruction er-
ror.

     But this error was harmless.  The incremental effect of the 
corroboration instruction was likely very small.  It seems 
improbable that it did much to strengthen the jury's belief in 
Clayton, especially as the evidence of the New York incidents 
had already been properly admitted.  And the case against 
Bailey was generally strong.  We do not think the jury's 
judgment was substantially swayed by the error, even in 
combination with the error discussed above.

Testimony of Detective Thomas

     Bailey's last objection is to the allowance of testimony that 
he says violated Rule 704(b)'s ban on an expert witness's 
giving an opinion as to "whether the defendant did or did not 
have the mental state or condition constituting an element of 
the crime charged or of a defense thereto."  Fed. R. Evid. 
704(b).  Here he points to the evidence of Detective Thomas.  
The closest that testimony came to suggesting that the expert 
knew what was in the defendant's head was his statement 
that "no one would want to tag along [on a large-scale drug 
transaction] who is an innocent person...."  6 Trial Tr. at 16 
(emphasis added).

     There having been no objection to this testimony, we 
review for plain error.  United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 
732-35 (1993) (requiring error that is plain and that affected 
substantial rights).  Because we find no error at all, the extra 
elements for plain error need not detain us.

     In United States v. Smart, 98 F.3d 1379 (D.C. Cir. 1996), 
we said that testimony should not be excluded under Rule 
704(b) as long as it is clear that the expert is testifying on the 
basis of his knowledge of general criminal practices and not 
on some special knowledge of the defendant's mental process-
es.  Id. at 1388 (also involving testimony by Detective Thom-
as).  We said that this inquiry required consideration of

     (1) the language used by the questioner and/or the ex-
     pert, including use of the actual word "intent";  and (2) 
     whether the context of the testimony makes clear to the 
     jury that the opinion is based on knowledge of general 
     criminal practices, rather than "some special knowledge 
     of the defendant's mental processes."
     
Id.

     Here the phrase quoted earlier--that no one would tag 
along who was "an innocent person"--is certainly a close 
equivalent of what Rule 704(b) excludes, namely stating "the 
mental state or condition constituting an element of the crime 
charged or of a defense thereto."  Clearly prosecutors should 
take care not to elicit, and experts not to make, statements 

that fall so close to the line.  But Smart directs us to consider 
the context of the testimony, and here the context would have 
told the jury that Thomas was testifying solely from "general 
criminal practices."

     Thomas's testimony centered on how drugs were distribut-
ed and the roles that workers in the drug world played in 
their distribution.  He explained that drug dealers at the kilo 
level took great precautions against getting caught, using 
intermediaries, for example, such as brokers and people 
called "mules" who help transport the drugs.  He also testi-
fied as to the cities into which drugs are trafficked generally, 
the way in which drugs are usually packaged, the difference 
between crack and powder cocaine and how transformation 
into crack increases the number of highs per unit of cocaine, 
the amount of cocaine a person buys at one time for personal 
consumption, how much money will be gained by the sale of a 
certain quantity of cocaine on the street level, the size and 
nature of traps in vehicles used to store drugs, money, or 
guns, and the use of informants as opposed to undercover 
officers.  Thomas's testimony was far broader than the spe-
cific circumstances of Bailey's activities.  Additionally, many 
of the specifics to which he testified had little to do with 
Bailey's mental state.  His testimony was clearly intended to 
give the jury information about the way high-level drug sales 
worked.

     Further, we said in Smart that if it is made clear to the 
jury that the expert was not qualified to testify to the 
ultimate issue of intent, there is no violation of Rule 704(b).  
Smart, 98 F.3d at 1389.  That was made clear here.  Detec-
tive Thomas frequently specified the source of his testimony.  
For instance, in discussion about whether drug dealers deal-
ing with kilo-size weights normally arm themselves, Thomas 
said that he had been involved in a couple of hundred 
investigations where kilograms of cocaine were being sold, 
and that in only 15% of them were any sort of weapons 
involved.  In discussing how many doses of crack five kilos of 
powder cocaine would yield, Thomas prefaced his answer by 
saying that it was what he knew from personal experience in 

his past work for the police department and drug enforce-
ment.

     And at a number of points Thomas explicitly noted his 
limited connection to the facts of the Bailey case.  In answer-
ing the defense counsel's question on cross examination of 
whether he was "talking about the facts in this case," Thomas 
replied by saying, "No, I don't know the facts, all the facts in 
this case.  I wasn't a part of the investigation."  6 Trial Tr. at 
18.  He said he had never met Bailey "that I can recall, and I 
know nothing about him, that I know of.  No."  Id. at 33.  
And in virtually the final impression that Thomas left with 
the jury, on redirect, he and government counsel had the 
following exchange:

     Q: Were you involved in the investigation of Mr. Bai-
     ley?
     
     A: No, I wasn't.
     
     Q: Did you do surveillance?
     
     A: No, I didn't.
     
     Q: Did you have any involvement at all in that investi-
     gation?
     
     A: None, whatsoever.
     
     Q: Is your testimony yesterday and today about your 
     general experience?
     
     A: That's what I'm testifying, my general experience 
     that I've accumulated over twenty-nine years of investi-
     gating narcotics[,] as what I've learned as how narcotic 
     deals go. 
Id. at 50.  These statements clear up any suggestion that 
Thomas might have purported to rest the "innocent" com-
ment on any special knowledge of the defendant's mental 
processes.  Admission of his testimony was not error, and 
therefore we need not reach the other elements of plain error.

     The judgment of conviction and sentence are

                                                            Affirmed.

                          