                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 6, 2001   Decided February 8, 2002 

                           No. 00-1100

                         Greg Ruggiero, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Robert T. Perry argued the cause for petitioner Greg 
Ruggiero.  With him on the briefs was Barbara J. Olshansky.

     Jacob M. Lewis, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondents.  With him on the briefs 
were Robert S. Greenspan, Attorney, Jane E. Mago, Acting 
General Counsel, Federal Communications Commission, Dan-
iel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, John E. Ingle, 

Deputy Associate General Counsel, C. Grey Pash, Jr. and 
Lisa E. Boehley, Counsel.

     Before:  Henderson, Rogers, and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  In this case, an unlicensed microb-
roadcaster--a "pirate"--challenges the constitutionality of the 
Radio Broadcasting Preservation Act of 2000's character 
qualification provision, which permanently prohibits anyone 
who ever "engaged in any manner in the unlicensed operation 
of any station in violation of ... the Communications Act of 
1934" from obtaining a low-power FM radio license.  To 
survive First and Fifth Amendment challenges in this Circuit, 
restrictions limiting the future lawful speech of a well-defined 
class of broadcasters must be more than "minim[ally] ration-
al[ ]."  News Am. Publ'g, Inc. v. FCC, 844 F.2d 800, 812, 814 
(D.C. Cir. 1988) ("News America").  Finding nothing in the 
Act, its legislative history, or the record before us to justify 
the character qualification provision's unique and draconian 
sanction for broadcast piracy, nor to explain why a more 
limited restriction would not achieve Congress's objective, we 
hold that the provision and its implementing regulation fail to 
meet this standard and are therefore unconstitutional.

                                I.

     Section 301 of the Communications Act of 1934 makes it 
unlawful to operate a radio station without a license issued by 
the Federal Communications Commission.  47 U.S.C. s 301.  
When the Commission began licensing FM radio stations in 
the 1940s, it licensed both high-power stations and low-power, 
or "Class D," educational stations operating with a maximum 
of ten watts of power.  In 1978, however, the Commission 
concluded that the Class D stations were impeding expansion 
of more efficient high-power operations.  Opting to "str[ike] 
the balance in favor of licensing higher powered stations to 
ensure that large audiences were served," the Commission 
stopped licensing low-power stations and required most exist-

ing stations to upgrade to at least 100 watts.  Creation of 
Low Power Radio Serv., 15 F.C.C. Rcd. 19,208, 19,236 (2000) 
("First Low-Power Reconsideration") (recons.) (discussing 
the 1978 rule, Changes in the Rules Relating to Noncommer-
cial Educ. FM Broad. Stations, 70 F.C.C.2d 972, 983 (1979) 
(codified at 47 C.F.R. s 73.512(d))).

     Over the next two decades, often in open defiance of this 
rule, individual pirates began operating unlicensed low-power 
stations that broadcast local news, music, and commentary.  
Known as "microradio," this phenomenon expanded signifi-
cantly in the late 1990s after Congress amended the Telecom-
munications Act to eliminate restrictions on the number of 
radio stations any one person or entity could own.  Telecom-
munications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, s 202(a), (b), 
110 Stat. 56, 110-12 (1996).  Following the amendment, own-
ership of licensed radio stations became increasingly concen-
trated, leading--according to microradio proponents--to a 
"marked decline in serious local radio news reporting" and a 
corresponding increase in the perceived importance and, in 
turn, number of unlicensed low-power stations.  Pet'r's Br. at 
6-7.  In response to this microradio expansion, the Commis-
sion cracked down on pirates, ordering them to cease broad-
casting and taking legal action against those who refused.  
See, e.g., Grid Radio v. FCC, No. 99-1463, __ F.3d __ (D.C. 
Cir. Feb. 8, 2002);  United States v. Dunifer, 219 F.3d 1004 
(9th Cir. 2000).

     In 1999, the Commission again changed course, seeking 
public comment on proposed rules that would allow licensing 
of low-power stations.  The Commission observed that in 
contrast to 1978, when it first adopted the microbroadcasting 
ban, "[n]ow, ... radio service is widely available throughout 
the country and very little spectrum remains available for 
new full-powered stations," so licensing low-power stations 
could "fill ... gaps in the spectrum that would otherwise go 
unused," First Low-Power Reconsideration, 15 F.C.C. Rcd. 
at 19,236, providing a "low-cost means of serving" both urban 
and rural areas, Creation of Low Power Radio Serv., 14 
F.C.C. Rcd. 2471, 2471 (1999) ("Low-Power Proposal") (notice 
of proposed rulemaking).  Many groups submitted comments, 

with students, religious groups, and labor unions generally 
supporting the low-power program, and the established 
broadcasting industry (including National Public Radio and 
other noncommercial broadcasters) opposing it.

     In January 2000, the Commission issued an order authoriz-
ing two new classes of low-power stations:  100-watt stations, 
reaching a radius of roughly 3.5 miles, and 10-watt stations, 
reaching a radius of less than 2 miles.  Creation of Low 
Power Radio Serv., 15 F.C.C. Rcd. 2205, 2205, 2210-12 (2000) 
("First Low-Power Rulemaking").  The order encouraged 
local ownership of low-power stations, limited the number of 
such stations any single entity could own, required the sta-
tions to operate on a noncommercial, educational basis, and 
prohibited existing media entities from holding interests in 
them.  Id. at 2215-25.  The order also included a provision 
addressing license applications by broadcast pirates.  Con-
cerned that those who had flouted the licensing process in the 
past could not be trusted "to deal truthfully with the Commis-
sion and to comply with [its] rules and policies," the Commis-
sion provided that it would only accept low-power applications 
from individuals who certified (under penalty of perjury) that 
if they had operated illegally in the past, they ceased all such 
operations either within twenty-four hours of being directed 
by the Commission to do so or within ten days of publication 
of the Low-Power Proposal.  Id. at 2225-26.  The Commis-
sion also extended this requirement to all parties to any 
corporate applicant, including the applicant's "parents, its 
subsidiaries, their officers and members of their governing 
boards."  Id. at 2223-26.

     This version of the low-power rules was short-lived.  Less 
than a year after the rules' promulgation, Congress, respond-
ing to broadcast industry lobbying, see, e.g., 146 Cong. Rec. 
S8197-8211 (statement of Sen. Grams) (discussing licensed 
broadcasters' concerns about the low-power rules), passed the 
Radio Broadcasting Preservation Act of 2000 ("RBPA"), Pub. 
L. No. 106-553, 114 Stat. 2762 (2000).  The RBPA directs the 
Commission to amend the low-power rules to limit the fre-
quencies available for low-power stations, thus reducing the 
risk of interference to existing stations.  Central to this case, 

the Act also directs the Commission to deny licenses to all 
applicants whose officers or board members ever "engaged in 
any manner in the unlicensed operation of any station in 
violation" of the Communications Act.  Id. s 632(a)(1)(B).  
This "character qualification provision" thus eliminates the 
distinction the Commission had drawn between those erst-
while broadcast pirates who voluntarily ceased broadcasting 
within a specified period and those who refused.  The provi-
sion also rescinds the Commission's discretion to waive the 
character qualification requirement in cases in which, despite 
an applicant's--or a party to an applicant's--unlicensed 
broadcasting, the Commission finds no reason to question the 
applicant's potential reliability as a licensee.  Id. 
s 632(a)(2)(B).

     Following passage of the RBPA, the Commission issued 
rules implementing the Act's character qualification provision.  
Creation of Low Power Radio Serv., 16 F.C.C. Rcd. 8026, 
2001 FCC LEXIS 1760 (2001) ("Second Low-Power Rule-
making") (amending First Low-Power Rulemaking).  Under 
the new rules--described by the Commission as "minor 
amendment[s]" that merely "codif[y] a Congressional require-
ment"--all pirates and former pirates are automatically and 
permanently disqualified from applying for low-power licens-
es.  Id., 2001 FCC LEXIS 1760, at *15.  Moreover, an 
applicant is deemed "ineligible to hold [a low-power] license if 
it has engaged in unlicensed operation regardless of whether 
the Commission has made a specific finding that the party 
has engaged in such conduct."  Id., 2001 FCC LEXIS 1760, 
at *14 (emphasis added).

                               II.

     Petitioner Greg Ruggiero, an acknowledged former pirate 
affiliated with microbroadcasting stations in New York City 
and elsewhere, argues that facially and as applied to him, the 
character qualification provision and implementing regulation 
violate the First and Fifth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution.  Before considering the merits of Ruggiero's 
challenge, we must deal with the Commission's argument that 

we lack jurisdiction for two independent reasons:  because 
Ruggiero failed to file a petition for review, and because he 
lacks Article III standing.  We consider each in turn.

                       Petition for Review

     Resolving the Commission's first argument requires an 
understanding of the history of this case.  Ruggiero originally 
filed a petition for review of the Commission's First Low-
Power Rulemaking, in which he argued that the then-current 
version of the licensing restriction violated both the Adminis-
trative Procedure Act and the First Amendment.  Following 
passage of the RBPA, we remanded the record to the Com-
mission and directed the parties to file supplemental briefs 
addressing Ruggiero's standing to pursue his First Amend-
ment claim, as well as the merits of that claim as applied "to 
the Act and any implementing orders or regulations the 
Commission may issue."  Order of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit at 1 (Jan. 8, 
2001) (No. 00-1054) ("Order of Jan. 8, 2001").  After the 
Commission issued the Second Low-Power Rulemaking, the 
parties submitted the requested supplemental briefs, and we 
heard oral argument on Ruggiero's constitutional claims--
expanded by a footnote in Ruggiero's Supplemental Brief to 
include a claim under the Fifth Amendment--as applied to 
the RBPA and the new rules.

     The Commission now argues that because Ruggiero never 
filed a petition for review of the Second Low-Power Rule-
making, this court lacks jurisdiction to hear his constitutional 
challenge.  We disagree.  Although it is true that Ruggiero 
did not file a second petition for review, he did, as we 
directed, file a brief addressing the constitutionality of the 
RBPA and the Commission's implementing regulation, and 
that brief, in all but title, satisfies the four statutory require-
ments for a petition for review of the Second Low-Power 
Rulemaking.  Specifically, as required by 28 U.S.C. s 2344, 
Ruggiero filed the brief within sixty days of the rulemaking;  

stated "the nature of the proceedings as to which review is 
sought, ... the facts on which venue is based, ... the 
grounds on which relief is sought, and ... the relief prayed";  
attached a copy of the challenged rulemaking;  and served the 
brief on the Commission and the United States Department 
of Justice.  See generally Pet'r's Supp. Br. at 1-10, App. B, 
Certificate of Service.  Accordingly, we may treat the brief as 
the "functional equivalent" of a petition for review.  See 
Smith v. Barry, 502 U.S. 244, 248-49 (1992) (internal citations 
omitted) (construing pro se brief as notice of appeal and 
noting that "[i]f a document filed within the time specified by 
Rule 4 gives the notice required by Rule 3, it is effective as a 
notice of appeal");  Moore v. United States Dep't of Transp., 
2001 U.S. App. LEXIS 2496, at *12 (7th Cir. Feb. 5, 2001) 
(unpublished disp.) (citing Smith v. Barry and construing 
brief as "functional equivalent of a timely petition for review" 
of agency action).

     This liberal construction of 28 U.S.C. s 2344 makes particu-
lar sense in this case.  For one thing, as we learned at oral 
argument, Ruggiero filed no second petition for review solely 
because we had directed him to file a supplemental brief 
addressing the applicability of his First Amendment claims to 
the RBPA and any subsequent implementing regulations.  
See Order of Jan. 8, 2001, at 1;  cf. Moore v. South Carolina 
Labor Bd., 100 F.3d 162, 163 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (discussing "the 
unique circumstances doctrine, under which appellate courts 
will excuse an untimely notice of appeal where the appellant 
could have filed a timely notice but was misled to delay filing 
by a court order or ruling which purportedly extended or 
tolled the appeal deadline" (citing, inter alia, Thompson v. 
INS, 375 U.S. 384, 387 (1964) (applying the doctrine))).  
Moreover, we maintained jurisdiction of Ruggiero's claims 
throughout the Commission's implementation of the RBPA, 
remanding only the record for further Commission action.  
Order of Jan. 8, 2001, at 1;  see also D.C. Cir. R. 41(b).  
Finally, Ruggiero's original contentions, made in his brief 
challenging the First Low-Power Rulemaking, are sufficient-
ly broad to cover at least his First Amendment challenge to 
the character qualification provision and implementing regu-
lation.  His original brief asserted that the Commission "vio-

lated [his] First Amendment rights in disqualifying [him] 
from holding a low power FM radio station license" and that 
"[t]he [a]utomatic [d]isqualification [p]olicy [l]acks the [n]ar-
row [t]ailoring [r]equired by the First Amendment."  Pet'r's 
Br. at 2, 23.  These broadly worded objections to the First 
Low-Power Rulemaking are equally valid as objections to the 
amended rules, as Ruggiero continues to argue primarily that 
the Commission violated his First Amendment rights by 
automatically disqualifying him and other unlicensed micro- 
broadcasters from holding low-power licenses.  Cf. Tenn. Gas 
Pipeline Co. v. FERC, 871 F.2d 1099, 1109 (D.C. Cir. 1989) 
(finding jurisdiction to review claims despite appellant's fail-
ure to file new FERC petition for rehearing because most of 
appellant's objections to agency's first decision, raised in 
timely petition for review, were "equally valid" as objections 
to agency's amended decision).

                             Standing

     In support of its argument that Ruggiero lacks Article III 
standing, the Commission relies on two basic facts:  First, 
although Ruggiero once operated an unlicensed microradio 
station, he is not now an applicant for a low-power license, 
nor is he associated with any such applicant;  and second, 
Ruggiero is a resident of New York City where, all concede, 
no spectrum space is available for low-power stations.  In 
response, Ruggiero claims that but for the RBPA's character 
qualification provision, he would associate with a low-power 
applicant.  To support this assertion, he submitted a declara-
tion by the President of a Greenville, South Carolina station 
stating that the station has applied for a low-power license 
and that "[b]ut for the character qualification provisions[,] ... 
[it] would offer [Ruggiero] a position on [its] board of di-
rectors."  Wangaza Decl. para. 3.  Because the Commission 
challenges none of the declaration's factual assertions, we 
think Ruggiero has established the prerequisites for Article 
III standing:  a personal injury (inability to become a director 
of the Greenville station), fairly traceable to the challenged 
action (the character qualification provision and implementing 
regulation), and likely to be redressed by the requested relief 
(a declaration that the provision and regulation are unconsti-

tutional).  See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 
560-61 (1992).

     We are equally unpersuaded by the Commission's second-
ary standing argument:  that Ruggiero is a "poor candidate" 
to challenge the character qualification provision because, 
given his history of deliberate and willful licensing violations, 
the Commission would be unlikely to grant him a license even 
in the absence of the provision.  This may be true, but it is 
irrelevant.  Ruggiero alleges only that the RBPA's per se ban 
deprives him of the right to compete in the low-power licens-
ing process, and the Supreme Court has held that such 
allegations are sufficient for Article III standing.  See North-
eastern Fla. Chapter of the Assocd. Gen. Contractors of Am. 
v. City of Jacksonville, 508 U.S. 656, 666 (1993) ("When the 
government erects a barrier that makes it more difficult for 
members of one group to obtain a benefit than it is for 
members of another group, a member of the former group 
seeking to challenge the barrier need not allege that he would 
have obtained the benefit but for the barrier in order to 
establish standing.").

                               III.

      To evaluate the constitutionality of the RBPA's character 
qualification provision--and, in turn, the implementing regu-
lation--we must first identify the appropriate level of First 
and Fifth Amendment scrutiny.  The parties agree, as they 
must in view of Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 
367 (1969), that the "scarcity of broadcast frequencies" neces-
sitates that "broadcast regulations receive more lenient [First 
Amendment] scrutiny than ones affecting other types of 
speech."  News Am., 844 F.2d at 811.  Going further, the 
Commission asserts that under FCC v. National Citizens 
Committee for Broadcasting, we should ask only whether the 
challenged character qualification provision "is based on con-
sideration of permissible factors and is otherwise reasonable."  
436 U.S. 775, 793 (1978) ("NCCB").  We disagree.

     To begin with, neither NCCB nor any subsequent Supreme 
Court case supports the Commission's position that all "rea-

sonable" broadcasting restrictions automatically pass consti-
tutional muster.  NCCB involved both statutory and constitu-
tional challenges to Commission regulations governing cross-
ownership of broadcast stations and daily newspapers in the 
same community ("the cross-ownership rules").  Although the 
NCCB Court did indeed observe that the Commission has 
broad regulatory authority to "issue regulations codifying its 
view of the public-interest licensing standard, so long as that 
view is based on consideration of permissible factors and is 
otherwise reasonable," it made that statement when describ-
ing the Commission's mandate under the Communications 
Act.  436 U.S. at 793.  Turning to the petitioner's First 
Amendment arguments, the Court indicated only that regula-
tion of broadcast frequencies is permissible if the regulation 
is content-neutral and preserves "the interests of the 'people 
as a whole ... in free speech.' "  Id. at 800 (quoting Red Lion 
Broad. Co., 395 U.S. at 390).  Concluding that the challenged 
cross-ownership regulations meet both requirements, the 
Court found the regulations "a reasonable means of promot-
ing the public interest in diversified mass communications."  
Id. at 802.  The Court expressly distinguished broadcast 
regulations that turn "on the content of constitutionally pro-
tected speech," however, and said nothing about restric-
tions--like those at issue here--that permanently limit the 
speech of certain specific individuals.  Id. at 801.

     Supreme Court case law since NCCB, moreover, confirms 
that some broadcast regulations merit heightened scrutiny.  
In FCC v. League of Women Voters, for example, the Court 
used intermediate scrutiny to strike down a statute that 
banned noncommercial educational stations from "engag[ing] 
in editorializing."  468 U.S. 364, 366 (1984).  The Court 
observed that although "the broadcasting industry ... oper-
ates under restraints not imposed upon other media," restric-
tions that constrain broadcasters' choices about the view-
points presented fail constitutional scrutiny unless "narrowly 
tailored to further a substantial governmental interest."  Id. 
at 380.

     Finally, in News America, we expressly rejected rational 
basis review as the standard for evaluating the constitutional-
ity of a broadcasting restriction analogous to the one chal-
lenged here.  See 844 F.2d at 810-14.  In that case, we 
confronted a statute that forbade the Commission from ex-
tending existing waivers of the cross-ownership rules.  The 
provision affected only two such waivers, both held by a 
single publisher/broadcaster, Rupert Murdoch.  News Amer-
ica's challenges to the provision "l[ay] at the intersection of 
the First Amendment's protection of free speech and the 
Equal Protection Clause's requirement that government af-
ford similar treatment to similarly situated persons."  Id. at 
804.  Reviewing the case law, we identified a "spectrum" of 
possible broadcast restrictions, "from the purely content-
based (e.g., 'No one shall criticize the President') to the purely 
structural (e.g., the cross-ownership rules themselves)," and 
suggested that the applicable level of constitutional scrutiny 
increases with the extent to which a challenged provision 
relies on the identity of the speaker or the content of the 
covered speech.  Id. at 812.  On this spectrum, we continued, 
the "prohibition at issue in League of Women Voters [was] at 
some remove from pure content, as it forbade 'editorializing' 
of any kind by the covered stations[,]" while the challenged 
prohibition on extending cross-ownership waivers was "far 
from purely structural ... as it applie[d] to a closed class of 
one publisher broadcaster."  Id.  Concerned that "the safe-
guards of a pluralistic political system are often absent when 
the legislature zeroes in on a small class of citizens[,]" but 
wary of League of Women Voters' intermediate-scrutiny stan-
dard, we concluded, "[w]hat suffices for this case is that more 
is required than 'minimum rationality.' "  Id. at 814.  Apply-
ing this heightened rational basis standard to the challenged 
provision, we concluded that the provision's narrow focus on 
extensions of existing waivers of the newspaper-television 
cross-ownership rules--rather than, for example, extensions 
of future waivers, or extensions of waivers of the newspaper-
radio cross-ownership rules--rendered the prohibition uncon-
stitutionally underinclusive.  See id. at 814-15.

     Like the prohibition at issue in News America, the RBPA's 
character qualification provision raises both First Amend-
ment and Equal Protection concerns, as it restricts future 
lawful speech (licensed broadcasting) and applies to a limited 
class of pirates and former pirates.  See 844 F.2d at 812.  
True, as the dissent points out, Dissent at 1 n.1, the class of 
pirate microbroadcasters is neither "closed" nor as small as 
News America's single-member class, but the former class is 
well defined (consisting of all pirates), and the character 
qualification provision focuses on it "with the precision of a 
laser beam."  News Am., 844 F.2d at 814.  The character 
qualification provision, moreover, is far more severe than the 
News America prohibition:  An unlicensed broadcaster can 
never lawfully operate a low-power station anywhere in the 
country, whereas even under the News America prohibition, 
Rupert Murdoch could lawfully have operated a television 
station outside of any community in which he "own[ed] or 
control[led] a daily newspaper."  Id. at 803;  cf. NCCB, 436 
U.S. at 800 (holding that the cross-ownership rules do not 
"condition receipt of a broadcast license upon forfeiture of the 
right to publish a newspaper" because even "[u]nder the 
regulations, ... a newspaper owner need not forfeit anything 
in order to acquire a license for a station located in another 
community").  On the other hand, like the News America 
prohibition, the character qualification provision is not purely 
content-based, nor does it ban "a form of speech ... that lies 
at the heart of First Amendment protection," as did the 
prohibition on editorializing at issue in League of Women 
Voters.  468 U.S. at 381.  As in News America, therefore, we 
find ourselves in a middle ground, sure only that the appro-
priate standard is neither NCCB's minimal scrutiny nor 
League of Women Voters' intermediate scrutiny.  Also as in 
News America, however, we need not "exact[ly] characteriz[e] 
... the proper standard," for "any that is appreciably more 
stringent than 'minimum rationality' requires invalidation of 
the challenged [provision]."  844 F.2d at 802.

                               IV.

     The RBPA's meager legislative history suggests that in 
enacting the statute's character qualification provision, Con-

gress sought to increase compliance with Commission regula-
tions in two ways:  by deterring future operation of unli-
censed stations and by preventing former pirates--who Con-
gress evidently believes would violate other Commission rules 
if given the opportunity--from obtaining licenses.  See H.R. 
Rep. No. 106-567, at 8 (2000) ("[O]peration of an unlicensed 
station demonstrates a lack of commitment to follow the basic 
rules and regulations which are essential to having a broad-
cast service that serves the public.");  146 Cong. Rec. S613-
S626 (2000) (statement of Senator Gregg) (arguing that per-
mitting pirates to obtain low-power licenses would "reinforce 
their unlawful behavior and encourage[ ] future illegal activity 
by opening the door to new unauthorized broadcasters");  see 
also Resp'ts' Br. at 7-8 ("[T]he statute ... is reasonably 
designed to avoid licensing those whose past conduct por-
tends future unlawful behavior.").  Accepting the legitimacy 
of this broad goal, we nevertheless believe that the character 
qualification provision suffers from the same defect that 
doomed the statute challenged in News America:  The provi-
sion "bears only the most strained relationship to [its ostensi-
ble] purpose."  844 F.2d at 814.

     To begin with, the provision is "astonishingly underinclu-
sive," id. at 814, excluding some "conduct that seems indistin-
guishable in terms of [the] ostensible purpose" of increasing 
regulatory compliance, id. at 805.  Specifically, the provision 
bans low-power license applications only from broadcasters 
who have operated without a license, leaving the Commission 
free to evaluate applications from anyone else under its 
preexisting, more permissive character qualification policy.  
See Policy Regarding Character Qualifications in Broad. Li-
censing, 102 F.C.C.2d 1179, 1229 (1986), recon. granted in 
part and denied in part, 1 F.C.C. Rcd. 421 (1986).  As a 
result, civil wrongdoers, felons, and even inveterate regulato-
ry violators other than pirates, retain the opportunity to 
demonstrate that notwithstanding their offenses, they can 
reliably operate microbroadcast stations in the public interest.  
In Modesto Broadcast Group, for example, the Commission 
considered a license application filed by a station whose 

general manager had operated with relatively high, night-
time-authorized power during the day, risking interference 
with other stations.  7 F.C.C. Rcd. 3404, 3422 (1992).  The 
Commission ultimately rejected the application, but only after 
considering such factors as the willfulness, duration, and 
timing of the general manager's violations--factors that the 
RBPA prohibits the Commission from considering in cases 
involving pirates who seek microbroadcast licenses.  See id.;  
see also Alessandro Broad. Co., 99 F.C.C.2d 1, 11 n.13 (1984) 
(refusing to disqualify applicant for new broadcast station 
permit even though applicant's controlling shareholder had 
been convicted of second degree murder because "the crime 
was an isolated event that occurred in the remote past and 
the state authorities ... [had] determined officially that [the 
shareholder was] rehabilitated," so there was "no predictive 
nexus between his past crime and his current and future 
fitness to be a Commission licensee");  Teleprompter Cable 
Sys., Inc., 40 F.C.C.2d 1027, 1028 (1973) (noting that "viola-
tions of Federal antitrust laws are not absolutely disqualify-
ing, but are a circumstance from which the Commission may 
draw inferences as to probable future conduct").  Moreover, 
the Commission may still grant full-power licenses to stations 
affiliated with former unlicensed broadcasters.  Neither Con-
gress nor the Commission has articulated any justification for 
this double standard.  If former misconduct portends non-
compliance with Commission regulations, why shouldn't for-
mer violators of any relevant federal law or regulation be 
ineligible to apply for any broadcast license?

     Of course, "Congress ordinarily need not address a per-
ceived problem"--here, the possibility of future regulatory 
violations by past wrongdoers--"all at once," but we have 
rejected this "facile one-bite-at-a-time explanation" for other-
wise inexplicable underinclusiveness in "rules affecting impor-
tant First Amendment values."  News Am., 844 F.2d at 815.  
Our dissenting colleague omits the latter half of this quoted 
passage, arguing that even in the First Amendment context, 
Congress may "permissibly tackle a single part of a perceived 
problem ... through a statute ... which is neither overinclu-
sive nor underinclusive."  Dissent at 2 & n.2.  But the 
RBPA's underinclusiveness (and indeed its overinclusiveness, 

too, as we discuss below) is the precise issue at hand.  The 
dissent's argument proves too much, relabeling any perceived 
underinclusiveness as a permissible attempt to address "a 
single part of a perceived problem."  Dissent at 2 n.2.

     The character qualification provision is poorly aimed for 
another reason:  It covers circumstances only marginally re-
lated to the purpose of increasing regulatory compliance.  
For example, the provision bans applications from former 
unlicensed operators who violated the licensing requirement 
only briefly or long ago;  from operators who have since 
exhibited, in whatever manner, an ability to abide by federal 
laws and regulations;  from operators who plan to serve only 
as members of a multi-member board, rather than as presi-
dent or CEO of an applicant station;  from operators who 
shut down immediately upon receiving a Commission order to 
do so;  and, most tellingly, from operators who were unaware 
of the licensing requirement at the time of the violation.  
Again, neither Congress nor the Commission has explained 
how a restriction that ignores such factors accurately targets 
those former pirates who pose a real risk of future malfea-
sance.

     These examples of the character qualification provision's 
under- and overinclusiveness are particularly troubling given 
the ready availability of a less restrictive and better aimed 
alternative:  the analogous provision in the First Low-Power 
Rulemaking, which allowed for the possibility of waiver in 
certain circumstances and applied only to former pirates who 
continued to operate in spite of a Commission request to shut 
down.  Cf. NCCB, 436 U.S. at 802 n.20 ("The reasonableness 
of the [challenged cross-ownership] regulations as a means of 
achieving diversification is underscored by the fact that waiv-
ers are potentially available from ... [the] rules in cases in 
which a broadcast station and a co-located daily newspaper 
cannot survive whithout common ownership."); also News 
Am., 844 F.2d at 814 (questioning Congress's chosen ap-
proach to the identified problem of "temporary waivers 
'creeping' into permanence" and suggesting alternative legis-
lative solutions).  Though potentially still underinclusive, such 
a limited restriction would not only permit the Commission to 
grant a license to rehabilitated former pirates, but more 
accurately identify likely future rule-breakers.  Indeed, 

adopting this limited regulatory restriction in the first place, 
the Commission rejected the very per se ban that Congress 
has now enacted, see First Low-Power Rulemaking, 15 
F.C.C. Rcd. at 2225-26, reasoning that "[t]he reliability as 
licensees of parties who ... illegally operated for a time but 
... ceased operation after being advised of an enforcement 
action ... is not necessarily as suspect" as that of "[p]arties 
who persist[ed] in unlawful operation after the Commission 
[took] ... enforcement actions," Low-Power Proposal, 14 
F.C.C. Rcd. at 2498.

     Overall, therefore, we find the character qualification provi-
sion so poorly aimed at maximizing future compliance with 
broadcast laws and regulations as to "raise[ ] a suspicion" 
that perhaps Congress's "true" objective was not to increase 
regulatory compliance, but to penalize microbroadcasters' 
"message."  News Am., 844 F.2d at 805.  Indeed, Ruggiero 
expressly alleges viewpoint discrimination, pointing to state-
ments in the record that suggest many former pirates violat-
ed the licensing requirement solely because they questioned 
the constitutionality of the now-defunct microbroadcasting 
ban and viewed their piracy as "civil disobedience."  See, e.g., 
Creation of Low Power Radio Serv., Comment of Civil Rights 
Orgs., reprinted in J.A. 325 ("[O]ne who broadcasts openly, 
willingly accepting that the government will attempt to shut 
her station down, is engaging in an act of civil disobedi-
ence.");  Creation of Low Power Radio Serv., Comment of 
Professor Robert McChesney, reprinted in J.A. 339 ("The 
tremendous demand for microradio is demonstrated by the 
emergence of a national Free Radio Movement, widespread 
civil disobedience, ... as well as the proliferation of unli-
censed community radio stations ... whose operators broad-
cast at the risk of financial losses, seizure of property, arrest, 
and in some cases, imprisonment.").  We need neither en-
dorse the pirates' tactics--in fact, in Grid Radio, slip op. at 
11-12, __ F.3d __, (also issued today), we reject an argument 
that penalizing microbroadcasting piracy violates the First 
Amendment--nor believe the RBPA discriminates against 
pirates' "message" to conclude, as we did in News America, 
that the provision's inaccurate aim is fatal.

     We emphasize that this result does not leave Congress and 
the Commission powerless to bar some past pirates from 

applying for licenses.  While that might well be the outcome 
were we applying intermediate scrutiny, we read News Amer-
ica's more permissive standard as leaving ample room for a 
carefully aimed licensing restriction.  Indeed, the Commis-
sion already has authority under its general character qualifi-
cation provision to deny licenses to individual pirates who, in 
the Commission's considered judgment, have demonstrated 
an inability to "comply with the Communications Act and 
[Commission] rules and policies."  Policy Regarding Charac-
ter Qualifications in Broad. Licensing, 102 F.C.C.2d at 1183.  
Even under the News America standard, however, we cannot 
sanction an automatic and permanent restriction on unli-
censed broadcasters' future lawful speech without under-
standing why their misdeeds warrant a penalty so much more 
severe than that applied to any other misconduct.  Yet nei-
ther the RBPA itself, nor the legislative history, nor the 
record in this case provides a satisfactory explanation.  We 
thus have no choice but to declare the statute and the 
Commission's implementing regulation unconstitutional.

                                V.

     The petition for review is granted, the Second Low-Power 
Rulemaking is vacated, and this matter is remanded to the 
Commission for further proceedings not inconsistent with this 
opinion.

                                                                 So ordered.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, dissenting:

     I dissent from the majority's holding that the challenged 
provision of the Radio Broadcasting Preservation Act (Act)--
withholding future low power FM (LPFM) licenses from 
those who have illegally engaged in LPFM broadcasting in 
the past--falls short of the "something more than minimum 
rationality"standard adopted in News America Publishing, 
Inc. v. FCC, 844 F.2d 800 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  Quoting News 
America, the majority charges that the Act's license restric-
tion is so "poorly aimed at maximizing future compliance with 
broadcast laws and regulations as to 'raise[ ] a suspicion' that 
perhaps Congress's true objective was not to increase regula-
tory compliance, but to penalize pirate microbroadcasters' 
'message.' "  Maj. Op. at 16 (quoting 844 F.3d at 805).  This 
case, however, is nothing like News America.

     In News America the court overturned a funding resolution 
that barred the FCC from using appropriated funds " 'to 
extend the time period of current grants of temporary waiv-
ers to achieve compliance with such rules.' "  844 F.2d at 802 
(quoting Pub. L. No. 100-202, 101 Stat. 1329, 34 (1987)).  The 
court found the provision "astonishingly underinclusive" for 
two reasons.  First, it did not prohibit extension of waivers 
granted after its enactment but only of those already in 
existence.  Second, it forbade only extensions of existing 
waivers and not the granting of new waivers.  In fact, be-
cause of its narrow focus the restriction affected only a single 
party, News America Publishing, Inc., a corporation owned 
by Rupert Murdoch, striking him, in the court's words, "with 
the precision of a laser beam."  844 F.2d at 814.  By contrast, 
the license restriction here applies to the entire class of those 
who as of the time of their license applications have unlawful-
ly engaged in LPFM broadcasting.1  Further, the restriction 
substantially furthers the plain intent of the Congress which 

__________
     1 This class includes persons who broadcast illegally after the 
Act's passage as well as those who had already done so before 
enactment.  It is therefore not a "closed" class as was the case in 
News America.  See 844 F.2d at 810 & n. 13 (noting that challenged 
provision "impinges on a closed class" because "Murdoch is not only 
the sole current member of the class, but is the sole party that can 
ever be a member").

believed that "the operation of an unlicensed station demon-
strates a lack of commitment to follow the basic rules and 
regulations which are essential to having a broadcast service 
that serves the public, and those individuals or groups should 
not be permitted to receive licenses in the LPFM service."  
H.R. Rep. No. 506 at 8 (2000).  What could be more reason-
able or logical than to suspect that those who ignored the 
Commission's LPFM broadcast regulations in the past are 
likely to do so in the future and therefore to head them off.  
The majority claims this class is underinclusive because it 
excludes a host of other scofflaws such as "civil wrongdoers, 
felons, and even inveterate regulatory violators other than 
pirates."  Maj. Op. at 13.  As the majority acknowledges, 
however, " 'Congress ordinarily need not address a perceived 
problem ... all at once.' "  Maj. Op. at 14 (quoting News 
America, 844 F.2d at 815.).2  It is no surprise that in legisla-
tion addressing LPFM licensing the Congress began with 
known violators of LPFM regulations.  In any event, given 
that the class's members here are many and unidentified, see 
supra note 1, I am at a loss to understand how we can infer 

__________
     2 As the majority points out, the court in News America noted 
other courts' rejection of the "one-bite-at-a-time explanation for 
rules affecting important First Amendment values."  News Amer-
ica, 844 F.2d at 815, quoted in Maj. Op. at 14.  Judging from the 
examples cited in News America, the court meant only that a 
proffered governmental interest will not suffice if the challenged 
statute does not reasonably serve the interest, that is, if the statute 
is underinclusive or overinclusive or both.  See FCC v. League of 
Women Voters, 468 U.S. 364, 396 (1984) (striking down statute of 
"patent overinclusiveness and underinclusiveness" because it "clear-
ly 'provide[d] only ineffective or remote support for the govern-
ment's purpose.' ") (quoting Central Hudson Gas & Elec. Corp. v. 
Pub. Serv. Comm'n of N.Y., 447 U.S. 557, 564 (1980));  Community-
Serv. Broadcasting v. FCC, 593 F.2d 1102 (D.C. Cir. 1978) (reject-
ing statute that "[a]t best ... serves as an overly restrictive means" 
of achieving asserted purpose) (en banc).  I see no reason the 
legislature cannot permissibly tackle a single part of a perceived 
problem (including one touching on the First Amendment) through 
a statute, such as the one here, which is neither overinclusive nor 
underinclusive.

the Congress intended to punish any particular "message" the 
way the senators mentioned in News America targeted Mur-
doch's message.3

__________
     3 As the News America court recounted, Murdoch was thoroughly 
excoriated in the Senate shortly after the Act was passed.  See 
News America, 844 F.2d at 807-10.

                                                                              