                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

          Argued April 9, 2001      Decided May 8, 2001 

                           No. 00-5143

  Building Industry Association of Superior California, et al., 
                            Appellants

                                v.

       Gale A. Norton, Secretary of the Interior, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                            (95cv0726)

     Lawrence R. Liebesman argued the cause for appellants.  
With him on the briefs was Rafe Petersen.

     Elizabeth Ann Peterson, Attorney, United States Depart-
ment of Justice, argued the cause for the federal appellees.  
With her on the brief were John Cruden, Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General, and Ellen J. Durkee, Attorney.

     Neil Levine argued the cause and filed the brief for the 
non-federal appellees.

     Robin L. Rivett and Anne M. Hayes were on the brief for 
amici curiae Pacific Legal Foundation, et al., in support of 
appellants.  Reed Hopper entered an appearance.

     Before:  Sentelle and Henderson, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Senior Circuit Judge 
Silberman.

     Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge:  Appellants Building In-
dustry Association, et al., sought review of the Fish and 
Wildlife Service's listing of various fairy shrimp species as 
endangered or threatened.  They now challenge a district 
court decision denying their motion for summary judgment.  
Determining that we have jurisdiction, we affirm the denial.

                    I.

     In those regions of California with Mediterranean climates, 
one finds shallow depressions called "vernal pools" that fill 
with rainwater in fall and winter only to evaporate in spring.  
In these pools reside numerous indigenous aquatic inverte-
brates that have evolved to survive in the pools' variable 
environmental conditions.  In 1992 the Fish and Wildlife 
Service proposed to list as endangered species five tiny 
crustaceans resident in California's vernal pools:  the vernal 
pool fairy shrimp, Conservancy fairy shrimp, longhorn fairy 
shrimp, California linderiella, and vernal pool tadpole shrimp 
(collectively, "fairy shrimp").  The proposed rule specified 
actual and threatened destruction of vernal pools as a justifi-
cation for the listing.1

     After a comment period, the Service withdrew the proposal 
to list the California linderiella.  It listed vernal pool fairy 
shrimp as threatened and the three remaining species as 

__________
     1  See Proposal to Determine Endangered Status for Fairy 
Shrimp, 57 Fed. Reg. 19,856, 19,858 (proposed May 8, 1992).

endangered.  Though the Endangered Species Act (ESA) 
requires the Service to designate "critical habitat[s]" for 
listed species "to the maximum extent prudent and determin-
able," the Service declined to make designations on the 
ground that so doing would put the listed species at risk of 
vandalism.2

     The Service's decision then began its long and bumpy 
journey to appellate review.  Appellants challenged the list-
ing decision in the district court, asserting violations of the 
ESA, the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), and the Con-
stitution.  Along with contesting on various grounds the 
general validity of the listing decision, appellants took issue 
with the Service's failure to designate critical habitats.  In 
response to cross-motions for summary judgment, the district 
court in July 1997 granted summary judgment to the Service 
on all claims except the critical habitat claim.  On that claim, 
the court held that the failure to designate critical habitat was 
arbitrary and capricious and remanded to the Service either 
for designation or for explanation why designation was not 
prudent.3

     While the critical habitat remand was pending, the district 
court certified the listing claims under Rule 54(b).  An appeal 
of that portion of the decision followed, but we dismissed for 
lack of jurisdiction.  The listing claims and the critical habitat 
claim arose out of the same body of law and fact, meaning 
that the listing appeal would be intertwined with a possible 
critical habitat appeal.  With the threat of such a piecemeal 
appeal looming, and without an explanation from the district 
court as to why such an approach was desirable, we held that 
we lacked jurisdiction.4

__________
     2  16 U.S.C. s 1533(a)(3) (2000);  see Determination of Endan-
gered Status for Fairy Shrimp, 59 Fed. Reg. 48,136, 48,151 (Sept. 
19, 1994);  Withdrawal of Proposal as to the California Linderiella, 
59 Fed. Reg. 48,154 (Sept. 19, 1994).

     3  See Bldg. Indus. Ass'n v. Babbitt, 979 F. Supp. 893, 905-06, 
908 (D.D.C. 1997).

     4  See Bldg. Indus. Ass'n v. Babbitt, 161 F.3d 740 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

     In March 1999, the district court reviewed additional record 
citations the Service had provided in support of its conclusion 
that critical habitat designations would be imprudent.  It 
ruled that these materials did not adequately support the 
Service's conclusion, vacated the Service's decision not to 
designate critical habitats, and remanded once again.  Ac-
cording to the district court, the decision constituted a final 
judgment on all claims.

     Appellants brought a second appeal of the listing decision. 
We ordered the parties to address whether a final decision 
existed because the critical habitat remand was still before 
the Service, which had not itself appealed.  In an attempt to 
resolve any possible jurisdictional infirmity, appellants decid-
ed to abandon litigation of the critical habitat claim, leaving 
for resolution only the listing claims, which were clearly final.  
To that end, appellants moved the district court to amend its 
March 1999 judgment remanding to the Service or in the 
alternative for leave to amend their complaint to delete the 
critical habitat claim.  The district court determined that due 
to the pending appeal it had no jurisdiction to consider the 
motion;  it also indicated that if it were to regain jurisdiction, 
it would deny the motion to amend the judgment but grant 
leave to amend the complaint.5  Soon thereafter appellants 
moved this court to dismiss their appeal, which we did.  The 
district court then granted appellants' motion to strike from 
their complaint the critical habitat claim, the only claim on 
which they had prevailed.  Appellants immediately brought 
this appeal, their third attempt to gain review of the district 
court's dismissal of the listing claims.  We once again ordered 
the parties to address our jurisdiction.

                    II.

     Appellants allege numerous errors in the district court's 
decision.  They argue that the rule's heavy reliance on a 
study, the so-called "Simovich study," not made available 
during the comment period violated the APA, as did the rule's 

__________
     5  See Bldg. Indus. Ass'n v. Babbitt, 70 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 
1999).

enumeration of fairy shrimp populations in terms of vernal 
pool complexes rather than individual pools.  They further 
contend that the listing was not supported by the best 
available scientific data, as required by the ESA, and that the 
Service misapplied its own policy on independent peer review. 
The nonfederal appellees, public interest groups that inter-
vened below ("intervenors"), argue that we lack jurisdiction 
because no final judgment exists.  We address that argument 
before reaching the merits.

                    A.

     Intervenors' jurisdictional argument is subtle.  Absent ap-
peal by the agency, an order remanding to an agency for 
further proceedings is not an appealable final decision even 
where the district court dismisses the case.  See NAACP v. 
United States Sugar Corp., 84 F.3d 1432, 1436 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  Before amendment of the complaint, therefore, the 
critical habitat remand pending before the Service prevented 
our assertion of appellate jurisdiction over the listing claims.  
Accordingly, appellants amended their complaint to omit the 
critical habitat claim.  Though the 1997 decision was not final 
at the time it was entered, under the doctrine of cumulative 
finality the dismissal of the only claim that survived that 
decision retroactively rendered it final and appealable.  See 
15A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller, & Edward H. 
Cooper, Federal Practice & Procedure s 3914.9, at 631-42 
(2d ed. 1992);  cf. Sacks v. Rothberg, 845 F.2d 1098, 1099 (D.C. 
Cir. 1988) (per curiam).

     Intervenors argue, however, that the district court abused 
its discretion in allowing amendment of the complaint after 
judgment.  If that were so, the March 1999 decision remand-
ing to the Service would still be in force, and there would be 
no final judgment for this court to review.  Ordinarily post-
judgment amendment of a complaint under Rule 15(a) re-
quires reopening of the judgment pursuant to Rule 59(e) or 
60(b).  See Cassell v. Michaux, 240 F.2d 406, 407-08 (D.C. 
Cir. 1956).  This prevents litigants from resurrecting claims 
on which they have lost.  Cf. Firestone v. Firestone, 76 F.3d 

1205, 1207-08 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (per curiam).  But that con-
cern is absent here:  appellants prevailed on the claim in 
question, and dropped it only so that they might appeal 
dismissal of other claims.

     Appellants respond (and the Service agrees) that because 
the remand was not a final judgment, no motion under Rule 
59 or 60 was necessary to amend the complaint to abandon 
claims they no longer wished to pursue.  We agree.  The 
general requirement of a Rule 59 or 60 motion prior to post-
judgment amendment is employed to serve the judicial policy 
"favoring finality of judgments and the expeditious termi-
nation of litigation."  See 6 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. 
Miller, & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice & Procedure 
s 1489, at 694 (2d ed. 1990).  Neither goal is served by 
requiring a Rule 59 or 60 motion here.  Indeed, it would be 
passing strange if in order to secure appeal of the claims on 
which they lost appellants were forced to litigate to finality 
claims on which they preliminarily prevailed and that they 
now wish to abandon.6

                    B.

     As noted, the rule relies heavily on the Simovich study, 
which was released after the proposal and which the agency 
received only during the comment period.  The study was 
therefore not among the materials published for public com-
ment.  Appellants argue that the Service's failure to seek 
comment on the study violated the APA.

__________
     6  Intervenors argue that they are prejudiced by appellants' 
amendment because they are forced to relitigate the dropped claim 
in a separate suit.  But the inability of a third party to rely on the 
disposition of a claim cannot force a plaintiff to litigate what it 
wishes to drop.  In any event, one intervenor recently sued the 
Service to compel designation of critical habitats for the four listed 
species.  The district court has granted summary judgment to that 
intervenor and ordered the Service to designate critical habitats by 
August 8, 2001.  See Butte Envtl. Council v. White, 
No. Civ. S-00-0797 WBS GGH (E.D. Cal. Feb. 8, 2001).

     It is not disputed that the Service placed great weight on 
the Simovich study.  It is cited frequently in the rule, which 
touted it as "[s]cientifically credible."  59 Fed. Reg. at 48,141.  
The Service concedes that the study is "the first long-term 
multidisciplinary study" and "the most scientifically based 
and well-documented professional study" of California vernal 
pools ever attempted, that it is "more comprehensive than 
any previous study," and that "the final rule relied substan-
tially on the findings in the Simovich study."

     The Service nonetheless contends that it was not required 
to publish the Simovich study for public comment, and we 
agree.  The APA generally obliges an agency to publish for 
comment the technical studies and data on which it relies.  
See Solite Corp. v. EPA, 952 F.2d 473, 484 (D.C. Cir. 1991) 
(per curiam).  But to avoid "perpetual cycles of new notice 
and comment periods," Ass'n of Battery Recyclers v. EPA, 
208 F.3d 1047, 1058 (D.C. Cir. 2000), a final rule that is a 
logical outgrowth of the proposal does not require an addi-
tional round of notice and comment even if the final rule 
relies on data submitted during the comment period.  See 
Int'l Fabricare Inst. v. EPA, 972 F.2d 384, 399 (D.C. Cir. 
1992) (per curiam);  Solite, 952 F.2d at 484.  Such is the case 
here.  The Simovich study, while the best available, only 
confirmed the findings delineated in the proposal.  In relying 
on it, the Service "did no more than provide support for the 
same decision it had proposed to take."  Int'l Fabricare, 972 
F.2d at 399.  Essentially, the proposal advanced for comment 
a hypothesis and some supporting data.  The Simovich study 
provided additional support for that hypothesis--indeed, bet-
ter support than was previously available--but it did not 
reject or modify the hypothesis such that additional comment 
was necessary.  See Solite, 952 F.2d at 484.

     Appellants next object to the rule because it counts fairy 
shrimp populations by the number of vernal pool complexes, 
not the number of individual vernal pools, in which they 
reside.  See 59 Fed. Reg. at 48,137.  (A pool complex is a 
group of individual pools that, due to their proximity, are 
susceptible to the same threats.)  Appellants insist that the 
proposal never put the public on notice of the "complexes 

methodology" or of the definition of complexes.7  But the use 
of complexes to measure fairy shrimp populations was no 
surprise:  the proposal itself used the term five times.  See 57 
Fed. Reg. at 19,856, 19,858, 19,859.  Moreover, nothing in the 
final rule's use of complexes constituted a deviation from the 
proposed rule.  The proposal posited danger to existing fairy 
shrimp populations, which were discussed in terms of both 
individual pools and pool complexes;  consistent with the 
proposal, the final rule found danger to existing fairy shrimp 
populations, which were measured--most accurately, accord-
ing to the rule--in terms of pool complexes.  The final rule's 
measurement of populations solely in terms of complexes, 
after the proposal's uncommitted use of both methodologies, 
was a tightening of the rule's reasoning, but it was nonethe-
less a logical outgrowth of the proposal.  Appellants have not 
pointed to any way in which the sharpened focus on complex-
es changed the rule's reasoning or conclusion.

     Appellants also claim that methodological flaws in the 
Simovich study and other relied-upon authorities mean that 
the rule was not based on the "best scientific and commercial 
data available," as required by 16 U.S.C. s 1533(b)(1)(A).  
Yet as the district court noted, appellants "have pointed to no 
data that was omitted from consideration."  979 F. Supp. at 
903.  Assuming that studies the Service relied on were imper-
fect, that alone is insufficient to undermine those authorities' 
status as the "best scientific ... data available."  Appellants 
misread s 1533(b)(1)(A):  the Service must utilize the "best 
scientific ... data available," not the best scientific data 
possible.  The Service may not base its listings on speculation 
or surmise or disregard superior data, cf. Bennett v. Spear, 
520 U.S. 154, 176 (1997);  City of Las Vegas v. Lujan, 891 
F.2d 927, 933 (D.C. Cir. 1989), but absent superior data--and 

__________
     7  Appellants' brief never explains why they were disadvantaged 
by the Service's reliance on pool complexes.  At oral argument 
appellants suggested that reliance on complexes reduced the num-
ber of discrete groups of fairy shrimp, meaning that a threat to a 
single shrimp grouping threatens a greater fraction of that species.  
Their argument remains somewhat obscure.

appellants point to none--occasional imperfections do not 
violate s 1533(b)(1)(A).

     Finally, we reject appellants' claim that the listing's validity 
is undermined by its failure to comply with the Service's peer 
review policy.  To be sure, the listing was not subjected to 
the present peer review procedure, which requires that "dur-
ing the comment period" the Service obtain three indepen-
dent specialists' opinions on the merits of the decision and 
reprint them in the listing.  See Peer Review Policy State-
ment, 59 Fed. Reg. 34,270 (July 1, 1994).  But the current 
peer review policy came into force 22 months after the close 
of the fairy shrimp comment period.  Appellants point out 
that a March 1995 letter from a Service official to Congress-
man Richard Pombo stated that "[i]n conformance with policy 
(59 FR 34270), the Service sought scientific peer review of the 
listing proposal."  Letter from George T. Frampton, Jr., 
Assistant Secretary for the Service, to Hon. Richard Pombo 1 
(March 10, 1995).  That statement may have misled the 
congressman as to the Service's compliance with the specific 
peer review procedures promulgated in 1994, but the listing 
was in fact subject to peer review that was intense though 
less formal than is currently required.  In any event, appel-
lants suggest no basis on which the letter would render the 
later-enacted policy statement retroactively binding on an 
already-concluded comment period.8

                    * * * *

     The denial of appellants' motion for summary judgment is

                                                            Affirmed.

__________
     8  Appellants also argue that this application of the ESA exceeds 
Congress' Commerce Clause power and that the Service misapplied 
the ESA's statutory factors.  According to appellants' brief, howev-
er, the former claim fails under National Association of Home 
Builders v. Babbitt, 130 F.3d 1041 (D.C. Cir. 1997), and is asserted 
only to preserve the possibility of en banc review.  Appellants 
conceded at oral argument that the latter claim was not pressed 
below.

                                          