                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 11, 2002      Decided May 24, 2002 

                           No. 01-1154

                       Grand Canyon Trust, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                Federal Aviation Administration, 
                            Respondent

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                 Federal Aviation Administration

     Robin Cooley argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
petitioner.  Mary-Lynn Sferrazza entered an appearance.

     Ellen J. Durkee, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the brief was 
Alice B. Thurston, Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  The Grand Canyon Trust petitions 
for review of the decision of the Federal Aviation Administra-
tion ("FAA") approving the federal actions necessary to allow 
the city of St. George, Utah, to construct a replacement 
airport near Zion National Park.  The Trust challenges the 
adequacy of the FAA's environmental assessment under 
s 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 
("NEPA"), 42 U.S.C. s 4332(C) (1970), and the FAA's conclu-
sion that there would be no significant environmental impacts 
from the project necessitating preparation of an environmen-
tal impact statement under NEPA.  Focusing on the noise 
impacts on the Park, the Trust principally contends that the 
FAA failed adequately to consider the cumulative impact on 
the natural quiet of the Park and instead addressed only the 
incremental impact of the replacement airport.  We grant the 
petition.

                                I.

     In 1995, the FAA began working with the City of St. 
George, Utah, to determine the feasibility of continuing use of 
the existing airport as compared to development of a new 
airport at a new site.  A growing retirement community and 
projected air-traffic demand was outstripping the capacity of 
the existing airport, which could not be expanded due to 
geographic constraints.  Three sites in addition to a no-action 
alternative were examined.  In response to comments on a 
draft environmental assessment, the FAA conducted a Sup-
plemental Noise Analysis on the potential noise impacts of the 
replacement airport on Zion National Park ("the Park").  The 
Park is located approximately 25 miles northeast of St. 
George and is the preferred replacement airport alternative.

     The FAA concluded that the noise impacts on the Park 
from the replacement airport would be negligible and insignif-
icant.  On January 30, 2001, the FAA approved the final 
environmental assessment, concluding that an environmental 
impact statement was unnecessary, and issued the record of 
decision, setting forth actions, determinations, and approvals 
that will allow St. George to construct the replacement air-

port.  It is the determination underlying this record of deci-
sion, that the proposed action will not significantly affect the 
environment of the Park, that the Trust challenges.

                               II.

     The essential disagreement between the parties is whether 
the FAA was required in its environmental assessment to 
address more than the incremental impact of the replacement 
airport as compared to the existing airport.  NEPA requires 
federal agencies to prepare an environmental impact state-
ment ("EIS") for "every ... major Federal action[ ] signifi-
cantly affecting the quality of the human environment."  42 
U.S.C. s 4332(2)(C).  An environmental assessment ("EA") is 
made for the purpose of determining whether an EIS is 
required.  See 40 C.F.R. s 1508.9.  "If any 'significant' envi-
ronmental impacts might result from the proposed agency 
action then an EIS must be prepared before agency action is 
taken."  Sierra Club v. Peterson, 717 F.2d 1409, 1415 (D.C. 
Cir. 1983) ("Peterson").

     An agency decision that an EIS is not required may be 
overturned "only if it was arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of 
discretion."  Sierra Club v. United States Dep't of Transpor-
tation, 753 F.2d 120, 126 (D.C. Cir. 1985) ("Transportation").  
Under the long-established standard in this circuit, the court 
reviews an agency's finding of no significant impact to deter-
mine whether:

     First, the agency [has] accurately identified the relevant 
     environmental concern.  Second, once the agency has 
     identified the problem it must have taken a 'hard look' at 
     the problem in preparing the EA.  Third, if a finding of 
     no significant impact is made, the agency must be able to 
     make a convincing case for its finding.  Last, if the 
     agency does find an impact of true significance, prepara-
     tion of an EIS can be avoided only if the agency finds 
     that the changes or safeguards in the project sufficiently 
     reduce the impact to a minimum.
     
Id. at 127;  see also Maryland-Nat'l Capital Park and Plan-
ning Comm'n v. U.S. Postal Serv., 487 F.2d 1029, 1040 (D.C. 
Cir. 1973).

     The Trust does not dispute that the FAA properly defined 
the relevant environmental concern of noise impacts from 
aircraft on the Park.  Rather, the Trust contends that the 
FAA cannot be said to have taken a "hard look" at the 
problem when it considered only the incremental impacts of 
the replacement airport and not the total noise impact that 
will result from the relocated airport.  The Trust notes that 
the EA does not address the cumulative impact in light of 
other air flights over the Park, air tours in or near the Park, 
and reasonably foreseeable future aircraft activity and airport 
expansions that will contribute to the cumulative noise impact 
on the Park.  Indeed, the EA's statement on cumulative 
impact is, in full:  "There are no known factors that could 
result in cumulative impacts as a result of the proposed St. 
George Replacement Airport."  Further, the Trust notes, the 
FAA's Supplemental Noise Analysis disregards cumulative 
impacts.  The FAA responds that it adequately considered 
the cumulative impact when it compared noise impacts associ-
ated with the replacement airport with the no-action alterna-
tive of continued use of the existing airport.  It rejects the 
Trust's position that it was required in an EA to compare the 
project to an environmental baseline of natural quiet and to 
consider the total impact of aircraft noise on the Park.

     The issue dividing the parties is settled by regulations 
promulgated by the Council on Environmental Quality 
("CEQ") to implement NEPA and by case law applying those 
regulations.*  "The CEQ regulations, which ... are entitled 
to substantial deference, impose a duty on all federal agen-
cies."  Marsh v. Oregon Natural Res. Council, 490 U.S. 360, 
372 (1989) (citations omitted);  see also Citizens Against 
Burlington, Inc. v. Busey, 938 F.2d 190, 200 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  
The CEQ regulations define each term within NEPA's re-
quirement of an EIS for "every ... major Federal action[ ] 
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment."  

__________
     * Neither party challenges the regulatory authority of the CEQ, 
and hence we have no occasion to question the binding effect of the 
regulations on the FAA.  See City of Alexandria v. Slater, 198 F.3d 
862, 866 n.3 (D.C. Cir. 1999).

42 U.S.C. s 4332(2)(C);  40 C.F.R. s 1502.3.  The term "sig-
nificantly" is defined as those actions "with individually insig-
nificant but cumulatively significant impacts.  Significance 
exists if it is reasonable to anticipate a cumulatively signifi-
cant impact on the environment."  40 C.F.R. s 1508.27(b)(7).  
"Cumulative impact," in turn, is defined as:

     the impact on the environment which results from the 
     incremental impact of the action when added to other 
     past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions 
     regardless of what agency (Federal or non-Federal) or 
     person undertakes such other actions.  Cumulative im-
     pacts can result from individually minor but collectively 
     significant actions taking place over a period of time.
     
40 C.F.R. s 1508.7.  Although federal agencies have discre-
tion to decide whether a proposed action "is significant 
enough to warrant preparation of an EIS," the court owes no 
deference to the FAA's interpretation of NEPA or the CEQ 
regulations because NEPA is addressed to all federal agen-
cies and Congress did not entrust administration of NEPA to 
the FAA alone.  Citizens Against Rails-to-Trails v. Surface 
Transportation Board, 267 F.3d 1144, 1150 (D.C. Cir 2001);  
see Amfac Resorts, LLC v. United States Dep't. of Interior, 
282 F.3d 818, 835 (D.C. Cir. 2002);  cf. Al-Fayed v. CIA, 254 
F.3d 300, 307 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

     The courts, in reviewing whether a federal agency has 
acted arbitrarily and capriciously in finding no significant 
environmental impact, have given effect to the plain language 
of the regulations.  While the factual settings differ in some 
respects from the instant case, the consistent position in the 
case law is that, depending on the environmental concern at 
issue, the agency's EA must give a realistic evaluation of the 
total impacts and cannot isolate a proposed project, viewing it 
in a vacuum.  For example, in Coalition on Sensible Trans-
portation v. Dole, 826 F.2d 60 (D.C. Cir. 1987) ("Dole"), this 
court stated that the CEQ regulations on cumulative impact 
"provide a distinct meaning to the concept" separate and 
apart from the notion of improper segmentation of agency 
action.  Id. at 70.  Noting that the regulatory definition of 
cumulative impact specifies that the " 'incremental impact of 
the action' [at issue]" must be considered " 'when added to 
other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future ac-

tions,' " id. (quoting 40 C.F.R. s 1508.7), the court observed 
that, consistent with the regulation and purpose of NEPA, 
"[i]t makes sense to consider the 'incremental impact' of a 
project for possible cumulative effects by incorporating the 
effects of other projects into the background 'data base' of the 
project at issue."  Id. at 70-71.  The point, the court stated, 
was to provide in the EA "sufficient [information] to alert 
interested members of the public to any arguable cumulative 
impacts involving [ ] other projects."  Id. at 71.  Further, the 
court concluded that insofar as Kleppe v. Sierra Club, 427 
U.S. 390 (1976), "may bear on an agency's duty to consider 
impacts in a context that realistically includes other pending 
projects, the [agency] fully complied by planning on the basis 
of ... ultimate completion of the related projects."  Id. 
(citing Kleppe, 427 U.S. at 415 n.26).  Similarly, the court in 
Peterson, without regard to any particular NEPA regulation, 
reversed a finding of no significant impact and a decision to 
issue certain oil and gas leases in national forests without 
preparing an EIS, remanding the case because the agency 
had failed, as NEPA requires, to "fully assess[ ] the possible 
environmental consequences" of activities "which have the 
potential for disturbing the environment."  717 F.2d at 1415.  
NRDC v. Hodel, 865 F.2d 288 (D.C. Cir. 1988), is to the same 
effect.  There, the agency had failed to consider the cumula-
tive impact, as defined in the CEQ regulations, of simulta-
neous development in the region on "species, particularly 
whales and salmon, that migrate through the different plan-
ning areas" when it considered only the effect on those 
species "within the Planning Area" rather than "the inter-
regional effects."  Id. at 297-99.  Other circuits take a similar 
approach in applying the regulations.  See, e.g., Fritiofson v. 
Alexander, 772 F.2d 1225 (5th Cir. 1985), rev'd on other 
grounds, Sabine River Auth. v. Dep't of the Interior, 951 F.2d 
669 (5th Cir. 1992).  Although the FAA would distinguish 
Hanly v. Kleindienst, 471 F.2d 823 (2d Cir. 1972), on which 
the Trust relies, on the ground that it preceded the regula-
tions, the court was addressing the requirements of NEPA, 
and the FAA can point to nothing in the regulations that 
would suggest the court erred in holding that NEPA requires 
review of a proposed action in light of

     the cumulative harm that results from [the action's] 
     contribution to existing adverse conditions or uses in the 
     area....  [E]ven a slight increase in adverse conditions 
     that form an existing environmental milieu may some-
     times threaten harm that is significant.  One more facto-
     ry ... may represent the straw that breaks the back of 
     the environmental camel.
     
Id. at 831.

     The FAA, in finding that the St. George replacement 
airport would have no significant impact on the environment 
of the Park, concluded that "there is little discernable in-
creased noise intrusion to the Park" from the proposed 
replacement airport as compared to the existing airport, and 
that "the increase in noise levels that would result from the 
development of a replacement airport is negligible [because] 
aircraft traffic will increase even if the replacement airport is 
not constructed."  The FAA's analysis appears principally in 
a Supplemental Noise Analysis attached to the EA, and 
proceeds on the basis of a comparison of the noise impacts 
from predicted air traffic at the existing airport and predicted 
air traffic at the larger replacement airport.  At the existing 
airport, the FAA predicted that flight activity would increase 
due to normal traffic growth from 46,193 flights in 1998 to 
59,640 flights in 2008 (more than 80 departures and 80 
arrivals every day), and to 78,490 in 2018 (more than 100 
departures and 100 arrivals each day).  At the replacement 
airport, traffic would increase to 63,290 flights in 2008 (more 
than 85 departures and 85 arrivals every day), and to 79,220 
flights in 2018 (more than 105 departures and 105 arrivals 
each day).  Comparing the predicted noise impact on the 
Park from the existing and replacement airports, the FAA 
found that Day-Night Noise Level ("DNL")1 would increase 
"due to the implementation of the replacement airport over 

__________
     1  Day-Night Noise Level ("DNL") is a 24-hour, time-weighted 
energy average noise level based on the A-weighted decibel.  It is a 
measure of the overall noise experienced during an entire day.  
"Time-weighted" refers to the fact that noise occurring during 

the use of the existing airport" by no more than 3.5 dBA2 in 
2008 and 3.2 dBA in 2018, which the FAA characterized as 
"extremely low" increases.  The FAA concluded that "there 
will be little difference associated with the replacement air-
port, as compared with the existing airport, in the long-term 
based on the DNL metric."

     The FAA also examined in the Supplemental Noise Analy-
sis the peak hour Equivalent Noise Level ("LEQ")3 based on 
a threshold of 45 dBA, when aircraft would be clearly audible 
and noticeable in the Park.  The FAA assumed that typical 
background noise levels in the Park would be 20 dBA during 
quiet times and locations and in the low 30 dBA in less quiet 
times and locations.  Based on its own data and on research 
sponsored by the National Park Service ("NPS"), the FAA 
found that only one flight path from the replacement airport 
would present noise greater than 45 dBA for more than one 
minute an hour in 2008, which represented only a 0.7% 
increase over the predicted traffic at the existing airport.  In 
2018, three of eleven flight paths from the replacement 
airport would present noise greater than 45 dBA for more 
than one minute per hour, a change of no more than 0.9% 
from the predicted traffic at the existing airport.  Using a 
lower noise annoyance threshold of 35 dBA, the FAA predict-
ed that no flight path would have noise above 35 dBA for 

__________
certain sensitive time periods is penalized for occurring at these 
times.

     2  The standard unit of measurement of sound is the decibel 
("dB").  Because the human ear is not equally sensitive to all 
frequencies, with some frequencies judged to be louder for a given 
signal than others, the most common method of frequency weight-
ing is the A-weighted noise curve ("dBA").  The A-weighted decibel 
scale discriminates between frequencies in a manner approximating 
the sensitivity of the human ear.  In the A-weighted decibel scale, 
everyday sounds normally range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 
dBA (very loud).

     3  Equivalent Noise Level ("LEQ") measures the energy aver-
age noise level resulting from the sound level corresponding to a 
steady-state A-weighted sound level containing the same total ener-
gy as a time-varying signal over a given sample period.

more than 7 minutes per hour in 2008 and 7.7 minutes each 
hour in 2018.  Based on this data, the FAA found that while 
2% to 7% of Park visitors would experience moderate to 
extreme annoyance due to aircraft noise from the existing St. 
George Airport, the number would only increase to 2% to 8% 
with the replacement airport using the 45 dBA threshold.  
Using a 35 dBA threshold, the FAA interpreted the data to 
mean that between 3% and 15% of Park visitors would be 
annoyed by aircraft noise from the existing airport, compared 
to 4% to 15% of visitors who would be annoyed by aircraft 
from the replacement airport, with a 3% increase (from 11% 
to 14%) of Park visitors experiencing moderate to extreme 
annoyance from the aircraft noise on the loudest flight path.  
The FAA concluded that "there will be little difference in 
noise between the existing and replacement airport."

     In a section of the EA entitled "Impacts to Natural Quiet of 
the Park," the FAA did acknowledge the existence of "over-
flights" that pass over the Park.  Noting that NPS had 
completed ambient noise monitoring in Zion National Park, 
the FAA stated that the results showed that "the background 
or ambient noise levels vary, but are often in the low 20 
dBA."  Finding that the typical peak or maximum noise 
levels from aircraft from either the existing or proposed St. 
George airport sites ranged from 45 to 65 dBA when passing 
directly overhead, the FAA concluded that, because "these 
aircraft are at or near cruise altitude, or in the case of jets 
[are] above 20,000 feet, the peak or maximum noise levels will 
remain the same for either airport site."  While recognizing 
that these overflights constitute noise events that are higher 
than background natural quiet during periods when ambient 
noise levels are low, the FAA focused on the incremental 
impact, stating that it was "important to illustrate that the 
development of the St. George replacement airport has little 
effect on the overall aircraft noise levels in the Park."  The 
FAA referred to the 250 overflights following established 
flight paths near or over the Park4 that are not associated 

__________
     4  Instrument flight rules ("IFR") designate flights using estab-
lished flight paths, as distinct from aircraft operating under visual 
flight rules ("VFR").

with St. George Airport in concluding that "the replacement 
airport has very little contribution to the cumulative number 
of aircraft over flights over Zion National Park."  The FAA 
observed that St. George Airport contributed only 31 flights 
using instrument flight rules over Zion, a number that was 
expected to increase to 48 in 2008 at the existing airport and 
54 at the replacement airport, and to 67 in 2018 at the 
existing airport and 69 at the replacement airport.  The FAA 
then found that the replacement airport would add only six 
additional flights using instrument flight rules per day in 2008 
and only two additional such flights in 2018.  In addition, the 
FAA predicted that less than four aircraft per day would fly 
over Zion using visual-flight-rules routes, a number the FAA 
predicted would remain the same for either the existing or 
the replacement site.  The FAA concluded that the existing 
St. George airport would contribute only 11% of all existing 
flights using instrument flight rules over or near the Park, 
and that the increased flights from the replacement airport 
would represent only approximately 2% of the total aircraft 
flights using instrument flight rules over or near the Park.

     The FAA's noise analysis in the EA, including the Supple-
mental Noise Analysis, may, in fact, be a splendid incremental 
analysis, but it fails to address what is crucial if the EA is to 
serve its function.  While, as the FAA stresses, the EA is not 
intended to be a lengthy document, see 40 C.F.R. 
s 1508.9(a)(1), it must at a minimum address the consider-
ations relevant to determining whether an EIS is required.  
NEPA regulations require that an agency consider cumula-
tive impacts and the FAA's EA fails to address the total noise 
impact that will result from the replacement airport.  Indeed, 
the FAA's own NEPA policy calls for consideration of cumu-
lative impact, parroting the language of the NEPA regula-
tions to include proposed projects and past, present, and 
reasonably foreseeable future actions.  See Policies and Pro-
cedures for Considering Environmental Impacts, FAA Order 
1050.1D.  Comments on the draft EA called the FAA's 
attention to the need to consider mitigation measures in view 
of the results of the study of noise-annoyance to persons in 
the Park;  the EA does not respond and provides no analysis 

of the 2% to 9% or the 4% to 15% level of annoyance shown in 
the NPS study.  Yet, as the FAA was aware, the NPS had 
identified Zion National Park as among the nine national 
parks of "highest priority" for attention to noise impact on 
their natural quiet from overflights.  See U.S. Department of 
the Interior/National Park Service, Report on Effects of 
Aircraft Overflights on the National Park System:  Report to 
Congress (July, 1995).  Comments also expressed concern 
about the total impacts of noise on the Park and on Park 
visitors, yet the EA contains no analysis of the impact of 54 
daily flights in 2008 and 69 in 2018 associated with St. George.

     The Trust maintains that each flight may be responsible for 
a noise level of 45 to 65 dBA and points to expert testimony 
that an increase of 10 dBA correlates to a doubling of 
loudness such that a commercial jet overflight at the Park 
may be 4 to 23 times as loud as the natural soundscape.  
Even in the absence of the regulatory definitions it would be 
difficult to understand how an agency could determine that an 
EIS is not required if it had not evaluated existing noise 
impacts as well as those planned impacts that will exist by the 
time the new facility is constructed and in operation.  As the 
Trust gleans from case law:

     a meaningful cumulative impact analysis must identify (1) 
     the area in which the effects of the proposed project will 
     be felt;  (2) the impacts that are expected in that area 
     from the proposed project;  (3) other actions--past, pres-
     ent, and proposed, and reasonably foreseeable--that 
     have had or are expected to have impacts in the same 
     area;  (4) the impacts or expected impacts from these 
     other actions;  and (5) the overall impact that can be 
     expected if the individual impacts are allowed to accumu-
     late.
     
Petitioner's Reply Br. at 3, citing Fritiofson, 772 F.2d at 1245 
(citing Cabinet Mountains Wilderness/Scotchman's Peak 
Grizzly Bears v. Peterson, 685 F.2d 678, 683-84 (D.C. Cir. 
1982));  see also Hodel, 865 F.2d at 297-99;  City of Carmel-
by-the-Sea v. DOT, 123 F.3d 1142, 1160 (9th Cir. 1997).

     The analysis in the EA, in other words, cannot treat the 
identified environmental concern in a vacuum, as an incre-

mental approach attempts.  Although the replacement airport 
may contribute only a 2% increase to the amount of over-
flights near or over the Park, there is no way to determine 
from the FAA's analysis in the EA whether, deferring to the 
FAA's expert calculations, a 2% increase, in addition to other 
noise impacts on the Park, will "significantly affect[ ]" the 
quality of the human environment in the Park.  At no point 
does the FAA's EA aggregate the noise impacts on the Park.  
The analysis in the EA does not address the accumulated, or 
total, incremental impacts of various man-made noises, such 
as the 250 daily aircraft flights near or over the Park that 
originate at, or have as their destination, airports other than 
that in St. George.  Neither does the EA consider in any 
manner the air tours near and over the Park originating from 
the St. George airport.  Nor does the EA address the impact, 
much less the cumulative impact, of noise in the Park as a 
result of other activities, such as the planned expansions of 
other regional airports that have flights near or over the 
Park.  Without analyzing the total noise impact on the Park 
as a result of the construction of the replacement airport, the 
FAA is not in a position to determine whether the additional 
noise that is projected to come from the expansion of the St. 
George airport facility at a new location would cause a 
significant environmental impact on the Park and, thus, to 
require preparation of an EIS.

     In defense of its incremental approach in the EA, the FAA 
make three arguments.  First, it relies on several phrases in 
the NEPA regulations.  The FAA points to the phrase "in-
cremental impacts" in 40 C.F.R. s 1508.7 to contend that it is 
obligated to consider only the incremental impact of any 
project.  The difficulty with this position is that it ignores the 
rest of the sentence in s 1508.7 directing an agency to 
consider that incremental impact "when added to other past, 
present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless 
of what agency ... or person undertakes such other actions."  
The FAA also relies on the phrase "related to" in the 
definition of "significantly" in 40 C.F.R. s 1508.28(b)(7) to 
contend that it need not consider either the overflights not 
associated with St. George or the proposed expansion at Las 

Vegas Airport and the proposals for new airports at Mesquite 
and Cedar City because they are "not related" to the St. 
George's airport expansion.  Again, the FAA ignores other 
language in the regulation that "[s]ignificance exists if it is 
reasonable to anticipate a cumulatively significant impact on 
the environment."  40 C.F.R. s 1508.28(b)(7).

     Second, the FAA points to 40 C.F.R. s 1508.25(a) and 
Kleppe, 427 U.S. at 409-10 & n.20, to contend that it need 
consider only other projects that are "inextricably inter-
twined" and not those that are "substantially independent."  
Both the regulation and the opinion address the proper scope 
of an EIS, not an EA, but to the extent the former influences 
the latter, nothing in Kleppe suggests that the FAA could 
ignore the total noise impact in the area of identified environ-
mental concern.  See Dole, 826 F.2d at 71.

     Third, the FAA, quoting CEQ guidance on preparation of 
an EIS, contends that the no-action alternative is properly 
viewed as a "benchmark against which decisionmakers may 
compare the magnitude of environmental effects" of actions.  
See 46 Fed. Reg. 18,026, 18,027 (March 23, 1981).  Neither 
the guidance nor the cases cited by the FAA relieve it of the 
duty to consider cumulative impact in the EA.  Although the 
court stated in Allison v. DOT, 908 F.2d 1024 (D.C. Cir. 
1990), that 40 C.F.R. s 1508.25(a) did not require the FAA to 
consider unconnected single actions that are neither related 
to nor dependent on the proposed new airport for Denver, 
Colorado, the court was not addressing the requirements of 
40 C.F.R. s 1508.7 on cumulative impact.  Id. at 1030.  In 
contrast, here, the FAA responded to comments that baseline 
data and cumulative impact was lacking in the draft EA by 
stating, on the basis of its incremental analysis, that "The 
current noise levels in Zion National Park will not be adverse-
ly affected by either the existing or future noise levels 
associated with aircraft."  Because there is no analysis of 
cumulative noise impact on the Park against which the addi-
tional noise impact of the replacement airport can be evaluat-
ed, the FAA's error in ignoring cumulative impact of man-
made noise is not harmless, see Allison, 908 F.2d at 1029, for 
the FAA has impermissibly taken "a foreshortened view of 

the impacts which could result from the act" of constructing 
the replacement airport.  Peterson, 717 F.2d at 1413.

     Accordingly, we grant the petition without reaching the 
Trust's contention that an EIS is required because the pro-
ject is "highly controversial," 40 C.F.R. s 1508.27(b)(4);  
Fund for Animals v. Frizzell, 530 F.2d 982, 988 n.15 (D.C. 
Cir. 1976).  We remand the case because the record is 
insufficient for the court to determine whether an EIS is 
required.  On remand, the FAA must evaluate the cumulative 
impact of noise pollution on the Park as a result of construc-
tion of the proposed replacement airport in light of air traffic 
near and over the Park, from whatever airport, air tours near 
or in the Park, and the acoustical data collected by NPS in 
the Park in 1995 and 1998 mentioned in comments on the 
draft EA.  See 42 U.S.C. s 4332(2)(C);  Marsh, 490 U.S. at 
371;  Transportation, 753 F.2d at 129 (citing Committee for 
Nuclear Responsibility, Inc. v. Seaborg, 463 F.2d 783, 787 
(D.C. Cir. 1971)).  Other data may also prove relevant.  Al-
though the FAA explained in responding to comments that it 
does not use "natural ambient noise levels," because they 
exclude human sounds and are therefore not a true reflection 
of the existing noise environment, and rejected the "L90" 
methodology5 used by NPS to calculate natural ambient noise 
levels, because 90% of sounds in the Park would be consid-
ered noisier than the "natural" ambient level, the FAA in fact 
did consider NPS data in its Supplemental Noise Analysis 
and fails to demonstrate that this information is not relevant 
to the cumulative impact analysis to be prepared for the EA.  
See Allison, 908 F.2d at 1029;  Transportation, 753 F.2d at 
129.

__________
     5  Under the "L90" methodology, the natural ambient level is 
based on the quietest 10% of noise data statistically derived from 
noise monitoring.

                                                             