                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued October 9, 2001   Decided November 9, 2001 

                           No. 00-3056

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Pernell J. Sumlin, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 99cr00164-01)

     Robert S. Becker, appointed by the court, argued the cause 
and filed the brief for appellant.

     Elana Tyrangiel, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the 
cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Kenneth L. 
Wainstein, U.S. Attorney at the time the brief was filed, John 
R. Fisher, Roy W. McLeese III and John Crabb Jr., Assistant 
U.S. Attorneys.

     Before:  Sentelle, Randolph and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Pernell Sumlin was convicted 
after a jury trial of one count of conspiracy to distribute and 
possess with intent to distribute 500 grams or more of cocaine 
base in violation of 21 U.S.C. ss 846, 841(a)(1) and 
841(b)(1)(B)(ii);  unlawful distribution of 5 grams or more of 
cocaine base in violation of 21 U.S.C. s 841(a)(1)(B)(iii);  and, 
unlawful distribution of 500 grams or more of cocaine and 
aiding and abetting, in violation of 21 U.S.C. ss 841(a)(1), 
841(b)(1)(B)(ii) and 18 U.S.C. s 2.  Sumlin appeals, arguing 
that the Government impermissibly introduced evidence relat-
ing to his "prior bad acts" and improperly bolstered the 
credibility of its paid informant.  Sumlin also argues that his 
convictions should be overturned because the evidence pre-
sented at trial established entrapment as a matter of law.  
Finding no merit to Sumlin's arguments, we affirm his convic-
tions.

                             I. Facts

     The parties agree that appellant Sumlin and Kevin Goode 
first met in the spring of 1998 when they both worked in the 
same downtown D.C. office building.  Goode, having pleaded 
guilty to a drug offense in 1997, was cooperating with the 
DEA on various drug investigations.  Beyond that, the par-
ties' versions of the events leading to Sumlin's arrest differ 
somewhat.  According to the government, Sumlin told Goode 
in mid-1998 that he was involved in the drug trade and that 
he had a drug connection in Indiana, one "Mike Turio," who 
supplied him with cocaine.  Also according to the govern-
ment, Sumlin told Goode that he had "purchased a kilo" of 
cocaine, and had mentioned his drug source to Goode on at 
least two subsequent occasions.

     In the spring of 1999, with the assistance of Goode, the 
DEA began investigating Sumlin and his purported connec-
tion in Indiana.  In late March or early April of that year, the 
DEA directed Goode to contact Sumlin.  Goode did so, and on 
April 2, 1999, Goode and Sumlin made arrangements for 

Sumlin to sell 62 grams of cocaine to Goode.  That night, 
Sumlin, Goode, and undercover law enforcement officer Per-
cel Alston (posing as Goode's cousin) met in a Maryland 
restaurant to complete the transaction.  At the time of the 
meeting, however, Sumlin indicated that the cocaine had not 
yet been converted into crack and that he needed to meet 
with his "source."  Sumlin left the restaurant and did not 
return.  However, in a conversation with Goode the following 
day, the two made arrangements to complete the transaction.  
Thus, on April 6, 1999, Sumlin sold 62 grams of crack cocaine 
to Goode and Alston for $2100.  During this drug sale, Sumlin 
discussed "Mike" and his own travel to Indiana.  After the 
sale was completed, Sumlin told Alston and Goode that he 
had an additional kilogram of cocaine to sell and that Goode 
and Alston should contact him if they needed any additional 
cocaine.  Goode and appellant subsequently arranged a deal 
for Sumlin to sell five kilograms of cocaine for $125,000.  
Sumlin asked an acquaintance, Daniel Clayton, to supply the 
cocaine for the upcoming sale.  Clayton provided four kilo-
grams of cocaine to Sumlin, who then met with Goode on 
April 15, 1999.  After giving the cocaine to Goode, Sumlin was 
arrested.

     Prior to trial and over Sumlin's objection, the court ruled 
that the government could introduce, under Federal Rule of 
Evidence 404(b), evidence that Sumlin pleaded guilty to drug 
trafficking in 1989, and had engaged in uncharged drug 
transactions in 1998.  This latter evidence, according to the 
government's proffer, would include testimony from Clayton 
that he and Sumlin had engaged in prior cocaine transactions 
together in amounts ranging from nine ounces to a kilogram, 
as well as evidence from Goode regarding Sumlin's state-
ments that he was involved in drug trafficking.  The govern-
ment also introduced at trial--without objection--statements 
from Sumlin regarding his experience as a drug dealer;  
testimony from Goode elaborating and interpreting Sumlin's 
statements regarding his Indiana contact, Mike;  and, testi-
mony from DEA Agent Michael Dukovich regarding the 
DEA's investigation into a possible drug source in Indiana.  
The government also introduced, again without objection, 

testimony from DEA Agent Albert Perry regarding Goode's 
record for assisting the DEA in other drug investigations.

     Sumlin testified in his own defense that he was an unwilling 
participant in the drug sales and that Goode called him 
between 40 and 50 times before he agreed to participate in 
the transactions at all.  Sumlin also testified that he only 
learned of Clayton and Clayton's drug connections through a 
friend, that he lied to Goode and Alston about his drug 
connections during the April 6 drug deal, and that he acted 
like a drug dealer for "safety reasons."  Sumlin further 
testified that he was unfamiliar with the drug jargon used by 
Goode and Alston, and produced a witness (his wife) who 
testified that he lacked the overt signs of participation in the 
drug trade such as expensive cars and clothing.  Finally, 
Sumlin testified that he made up the story of "Mike," his 
alleged drug source.

     On appeal, Sumlin challenges his convictions on grounds 
the trial court erred in allowing testimony from Goode and 
Agent Dukovich regarding "Mike" and the DEA's investiga-
tion into an Indiana drug source, as well as testimony from 
Agent Perry regarding Goode's record for assisting the DEA.  
Sumlin also argues that he was entrapped, as no reasonable 
jury could have concluded that he was predisposed to commit 
the crimes for which he was convicted.  We address, and 
dismiss, each of his arguments in turn.

                           II. Analysis

                     A. Rule 404(b) Evidence

     Prior to trial, the government filed notice of its intent to 
present, under Fed. R. Evid. 404(b), "other crimes evidence."  
See Government's Notice of Intent to Introduce Other Crimes 
Evidence Pursuant to Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b), Unit-
ed States v. Sumlin, Cr. No. 99-164 (RWR) (D.D.C. Jan. 5, 
2000).  "Other crimes evidence" is admissible under Rule 
404(b) if it is relevant, probative of a material issue other than 
the defendant's character, and more probative than prejudi-
cial.  See United States v. Mathis, 216 F.3d 18, 26 (D.C. Cir. 

2000);  see also United States v. Bowie, 232 F.3d 923, 930 
(D.C. Cir. 2000).  In addition, such evidence is admissible 
only if all of the evidence at trial is "sufficient to support a 
jury finding that the defendant committed the other crime or 
act."  Bowie, 232 F.3d at 930 (citing Huddleston v. United 
States, 485 U.S. 681, 689-90 (1988)).

     The Government intended to introduce evidence of Sumlin's 
past guilty plea to drug distribution in 1989, and his un-
charged participation in drug trafficking during 1998.  At a 
hearing before the district court, the Government proffered 
the testimony of Clayton, who would testify about his direct 
participation with Sumlin in past drug transactions, and Kev-
in Goode, who would testify about comments Sumlin made 
indicating his involvement in the drug trade.  Over Sumlin's 
objection, the district court ruled in favor of allowing the 
testimony, subject to Sumlin renewing his objection at trial.  
At trial, the government introduced its proffered evidence, 
but Sumlin did not renew his objection.

     Sumlin now argues that the district court abused its discre-
tion and committed prejudicial error in admitting certain 
"other crimes evidence" through the testimony of Goode and 
DEA Agent Mike Dukovich.  Specifically, Sumlin argues that 
in granting the Government's motion to introduce testimony 
under Fed. R. Evid. 404(b), the district court ruled only that 
the Government could introduce evidence concerning 1) Sum-
lin's guilty plea to crack cocaine distribution in 1989, and 
2) evidence that Sumlin received and sold crack cocaine in 
1998.  Sumlin asserts that the district court wrongly allowed 
testimony from Goode concerning Sumlin's alleged association 
with "Mike Turio," and testimony from Agent Dukovich con-
cerning an open investigation in Indiana as to a possible 
source of drugs.  Because the Government's proffer at the 
hearing made no mention of "Mike Turio" or of Sumlin's 
alleged connection to Indiana, Sumlin argues that it was error 
for the district court to admit this evidence at trial.  Sumlin 
contends that it was this particular evidence that caused a 
jury to conclude that he was engaged in drug trafficking.  
Therefore, he claims he was prejudiced by its admission.

     The Government, however, argues that although Sumlin 
objected to its proffered evidence at the hearing before the 
district court, he did not object to its introduction at trial.  
Accordingly, the proper standard of review is one of plain 
error, not abuse of discretion.  The Government continues 
that even if it was error for the district court to admit the 
testimony, Sumlin did not suffer any prejudice from the 
admission of the testimony because additional, unobjected-to 
evidence was admitted such that a jury could have concluded 
that he participated in drug trafficking.

     We agree with the Government that even if it was error for 
the district court to admit the challenged testimony, Sumlin is 
not entitled to remedial action.  We note that our analysis 
remains unchanged whether we apply the more lenient abuse 
of discretion standard, as suggested by Sumlin, or the less 
forgiving plain error standard, as suggested by the Govern-
ment.  This is so because both standards require a finding 
that the district court's error affected the defendant's sub-
stantial rights.  See Fed. R. Crim. P. 52;  see also United 
States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 731 (1993).  Thus even assum-
ing error, Sumlin has nonetheless failed to establish that the 
admission of both Goode's and Agent Dukovich's testimony 
"affected the outcome of the district court proceedings."  
Olano, 507 U.S. at 734.

     First, Sumlin does not contest the district court's decision 
to allow Clayton's statements regarding Sumlin's experiences 
as a drug dealer.  He concedes that these statements are 
admissible under Federal Rule of Evidence 801(d)(2) as party 
admissions.  This unchallenged evidence includes Clayton's 
testimony that Sumlin said he was involved in the drug trade, 
that he "was receiving about a 'ki'[logram] a week to a week 
and a-half," and that he had a "connection through Indiana" 
for receiving drugs.  Moreover, Goode's unchallenged testi-
mony includes Sumlin's admissions that he had a drug suppli-
er in Indiana named Mike Turio.  Yet Sumlin argues that it 
was Goode's unsupported explanation of his relationship with 
Mike Turio at trial that caused the jury to find that he was 
involved in drug trafficking.  This challenged evidence, how-

ever, pales in comparison to Sumlin's own damaging admis-
sions regarding his past involvement in drug trafficking.  Any 
error in admitting Goode's testimony was harmless.

     Second, Sumlin challenges Agent Dukovich's testimony con-
cerning an open investigation into an Indiana drug source.  
Specifically, Sumlin argues that because the DEA never 
established a connection between Sumlin and Indiana or Mike 
Turio, it was error for the district court to admit Agent 
Dukovich's testimony concerning the DEA's investigative ef-
forts in Indiana.  Error results, Sumlin argues, because 
"[o]nly with the addition of [Agent] Dukovich's testimony that 
a person in Ft. Wayne [Indiana] was under DEA investiga-
tion did the allegations become sufficient for a jury to con-
clude" that Sumlin was involved in a drug trafficking conspir-
acy.  This argument lacks merit.  Whether Sumlin received 
drugs from Indiana or India makes no difference.  The 
unchallenged evidence easily established that Sumlin and 
Clayton received and distributed drugs in 1998.  From where 
or from whom is of little consequence.  Moreover, defense 
counsel succeeded at trial in showing that the DEA never 
confirmed a relationship between Sumlin and Mike Turio.  
Again, even assuming it was error to admit Agent Dukovich's 
testimony concerning the DEA's investigation in Indiana, 
Sumlin did not suffer prejudice.  Because Sumlin has not 
established prejudice, he is not entitled to relief.

                          B. Bolstering

     Sumlin next asserts that the district court erred by admit-
ting DEA Agent Perry's testimony regarding Goode's cooper-
ation with the DEA in previous drug investigations.  Sumlin 
argues that this evidence was irrelevant, improper "bolster-
ing" more prejudicial than probative, and should not have 
been admitted.1  We disagree.

__________
     1 Although Fed. R. Evid. 608(b) explicitly deals with "bolstering" 
appellant expressly is not relying on that rule, on the theory that 
the evidence in this case is not "extrinsic" within the meaning of the 
rule.  Without regard to whether Sumlin's understanding of the 

     Here Sumlin and the Government agree that the district 
court's decision to admit Agent Perry's testimony is reviewed 
for plain error because Sumlin did not object to its introduc-
tion at trial.  Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b);  United States v. 
Spriggs, 102 F.3d 1245, 1257 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  As used in 
Rule 52(b), " '[p]lain' is synonymous with 'clear' or, equiva-
lently, 'obvious.' "  Olano, 507 U.S. at 734.  In determining 
whether an error is "plain," we recognize that "[a]t a mini-
mum, [a] court of appeals cannot correct an error pursuant to 
Rule 52(b) unless the error is clear under current law."  Id.  
The plain error must also affect "substantial rights."  Id.  
Usually, an error affecting substantial rights is one that is 
prejudicial, or, in other words, one that "affected the outcome 
of the district court proceedings."  Id.  A decision to correct 
such an error, however, remains within our "sound discre-
tion," which "should not [be] exercise[d] ... unless the error 
seriously affect[s] the fairness, integrity, or public reputation 
of judicial proceedings."  Id. at 732 (internal quotations omit-
ted).  Under this standard of review, the district court's 
decision to admit testimony concerning Goode's prior coopera-
tion with the DEA was not error, plain or otherwise, and 
certainly did not affect the outcome of the district court 
proceedings.

     Sumlin's first challenge to Agent Perry's testimony is that 
it was irrelevant under Fed. R. Evid. 401.  This challenge 
need not detain us long.  Evidence is relevant if it has "any 
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of conse-
quence to the determination of the action more probable or 
less probable than it would be without the evidence."  Fed. R. 
Evid. 401.  In United States v. Smith, 232 F.3d 236 (D.C. Cir. 
2000), we dismissed a relevance challenge under similar cir-
cumstances on grounds that the fact a paid informant "has 
informed and testified truthfully in the past under his plea 
agreement certainly bears on his response to similar pres-
sures and temptations in the present."  Id. at 241.  Finding 

__________
meaning of the rule is correct, we have analyzed the record in the 
terms of relevance and prejudice asserted by him in his brief.

no reason to depart from our reasoning in Smith, we reject 
Sumlin's claim that Perry's testimony was irrelevant.

     We interpret Sumlin's next challenge as one of improper 
"bolstering" under Rule 608(b).  Rule 608(b) states that

     [s]pecific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the 
     purpose of attacking or supporting the witness' credibili-
     ty, other than conviction of crime as provided in rule 609, 
     may not be proved by extrinsic evidence.  They may, 
     however, in the discretion of the court, if probative of 
     truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired into on cross-
     examination of the witness (1) concerning the witness' 
     character for truthfulness or untruthfulness, or (2) con-
     cerning the character for truthfulness or untruthfulness 
     of another witness as to which character the witness 
     being cross-examined has testified.
     
Fed. R. Evid. 608(b).  The testimony to which Sumlin now 
objects includes statements from Agent Perry that Goode had 
assisted the DEA in other investigations that resulted in 
numerous arrests.  This testimony, however, followed Sum-
lin's efforts to impeach Goode's credibility by questioning the 
arrangements of his plea agreement with the DEA.  Certain-
ly, revealing a witness' bias is an acceptable method of 
attacking a witness' credibility.  See United States v. Abel, 
469 U.S. 45, 50-52 (1984).  Equally acceptable, though, may 
be testimony that tends to rebut bias.  In Smith, we recog-
nized that our sister circuits did not agree on "the point at 
which impermissible 'bolstering' ends and permissible use of 
past cooperation to rebut bias begins."  232 F.3d at 242.  We 
did, however, identify the threshold question under Rule 
608(b) as:  "For what purpose has the prosecution offered the 
extrinsic evidence?"  Id.  If offered only to bolster an infor-
mant's credibility, the extrinsic evidence is barred by Rule 
608(b).  See United States v. Taylor, 900 F.2d 779, 781 (4th 
Cir. 1990).  If offered for an alternate and legitimate reason, 
"such as 'to justify a cooperation agreement [or] rebut allega-
tions of bias,' the evidence falls outside Rule 608(b)'s narrow 
confines."  Smith, 232 F.3d at 242 (quoting United States v. 
Lochmondy, 890 F.2d 817, 821 (6th Cir. 1989)).

     In the present case, we do not know for what purpose the 
Government introduced Agent Perry's testimony.  As in 
Smith, defense counsel failed to object to the testimony at 
trial, thus preventing the prosecution from justifying or ex-
plaining its purpose for introducing the testimony.  Perhaps 
the Government offered the evidence to rebut allegations of 
bias;  perhaps not.  Under the plain error standard, with the 
possibility that the Government introduced Agent Perry's 
testimony to rebut allegations of bias, and the "ambiguity in 
the case law" that results from the "hazy" line between 
permissible and impermissible uses of "bolstering," we cannot 
find that the district court's admission of Agent Perry's 
testimony, if error at all, was obvious, or that it affected 
substantial rights of the defendant.  See Smith, 232 F.3d at 
243.

     Even if it was error to introduce Agent Perry's testimony, 
the ultimate outcome remains unchanged.  Under the plain 
error standard, Sumlin must show that the introduction of 
Agent Perry's testimony was error that "affected the outcome 
of the district court proceedings."  Olano, 507 U.S. at 734.  
In considering this standard, we are mindful that a court 
should invoke the plain error exception "sparingly" to remedy 
only "particularly egregious errors" that adversely affect the 
"fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceed-
ings."  Smith, 232 F.3d at 243 (internal quotations omitted).  
With the great weight of the evidence against Sumlin before 
us, in particular his own damaging admissions, we fail to see 
how the introduction of Agent Perry's testimony could have 
affected the outcome of Sumlin's trial.  Because Sumlin did 
not suffer prejudice as a result of Agent Perry's testimony, 
his challenge must fail.

     Sumlin next argues that Agent Perry's testimony, even if 
admissible, should have been rejected under Federal Rule of 
Evidence 403.  This rule states that,

     [a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
     probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger 
     of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading 
     
     the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of 
     time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
     
Fed. R. Evid. 403.  Sumlin argues that Agent Perry's testi-
mony was unduly prejudicial and should therefore have been 
excluded.  This challenge also need not detain us long be-
cause we again review for plain error.  When faced with this 
question before, we noted that "[i]t is difficult to imagine a 
Rule 403 challenge that could meet [the plain error] standard, 
for Rule 403 contemplates the thoughtful consideration of the 
trial court and leaves the admission of evidence to the sound 
discretion of the trial judge."  United States v. Boney, 977 
F.2d 624, 631 (D.C. Cir. 1992).  The facts of this case do not 
stretch our imagination to the extremes contemplated by the 
Boney court.  Instead, the facts here are quite similar to 
those in Smith.  The Government's evidence tended to dem-
onstrate that Goode had cooperated with the Government in 
the past, and to rebut Sumlin's allegations that Goode was 
biased.  Its probative value, then, was high.  The prejudice 
complained of, however, is unclear.  Even without Agent 
Perry's testimony, the evidence against Sumlin was sufficient 
to support his convictions.  Therefore, based on our decision 
in Smith, our recognized deference to a trial court's Rule 403 
determinations, and our agreement with the Third Circuit 
that "[i]f judicial self-restraint is ever desirable, it is when a 
Rule 403 analysis of a trial court is reviewed by an appellate 
tribunal," we find that the district court's admission of Per-
ry's testimony was not plainly more prejudicial than proba-
tive.  Boney, 977 F.2d at 631 (quoting United States v. Long, 
574 F.2d 761, 767 (3d Cir. 1978)).

                          C. Entrapment

     Sumlin's final argument is that the evidence presented at 
trial established entrapment as a matter of law.  We dis-
agree.  A successful entrapment defense requires two ele-
ments:  "government inducement of the crime, and a lack of 
predisposition on the part of the defendant to engage in the 
criminal conduct."  Mathews v. United States, 485 U.S. 58, 63 
(1988).  Thus, a defendant must first show that he was 

induced by the government to commit a crime that he would 
not have otherwise committed.  See id. at 62-63.  A defen-
dant will succeed at this step if he "comes forward with some 
evidence of government" inducement.  United States v. Burk-
ley, 591 F.2d 903, 913 (D.C. Cir. 1978) (emphasis added).  If 
successful at this stage, then the burden shifts to the govern-
ment "to disprove entrapment by demonstrating beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the defendant was predisposed to 
commit the crime."  United States v. Budd, 23 F.3d 442, 445 
(D.C. Cir. 1994);  see also United States v. Neville, 82 F.3d 
1101, 1107 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     Under this approach, "the jury, and not the judge, deter-
mines whether the defendant has carried the burden of 
demonstrating that there is some evidence of inducement and, 
if so, whether the government has met its burden of proving 
predisposition."  Budd, 23 F.3d at 445;  see also United 
States v. Whoie, 925 F.2d 1481, 1483 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  In this 
case, the jury considered testimony on both inducement and 
predisposition.  Given that the jury found Sumlin guilty, we 
cannot know whether the jury based its verdict on a finding 
that Sumlin was not induced, or, if he was, that he was 
nonetheless predisposed to commit the crime.  We therefore 
"focus[ ] on the predisposition issue" and uphold the jury's 
verdict if, viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to 
the Government, "a reasonable jury could have found that the 
Government proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the de-
fendant was predisposed to commit the crime."  Neville, 82 
F.3d at 1107.

     Recognizing that predisposition is "the principal element in 
the defense of entrapment," United States v. Russell, 411 
U.S. 423, 433 (1973), we focus "upon whether the defendant 
was an 'unwary innocent' or, instead, an 'unwary criminal' 
who readily availed himself of the opportunity to perpetrate 
the crime."  Mathews, 485 U.S. at 63.  The Government must 
therefore prove a "state of mind which readily responds to 
the opportunity furnished by the officer or his agent to 
commit the forbidden act."  Burkley, 591 F.2d at 916 (inter-
nal quotations omitted).  In evaluating a defendant's predis-
position, we look to all of the events surrounding the ultimate 

commission of the crime.  See United States v. Kelly, 748 
F.2d 691, 699 (D.C. Cir. 1984).

     Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the 
Government, we find sufficient evidence to support a jury's 
finding that Sumlin was predisposed to commit the crimes for 
which he was convicted.  For example, the jury considered 
evidence that Sumlin had pled guilty to selling crack cocaine.  
The jury also considered evidence that showed Sumlin en-
gaged in at least four, and as many as seven, prior drug 
transactions with Clayton during 1998.  Moreover, Sumlin's 
own admissions show "he had been dabbling a little in the 
[drug trafficking] game," that "he was receiving about a 
'ki[logram]' a week to a week and a-half," and that "he had a 
connection through Indiana."  The jury also heard evidence 
that Sumlin told Goode and Alston during the April 6 drug 
sale that he could supply them with whatever amount of 
drugs they needed.  During this same drug sale, Sumlin told 
Goode and Alston that he had a "whole brick," or kilogram, of 
additional cocaine to sell.  We find this evidence more than 
sufficient for a reasonable jury to find beyond a reasonable 
doubt that Sumlin was predisposed to sell cocaine.

     Sumlin's assertions that he was "reluctant," unfamiliar with 
drug jargon, and lacked overt signs of participation in the 
drug trade fail to convince us that the jury's verdict was 
unreasonable.  At best, Sumlin was an unwary criminal.  See 
Mathews, 485 U.S. at 63.  Unwariness, however, does not 
preclude predisposition.  We conclude, as did a reasonable 
jury, that the Government proved beyond a reasonable doubt 
that Sumlin was predisposed to commit the crimes for which 
he was charged and convicted.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, appellant's convictions in the 
district court are affirmed.

                                                    