                    United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Submitted October 15, 1999   Decided January 25, 2000 

                           No. 98-1398

                      Frederick W. Martin, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
                            Respondent

            Portland Natural Gas Transmission System, 
                            Intervenor

             On Petition for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

     Frederick W. Martin, appearing pro se, was on the briefs 
for petitioner.

     Jay L. Witkin, Solicitor, Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission, John H. Conway, Deputy Solicitor, and David H. 
Coffman, Attorney, were on the brief for respondent.

     George H. Williams, Jr. and Gunnar Birgisson were on 
the brief for intervenor.

     Before:  Williams, Ginsburg and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  Frederick Martin petitions for 
review of a decision of the Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission authorizing the construction of a new pipeline that 
would traverse part of Mr. Martin's property.  Despite Mr. 
Martin's failure to designate the correct order in his petition 
for review, we hold that we have jurisdiction to review the 
Certificate Order.  Because the Commission's decision was 
not arbitrary and capricious, we deny the petition.

                          I. Background

     In 1997 the Commission authorized the Portland Natural 
Gas Transmission System to construct a pipeline nearly one 
mile of which would use an existing right-of-way through Mr. 
Martin's farm in North Stratford, New Hampshire.  Portland 
Natural Gas Transmission Sys., 80 FERC p 61,345 (1997) 
(the "Certificate Order").  The farm was established by an 
ancestor of Mr. Martin's in the early 1830s and the farmhouse 
and surrounding 112-acre tract are characteristic of early 
19th century building and farming patterns.  Mr. Martin has 
improved the farm but maintained its historic character and 
function.  The property was listed in the National Register of 
Historic Places one year after the Commission authorized 
Portland to construct the pipeline.

     Before the Commission, Mr. Martin challenged the plan to 
build the pipeline across his property upon various environ-
mental grounds, alleging that the pipeline would damage the 
open fields and other scenic and natural resources on his 
property and endanger the historic farmhouse.  Mr. Martin 
suggested an alternative route for the pipeline, but the Com-
mission rejected that route in favor of the Portland plan to 
use the existing right-of-way.  Mr. Martin requested rehear-

ing but the Commission denied his application.  Portland 
Natural Gas Transmission System, 83 FERC p 61,080 (1998) 
(the "Rehearing Order").

                           II. Analysis

     Although Mr. Martin seeks to challenge the Commission's 
Certificate Order, his petition for review mentions only the 
Rehearing Order.  Before we reach the merits of Mr. Mar-
tin's argument, therefore, we must determine whether we 
have jurisdiction to hear his claim.

A.   Jurisdiction

     After the Commission denied Mr. Martin's request for 
rehearing, he filed a petition for review and a motion for stay 
of construction.  In the petition, Mr. Martin sought review of 
the Commission's Rehearing Order, in which the Commission 
had denied his request that the agency reconsider its decision 
to grant the certificate to Portland.  It is clear from Mr. 
Martin's briefs before this court, however, that what he really 
wants is review of the Certificate Order, which is the order 
actually authorizing Portland to construct the pipeline across 
his property.

     Under 15 U.S.C. s 717r(b):  "Any party ... aggrieved by 
an order issued by the Commission ... may obtain a review 
of such order in the court of appeals ... by filing ... a 
written petition praying that the order ... be modified or set 
aside...."  Mr. Martin is aggrieved by the Certificate Order, 
not the Rehearing Order, which simply denied rehearing.  
Indeed, an order denying rehearing is unreviewable except 
insofar as the request for rehearing was based upon new 
evidence or changed circumstances.  See ICC v. Brotherhood 
of Locomotive Engineers, 482 U.S. 270, 278-80 (1987).

     The Commission argues that, because Mr. Martin failed to 
designate the Certificate Order in his petition for review, this 
court lacks jurisdiction to review that Order.  According to 
the Commission, the two orders do not "merge" such that an 

appeal of the Rehearing Order may be construed as an appeal 
of the Certificate Order.  Cf. Conecuh-Monroe Community 
Action Agency v. Bowen, 852 F.2d 581, 586 (D.C. Cir. 1988) 
(noting that, where district court simultaneously denied pre-
liminary injunction and entered judgment on underlying com-
plaint, "the preliminary injunction question ... merged into 
the final judgment").

     In general, this court reviews only the order(s) designated 
in the petition for review.  See Fed. R. App. P. 15(a) (1998) 
("petition must ... designate ... the order or part thereof to 
be reviewed");  see also John D. Copanos & Sons, Inc. v. 
FDA, 854 F.2d 510, 527 (D.C. Cir. 1988).*  The failure to 
designate an order in the petition is not necessarily fatal to its 
review, however.  As we said in Southwestern Bell Telephone 
Co. v. FCC, a party may demonstrate its intention to appeal 
from one order despite referring only to a different order in 
its petition for review if the petitioner's intent " 'can be fairly 
inferred' " from the petition or documents filed more or less 
contemporaneously with it.  180 F.3d 307, 313 (D.C. Cir. 
1999) (quoting Brookens v. White, 795 F.2d 178, 180 (D.C. Cir. 
1986)).

     In Southwestern Bell, the FCC had denied a local exchange 
carrier's petition for rehearing of an Investigation Order in 
which the agency had found that the carrier had underesti-
mated its future tariff requirements.  See id. at 309-10.  
Southwestern Bell then petitioned this court for review, citing 
only the Reconsideration Order.  See id.  Upon examination 
of Southwestern Bell's petition for review and its subsequent 
filings, we found that "nothing prior to the brief filed in this 
court ... gave the Commission any notice of Southwestern 
Bell's intent to seek review of the Investigation Order."  Id. 

__________
     * Effective December 1, 1998, Fed. R. App. P. 15(a) was amended 
(in style but not in substance) to require that a petitioner "specify" 
rather than "designate" the order or part thereof to be reviewed.  
Because Mr. Martin filed his petition prior to the amendment, we 
refer to the earlier version of the Rule in this opinion.

at 313.  The petition designated for review only the Reconsid-
eration Order and only that order was appended to the 
petition;  likewise, the docketing statement named only the 
Reconsideration Order and only that order was attached to it;  
and the preliminary statement of issues focused upon South-
western Bell's petition for review of the Reconsideration 
Order.  See id.

     Like the petitioner in Southwestern Bell, Mr. Martin desig-
nated in his petition for review only the order denying 
rehearing, but unlike the earlier petitioner, he made his 
intent to seek review of the underlying order fairly inferable 
from his contemporaneous filings.  On the same day that Mr. 
Martin filed his petition for review, he filed a motion to stay 
the construction of a portion of the pipeline pending review of 
his petition.  The motion for stay bespeaks in two ways Mr. 
Martin's intent to seek review of the Certificate Order.

     First, by attaching to the motion a copy of his application 
to the Commission for rehearing, in which he cites and 
discusses the Certificate Order, Mr. Martin identified the 
order from which his dispute with the Commission arose.  
Second, the nature of the motion for stay itself sufficed to 
indicate Mr. Martin's purpose in filing his petition for review. 
He sought a stay in order to prevent the irreparable harm to 
his property that allegedly would attend the construction of 
the pipeline.  Because Portland clearly derived its authority 
to construct the pipeline from the Certificate Order, Mr. 
Martin's motion for stay was necessarily directed to that 
order.  And if Mr. Martin sought to stay enforcement of the 
Certificate Order, then he must also have meant to seek 
review of the Certificate Order, not the Rehearing Order.  Cf. 
Foman v. Davis, 371 U.S. 178, 181 (1962) (holding that where 
petitioner submitted two notices of appeal, one that was 
premature and one that failed to specify judgment from which 
appeal was being taken, "Court of Appeals should have 
treated the [second] ... as an effective, although inept, 
attempt to appeal from the judgment sought to be vacated.  
Taking the two notices and the appeal papers together, 

petitioner's intention ... was manifest").  Moreover, Mr. 
Martin's filings subsequent to the petition for review, includ-
ing the docketing statement and the certificate as to rulings 
under review, indicated that he was challenging the Certifi-
cate Order as well as the Rehearing Order.

     Nor does the Commission claim to suffer any prejudice 
from our review of the Certificate Order despite Mr. Martin's 
failure to designate it in his petition for review.  Although an 
agency is under no obligation to determine whether a party 
that petitions for review of an unreviewable order meant to 
specify a different order, see Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 
314, here the Commission's filings in response to Mr. Martin's 
petition for review and motion for stay indicate that the 
agency was aware from the outset that Mr. Martin meant to 
seek review of the Certificate Order.

     The Commission's opposition to Mr. Martin's motion for 
stay lists the Certificate Order as one of several orders 
"relevant to this proceeding."  In moving to transfer Mr. 
Martin's case from the First Circuit to this circuit, the 
Commission invoked the authority of 28 U.S.C. s 2112(a)(1):  
"If proceedings are instituted in two or more courts of 
appeals with respect to the same order ... the agency ... 
shall file the record in the court in which proceedings with 
respect to the order were first instituted."  The Commission 
expressly argued that the First Circuit should transfer Mr. 
Martin's case to this circuit because another party had filed a 
petition for review of the Preliminary Order and the Certifi-
cate Order in this circuit before Mr. Martin had filed his 
petition for review.  That the Commission understood Mr. 
Martin's petition for review to encompass the Certificate 
Order, therefore, is apparent;  indeed, its argument for trans-
fer of the case depended upon it.

     In sum, despite Mr. Martin's failure to refer to the Certifi-
cate Order in his petition for review, his accompanying mo-
tion for stay provided the Commission with notice of his 
intent to seek review of the Certificate Order.  Accordingly, 
we have jurisdiction to consider Mr. Martin's claim.

B.   The Merits

     Mr. Martin challenges the Certificate Order as arbitrary 
and capricious on the grounds that the Commission failed to 
comply with regulations promulgated under the National 
Environmental Protection Act and the National Gas Act in 
order to protect scenic and historic places.  Under the regula-
tions implementing the NEPA, the agency was required to 
prepare an Environmental Impact Statement in which it 
discussed any inconsistency between the proposed project 
and a state or local environmental plan or law.  40 C.F.R. 
s 1506.2(d).  Mr. Martin complains that the Commission 
failed to discuss the consistency of Portland's proposed pipe-
line with a "river corridor management plan" adopted by the 
State of New Hampshire.  The Commission points out, dis-
positively, that no inconsistency with any state or local plans 
was raised before it, and that the cited regulation does not 
require it affirmatively to address consistency with such 
plans.

     The NGA regulation governing placement of pipeline 
rights-of-way provides:

     Where practical, rights-of-way should avoid ... places 
     listed in the National Register of Historic Places....  If 
     rights-of-way must be routed through such historic 
     places ... they should be located in areas or placed in a 
     manner so as to be least visible from areas of public view 
     and so far as possible in a manner designed to preserve 
     the character of the area.
     
18 C.F.R. s 2.69(a)(1)(ii).  Mr. Martin claims that because a 
portion of his land lies within a state-designated "river corri-
dor" and because the State had certified his entire property 
as "historic" before the Commission prepared its Final Envi-
ronmental Impact Statement, the agency should have ad-
dressed in the certification proceedings whether the regula-
tions required an adjustment to take the proposed pipeline 
route around Mr. Martin's property.  Mr. Martin proposed 
such an adjustment to the Commission.

     The Commission considered the "visual impact" of the 
proposed pipeline on historic properties such as Mr. Martin's, 
as well as the practicality of the alternative route Mr. Martin 
proposed.  The Commission rejected the alternative route 
because it would have required Portland to develop a new 
right-of-way, in contravention of 18 C.F.R. s 2.69(a)(1)(i), 
which states that "[i]n locating proposed facilities, consider-
ation should be given to the utilization, enlargement or exten-
sion of existing rights-of-way."  We cannot fault the Commis-
sion for approving Portland's use of the existing right-of-way 
through Mr. Martin's property rather than requiring the 
pipeline company to develop a new route through previously 
undisturbed properties.

     The Commission also notes that, New Hampshire's desig-
nation notwithstanding, Mr. Martin's property was not listed 
on the National Register of Historic Places at the time of the 
proceedings, nor even as of his request for rehearing, and 
that he therefore did not raise before the agency any claim 
related to listing on the National Register.  The record of the 
certification proceeding bears out the Commission's point.  
Therefore, the agency's decision was in no respect arbitrary 
and capricious.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we have jurisdiction to review 
the Certificate Order, and the petition for review is

                                                          Denied.

  