                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 7, 2000   Decided January 30, 2001 

                           No. 00-1258

              National Wildlife Federation, et al., 
                           Petitioners

                                v.

                        Carol M. Browner, 
       Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency and 
                Environmental Protection Agency, 
                           Respondents

          American Forest and Paper Association, Inc., 
                            Intervenor

                On Motion to Dismiss the Petition 
                     for Want of Jurisdiction

     Raymond B. Ludwiszewski argued the cause for Industry 
Petitioners Boise Cascade Corporation, et al.  With him on 

the briefs were Peter E. Seley and Scott H. Segal.  Gene E. 
Godley entered an appearance.

     Neil S. Kagan argued the cause and filed the brief for 
petitioners National Wildlife Federation, et al.

     Jon M. Lipshultz, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, 
argued the cause for respondents. Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant 
Attorney General, Karen L. Egbert, Attorney, and Carol Ann 
Siciliano, Attorney, Environmental Protection Agency, were 
on the brief.  Seth M. Barsky, Attorney, U.S. Department of 
Justice, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Williams and Tatel, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  The National Wildlife Federation 
and various pulp, paper, and paperboard companies petitioned 
for review of the Environmental Protection Agency's new 
effluent guidelines for paper mills.  At this stage of the 
proceedings, we consider Industry petitioners' motion to dis-
miss NWF's petition for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  
This is a simple issue.  Because the statutory provision 
Industry petitioners invoke is not jurisdictional, we deny their 
motion.

                                I

     In April of 1998, EPA promulgated regulations, known as 
the "Cluster Rules," governing parts of the paper and pulp 
industry.  The Rules include both effluent limitation guide-
lines under the Clean Water Act and emission standards 
under the Clean Air Act.  See National Emission Standards 
for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Category:  Pulp and 
Paper Production, 63 Fed. Reg. 18,504 (April 15, 1998).

     Six environmental groups, including the National Wildlife 
Federation, filed a joint petition for review of the Clean 
Water Act portion of the Rules in the Ninth Circuit.  Various 
paper producers--we will refer to them collectively as "Indus-
try petitioners"--then filed petitions for review of the effluent 

guidelines here and in the Fourth and Eleventh Circuits.  
The three Industry petitions were transferred to the Ninth 
Circuit, which consolidated them with NWF's.  Industry peti-
tioners moved to dismiss the NWF petition for lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction or, in the alternative, to transfer the case 
to this circuit.

     Without ruling on the motion to dismiss, the Ninth Circuit 
transferred the case here.  Nat'l Wildlife Fed'n v. Browner, 
No. 98-70506 (9th Cir. Nov. 3, 1989) (order granting transfer 
of venue to D.C. Circuit).  We bifurcated the motion to 
dismiss and the merits, holding the merits in abeyance pend-
ing resolution of the jurisdictional issue.  Both NWF and 
EPA opposed the motion to dismiss.  While that motion was 
pending, Industry petitioners filed an additional motion to 
sanction both NWF and EPA for alleged disclosure, conceal-
ment, and use of protected confidential business information.

                                II

     Section 509(b)(1) of the Clean Water Act provides:

     Review of the [EPA] Administrator's action (A) in pro-
     mulgating any standard of performance under section 
     1316 of this title, (B) in making any determination pursu-
     ant to section 1316(b)(1)(C) of this title, (C) in promulgat-
     ing any effluent standard, prohibition, or pretreatment 
     standard under section 1317 of this title, (D) in making 
     any determination as to a State permit program submit-
     ted under section 1342(b) of this title, (E) in approving or 
     promulgating any effluent limitation or other limitation 
     under section 1311, 1312, 1316, or 1345 of this title, (F) in 
     issuing or denying any permit under section 1342 of this 
     title, and (G) in promulgating any individual control 
     strategy under section 1314(l) of this title, may be had by 
     any interested person in the Circuit Court of Appeals of 
     the United States for the Federal judicial district in 
     which such person resides or transacts business which is 
     directly affected by such action upon application by such 
     person....
     
33 U.S.C. s 1369(b)(1) (emphasis added).  Industry petition-
ers assert that the language specifying review in the circuit 
where a petitioner "resides or transacts business" is jurisdic-
tional.  They urge us to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction 
because, they claim, only one of the NWF petitioners--the 
Clark Fork-Pend Oreille Coalition--"resides or transacts 
business" in the Ninth Circuit, and this petitioner lost stand-
ing (or, alternatively, its claim became moot) nine months 
after NWF's petition was filed.  Disagreeing, NWF argues 
that the "resides or transacts business" clause in section 
509(b)(1) is a venue provision, that venue in the Ninth Circuit 
was properly established, and that Industry petitioners' 
standing and mootness arguments are without merit.  To 
resolve Industry petitioners' motion to dismiss, we need 
address only the parties' disagreement over the meaning of 
section 509(b)(1).

     So far as we can tell, no court has yet decided whether the 
"resides or transacts business" requirement of section 
509(b)(1) is jurisdictional.  Courts and commentators, howev-
er, have assumed that similar provisions in other statutes 
determine venue, not jurisdiction.  See Fed. Power Comm'n 
v. Texaco, 377 U.S. 33, 37-39 (1964) (assuming a provision 
stating that an aggrieved party "may obtain review ... in the 
court of appeals of the United States for any circuit wherein 
the natural-gas company to which the order relates is located 
or has its principal place of business, or in the United States 
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia" was a venue 
provision, despite an explicit reference to "jurisdiction" later 
in the provision, see 15 U.S.C. s 717r(b));  15 Charles Alan 
Wright, Arthur R. Miller, & Edward H. Cooper, Federal 
Practice and Procedure s 3816 at 166-67 n.4 (2d ed. 1986) 
(implying that a provision in the Federal Trade Commission 
Act allowing review in "any circuit ... where such person, 
partnership, or corporation resides or carries on business" is 
a venue provision).  Moreover, in Texas Municipal Power 
Agency v. EPA, 89 F.3d 858 (D.C. Cir. 1996), we decided that 
an analogous provision of the Clean Air Act, section 307(b)(1), 
determines venue.  That section provides that

     [a] petition for review of action of the Administrator in 
     promulgating any national primary or secondary ambient 
     air quality standard, [any standard or any requirements 
     under a variety of other specified sections of the Act], or 
     any other nationally applicable regulations promulgated, 
     or final action taken, by the Administrator under this 
     chapter may be filed only in the United States Court of 
     Appeals for the District of Columbia.  A petition for 
     review of ... any other final action of the Administrator 
     under this chapter ... which is locally or regionally 
     applicable may be filed only in the United States Court 
     of Appeals for the appropriate circuit.
     
42 U.S.C. s 7607(b)(1) (emphasis added).  We rejected EPA's 
contention that the section was jurisdictional.  Noting that it 
"[could] be read as prescribing the choice among circuits and 
not the power of a particular federal circuit court to hear a 
claim," see Texas Mun., 89 F.3d at 867, we suggested that 
"the provision's reference to where a petitioner may 'file' " 
and its "unequivocal characterization in the legislative history 
as a venue provision" both supported the view that it speci-
fied venue.  Id.  Although we acknowledged that there was 
"some 'jurisdictional' language" elsewhere in the section, such 
as a "clearly jurisdictional 60-day limit for filing petitions for 
review," and that the language was "mandatory rather than 
providing a 'choice' of circuits," we nevertheless thought these 
facts "not determinative":

     we think it more significant that federal court power to 
     entertain petitions is clear, that the provision refers to 
     where a petitioner must file, and that the apparent 
     congressional purpose was to place nationally significant 
     decisions in the D.C. Circuit.  Given the less than clear 
     language, the structure of the section--dividing cases 
     among the circuits--and the legislative history indicate 
     that s 307(b)(1) is framed more as a venue provision.
     
Id.

     In light of Texas Municipal, we think the statute at issue 
in this case determines venue, not jurisdiction.  Like the 
statutory language in Texas Municipal, section 509(b)(1)'s 

language--"[r]eview of the Administrator's action ... may be 
had by any interested person in the Circuit Court of Appeals 
of the United States for the Federal judicial district in which 
such person resides or transacts business"--is best read as 
"prescribing the choice among circuits and not the power of a 
particular federal circuit court to hear a claim."  See Texas 
Mun., 89 F.3d at 867.  In fact, for at least two reasons, this 
reading has even more facial plausibility here than it did in 
Texas Municipal.  To begin with, the provision at issue in 
Texas Municipal contained exclusive language stating that a 
petition for review "may be filed only" in the specified circuit.  
See id. at 867 n.6 (emphasis added).  Despite similar language 
in, for example, the general venue statute for the district 
courts, see 28 U.S.C. s 1391 (a) & (b), this exclusive language 
could have been taken to suggest that the specified court had 
exclusive jurisdiction over a particular kind of case.  In 
concluding otherwise, we relied on a variety of other factors, 
including the legislative history and the provision's focus on 
where a petitioner had to "file."  Because section 509(b)(1) 
contains no such exclusive language, it is far less plausible to 
think it confers exclusive jurisdiction in the first place.  The 
Clean Air Act provision at issue in Texas Municipal, more-
over, required petitioners to file particular kinds of petitions 
in particular courts--petitions for review of national actions in 
this circuit, and petitions for review of regional actions in the 
geographically appropriate circuit.  Section 509(b)(1) simply 
allows for review of any enumerated claim in whichever 
circuit an interested person resides or transacts business.  Its 
purpose is thus even more clearly to "divid[e] cases among 
the circuits," see Texas Mun., 89 F.3d at 867, placing deci-
sions in the circuits in which "interested person[s]" are locat-
ed, and thus ensuring, as EPA suggests, that "the appellate 
court that hears the matter has some direct connection to the 
parties involved in the proceeding."  Brief for EPA at 3.

     Our conclusion that section 509(b)(1) determines venue 
finds further support from the fact that, as in Texas Munici-
pal, "federal court power to entertain petitions" under the 
section is clear:  under section 509(b)(1), every interested 
person challenging an enumerated action has a court in which 

to obtain review.  Industry petitioners' interpretation con-
flicts with this broad grant of power, since under their 
reading, "the punishment for a petitioner's failure to file its 
petition initially in the proper circuit court of appeals ... is 
dismissal of the petition for want of jurisdiction, even where 
the petitioner otherwise can demonstrate standing to bring its 
petition," Brief for EPA at 3, thus either denying review to an 
otherwise qualified person, if the statute of limitations has 
run, or making review more burdensome.  Reading section 
509(b)(1) as a venue provision comports better with the broad 
grant of appellate authority, since the standard remedy for 
improper venue is to transfer the case to the proper court 
rather than dismissing it--thus preserving a petitioner's abili-
ty to obtain review.  See Wright, Miller, & Cooper s 3827 at 
268-29 ("It is not surprising that in most cases of improper 
venue the courts conclude that it is in the interest of justice to 
transfer to a proper forum rather than to dismiss.").

     Disagreeing with this reading of the statute, Industry 
petitioners argue that Texas Municipal actually supports 
their claim that section 509(b)(1) is jurisdictional, pointing out 
that the provision at issue in that case specified where a 
petition for review "may be filed," while the provision here 
specifies where "[r]eview ... may be had."  Noting that our 
decision in Texas Municipal singled out, among other factors, 
"the provision's reference to where a petitioner may 'file,' " 
Texas Mun., 89 F.3d at 867, Industry petitioners argue that 
"the Court recognized [in Texas Municipal] that the lan-
guage in Clean Air Act s 307(b)(1) is intended to limit the 
petitioner's ability to file a challenge to agency action in 
particular fora.  The language of Clean Water Act 
s 509(b)(1), on the other hand, limits the court's ability to 
review such a petition."  Brief for Appellant at 7 n.1.

     Though perhaps not "frivolous" in the Rule 11 sense, see 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 11(b)(2), this argument is exceptionally uncon-
vincing.  As we have already pointed out, our concern with 
the word "file" in Texas Municipal was motivated by the 
exclusive language in the provision there--language not found 
in section 509(b)(1).  More to the point, it is simply not clear, 
as Industry petitioners assert, that section 509(b)(1)'s lan-

guage focuses on courts rather than petitioners.  The provi-
sion does not explicitly address the courts:  it does not say, 
for example, that "only the court where any interested party 
resides" may review a petition.  Instead, it limits only where 
review "may be had."  And unlike the other provisions Indus-
try petitioners mention that confer jurisdiction based on 
residence, section 509(b)(1) never uses the word "jurisdic-
tion."  Cf., e.g., 26 U.S.C. s 7609(h)(1);  Deal v. United States, 
759 F.2d 442, 444 (5th Cir. 1985) (interpreting 26 U.S.C. 
s 7609(h)(1) as a jurisdictional provision).  Moreover, al-
though section 509(b)(1) does not use the word "file," it does 
state that review may be had by an interested person in the 
appropriate circuit "upon application by such person" (em-
phasis added).  Thus, like the provision in Texas Municipal, 
it clearly directs petitioners where to file.

     Even more unconvincing is Industry petitioners' second 
(and main) argument for reading section 509(b)(1) as jurisdic-
tional.  Pointing out that courts have found other provisions 
in the same section--such as the enumeration of Administra-
tor actions and the limitation to "interested persons"--to be 
jurisdictional, see City of Baton Rouge v. EPA, 620 F.2d 478, 
480 (5th Cir. 1980) (stating that "the Courts of Appeals have 
jurisdiction for direct review only of those EPA actions 
specifically enumerated in 33 U.S.C. s 1369(b)(1)"), Mont-
gomery Envtl. Coalition v. Costle, 646 F.2d 568, 577-78 (D.C. 
Cir. 1980) (finding that the term "interested person" in 
section 509(b) incorporates the jurisdictional injury-in-fact 
requirement), Industry petitioners argue that it would be 
"anomalous if all the different limitations on judicial review 
embodied in section 509(b)(1) are considered jurisdictional 
except the provision limiting the court in which review may be 
had."  Brief for Appellant at 6.  Wholly undercutting this 
argument, Texas Municipal found the fact that the judicial 
review provision at issue there also contained some jurisdic-
tional restrictions to be "not determinative."  89 F.3d at 867.

     Industry petitioners could have argued--but did not--that 
unlike in Texas Municipal, the legislative history of the Clean 
Water Act is not "unequivocal."  The Senate Report accom-
panying the original Senate version of the Act states that 

"[f]or ... actions which run only to one region, [section 509] 
places jurisdiction in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
Circuit in which the affected State or region ... is located."  
S. Rep. No. 92-414, at 85 (1971) (emphasis added).  Even if 
the significance of this snippet of legislative history were 
clear, we doubt it would change our view of section 509(b)(1).  
For at least two reasons, however, its significance is not at all 
clear.  First, the judicial review provision in the Senate 
version of the bill differed substantially from the one enacted.  
See S. Conf. Rep. No. 92-1236, at 147-48 (1972).  The legisla-
tive history cited above thus cannot be viewed as commenting 
directly on the language at issue here.  Second, Congress 
subsequently revised section 509(b)(1), changing the original 
phrase, "resides or transacts such business," to "resides or 
transacts business which is directly affected by such ac-
tion...."  See Historical and Statutory Notes, 1987 Amend-
ment, 33 U.S.C.A. s 1369, at 381 (West Supp. 2000).  The 
legislative history accompanying these revisions expressly 
refers to section 509(b)(1) as a "venue" provision at least six 
separate times.  See S. Rep. No. 99-50, at 31 (1985) ("The 
purpose of the changes ... is to clarify the proper venue for 
court of appeals review....") (emphasis added);  id. at 32 
("In order to eliminate ... the potential for threshold litiga-
tion over proper venue, the Committee amendment changes 
the venue provision....") (emphasis added);  H.R. Conf. Rep. 
No. 99-1004, at 164 (1986) ("The purpose of the changes ... 
is to clarify the proper venue for court of appeals review....  
The Senate bill provides that proper venue for judicial review 
... shall be in the Circuit Court of Appeals [where] the 
applicant resides or transacts business....") (emphasis add-
ed);  Section-by-Section Analysis of the Water Quality Act of 
1987, 133 Cong. Rec. H131 (daily ed. Jan. 7, 1987), reprinted 
in 1987 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5, 42 ("Subsection (a) amends Section 
509(b)(1) ... by modifying the choice of venue available for 
persons seeking judicial review of certain actions taken by the 
Administrator.") (emphasis added).  Though it is certainly 
true, as Industry petitioners argue, that "subsequent legisla-
tive history is a hazardous basis for inferring the intent of an 
earlier Congress," Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. v. LTV 

Corp., 496 U.S. 633, 650 (1990) (internal quotation marks 
omitted), it is nonetheless sufficient in this case to offset any 
weight we might give the fragment from the earlier Senate 
Report.

     In view of these considerations, we hold that section 
509(b)(1) determines venue, not jurisdiction.  Since objections 
to venue may be waived, see Wright, Miller, & Cooper 
s 3829 at 309, and since Industry petitioners concede that 
"[t]he proper venue of the present case is no longer at issue," 
Reply Brief for Appellant at 2, we reach neither Industry 
petitioners' nor NWF's remaining arguments.  Industry peti-
tioners' motion to dismiss is denied, and their additional 
motion for sanctions is deferred to the merits panel.

                                                                So ordered.

                                    