                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued May 19, 2000      Decided June 13, 2000 

                           No. 98-1424

                  Orion Communications Limited, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

              Federal Communications Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

       Liberty Productions, A Limited Partnership, et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
          98-1434, 98-1444, 98-1445, 98-1523, 99-1188, 
                99-1212, 99-1249, 99-1260, 99-1423

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

                            ---------

     Stephen C. Leckar argued the cause for petitioner Orion 
Communications Limited, et al.  With him on the briefs were 
Richard F. Swift, Donald J. Evans, Gene A. Bechtel, Stephen 
T. Yelverton and Loren A. Colby.

     James K. Edmundson argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for petitioners Dewey Matthew Runnels and Howard G. Bill.

     Dennis P. Corbett argued the cause for petitioner Davis 
Television Duluth, LLC., et al. and Intervenors Riverbank 
Restaurants, Inc., et al.  With him on the briefs were Loren 
A. Colby and Timothy K. Brady.

     Daniel M. Armstrong, Associate General Counsel, Federal 
Communications Commission, argued the cause for appellees.  
With him on the brief were Christopher J. Wright, General 
Counsel, C. Grey Pash, Jr., Attorney, Joel I. Klein, Assistant 
Attorney General, United States Department of Justice, Rob-
ert B. Nicholson and Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys.

     Stephen T. Yelverton, Timothy K. Brady, Donald J. Evans, 
Thomas A. Hart, Jr. and Scott C. Cinnamon were on the 
brief for intervenors.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Tatel and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed Per Curiam.

     Per Curiam:  In the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Congress 
amended section 309(j) of the Communications Act of 1934 to 
require competitive bidding for commercial broadcast ser-
vices, replacing the Commission's historic practice of award-
ing such licenses through comparative hearings.  See Bal-
anced Budget Act of 1997 s 3002(a)(1), Pub. L. No. 105-33, 
111 Stat. 251, codified at 47 U.S.C. s 309(j).  Following a 
notice of proposed rulemaking, the FCC issued two orders 
implementing section 309(j).  First Report and Order, 13 
FCC Rcd. 15920 (1998);  Memorandum Opinion and Order, 
14 FCC Rcd. 8724 (1999).  Various parties filed petitions for 
review of these orders.  In this opinion, we consider the 
petition for review in No. 99-1188.  We resolved all of the 
issues raised by the other petitions in a separate order issued 
herewith.

     In the First Report and Order, the FCC determined that 
applicants for broadcast service auctions would be subject to 
its anti-collusion rule, 47 C.F.R. s 1.2105(c)(1), which it had 
previously applied in sixteen spectrum auctions.  First Report 
and Order, 13 FCC Rcd. at 15980-81 p  155.  This rule 
provides that, following the filing of short-form applications,

     applicants are prohibited from cooperating, collaborating, 
     discussing or disclosing in any manner the substance of 
     their bids or bidding strategies, or discussing or negotiat-
     ing settlement agreements, with other applicants until 
     after the high bidder makes the required down payment, 
     unless such applicants are members of a bidding consor-
     tium or other joint bidding arrangement identified on the 
     bidder's short-form application....
     
47 C.F.R. s 1.2105(c)(1).  In other words, applicants may not 
negotiate settlement agreements after their short-form appli-
cations have been filed.

     Petitioners contest the FCC's application of its anti-
collusion rule, urging instead that the Commission permit 
applicants to negotiate settlement agreements within a rea-
sonable interval--they suggest ninety days--of the date of 
filing.  They first contend that the anti-collusion rule violates 
section 309(j)(6)(E), which provides:

     Nothing in this subsection, or in the use of competitive 
     bidding, shall be construed to relieve the Commission of 
     the obligation in the public interest to continue to use 
     engineering solutions, negotiation, threshold qualifica-
     tions, service regulations, and other means in order to 
     avoid mutual exclusivity in application and licensing pro-
     ceedings.
     
47 U.S.C. s 309(j)(6)(E) (emphasis added).  Making a Chev-
ron step one argument, petitioners claim that "Congress both 
intended and expressly provided that the Commission is 
obliged in the public interest to use settlements (i.e., 'other 
means') to avoid mutual exclusivity in broadcast auction pro-
ceedings."

     The question we ask at Chevron step one is whether 
Congress has "directly spoken to the precise question at 
issue."  Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense 
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984).  We cannot see how 
section 309(j)(6)(E) speaks to the precise question of whether 
the FCC must permit a reasonable interval for settlement 
negotiations when the statute does not even mention settle-
ments, let alone a specific time interval for negotiations.  To 
be sure, settlements are "other means" of avoiding mutual 
exclusivity, but the statute cannot be read to direct the FCC 
to adopt all other means available.

     Petitioners next claim that the Commission's application of 
the anti-collusion rule is arbitrary and capricious, arguing 
that "the Commission never explains why, in its view, the 
provision for a reasonable interval for settlement is irreconcil-
able with its policy to deter collusion."  We disagree.  The 
Commission more than adequately explained its reasons for 
applying the anti-collusion rule.  "Permitting competing ap-
plicants for new facilities in all broadcast services to engage 
in discussions concerning settlements or other resolution of 
their mutual exclusivities following submission of their short-
form applications," the Commission said, "would, we believe, 
reduce the effectiveness of the anti-collusion rule."  Memo-
randum Opinion and Order, 14 FCC Rcd. at 8755 p 61.  The 
Commission elaborated:

     For example, if competing broadcast auction applicants 
     were permitted to engage in discussions concerning set-
     tlement or other resolution of mutual exclusivities, these 
     competing applicants would almost inevitably transfer 
     information at least indirectly affecting bids or bidding 
     strategies, thereby adversely impacting the competitive-
     ness of the auction.  Moreover, given our statutory obli-
     gation to utilize auctions as a primary licensing tool, the 
     protection of the integrity of the auction process is of 
     paramount importance, and we are consequently con-
     cerned about actions that compromise the integrity of the 
     process, particularly behavior that violates the anti-
     collusion rule.  The Commission's experience in conduct-
     
     ing numerous previous auctions has demonstrated the 
     importance of the anti-collusion rule in preventing and 
     facilitating the detection of collusive conduct.
     
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).  Finding this explana-
tion entirely reasonable, we deny the petition for review.

                                                      So ordered.

                                            