                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued December 5, 2000     Decided January 19, 2001 

                           No. 00-1089

                         John D. Huddy, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

                   Biltmore Broadcasting, LLC, 
                            Intervenor

                    Appeal of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Gene A. Bechtel argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Roberta L. Cook, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief 
were Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, and Daniel M. 

Armstrong, Associate General Counsel.  Gregory M. Christo-
pher, Counsel, entered an appearance.

     Daniel E. Troy argued the cause for intervenor Biltmore 
Broadcasting, LLC.  With him on the brief were Richard J. 
Bodorff and E. Joseph Knoll III.

     Before:  Williams, Ginsburg and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  John D. Huddy petitions for 
review of a Federal Communications Commission decision 
denying his request for a hearing on his challenges to the 
assignment of a television broadcast license.  We dismiss for 
lack of standing.

     Huddy is the sole shareholder of Riklis Broadcasting Cor-
poration, the former owner and licensee of TV station KADY.  
In July 1996 Riklis entered involuntary bankruptcy and a 
trustee was appointed to manage the corporation's estate.  
The FCC consented to an involuntary transfer of the KADY 
license to the trustee, who proceeded to auction off the 
station.  John Cobb emerged as the highest bidder.  On the 
trustee's endorsement of his creditworthiness, the bankruptcy 
court approved the sale.  Cobb assigned his purchase rights 
to Biltmore Broadcasting, of which he is the controlling 
principal.

     In November 1997 Biltmore applied for FCC approval of 
assignment of the license.  Huddy filed a petition asking for a 
hearing, claiming that Cobb had falsely certified his financial 
qualifications to the FCC. In support, he asserted that in a 
phone conversation Cobb had said that he hadn't yet secured 
funding for the purchase.  Cobb responded that Huddy mis-
understood his remarks and that he told Huddy only that he 
had not chosen which of various means of financing he would 
use.  Cobb also struck back, alleging that during the same 
call Huddy threatened to oppose Cobb's license application 
unless the latter assisted Huddy in his claims against the 
Riklis bankruptcy estate.  Huddy later added a charge that 
Cobb had assumed control of KADY before FCC approval of 
the transfer, in violation of Commission rules.  The trustee 

answered with an affidavit saying that in the relevant period 
he (the trustee) had controlled all business decisions at 
KADY.

     The FCC ultimately approved the assignment, and on July 
1, 1998 the purchase of the television station was consummat-
ed.  After twice petitioning the FCC to rethink its decision 
and each time being rebuffed, Huddy sought review here.

     To be heard on the merits Huddy must first satisfy the 
three elements of constitutional standing:  injury in fact, 
causation, and redressability.  See Lujan v. Defenders of 
Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992).  These elements rough-
ly correspond to the following questions:  has Huddy asserted 
a present or expected injury that is legally cognizable and 
non-negligible, did the agency's actions materially increase 
the probability of injury, and will the remedy sought compen-
sate Huddy or materially reduce the expected harm?  To 
satisfy these requirements Huddy asserts two interests--one 
as a viewer of KADY and the other as a residual claimant of 
the bankruptcy estate who would benefit financially if the 
KADY license were returned to the trustee and re-auctioned.  
We address each claim in turn.

     As a resident of the service area and a viewer of the 
station, Huddy can assert a possible injury to a legally 
protected interest.  Under our precedents listeners or view-
ers may serve as "spokesmen" for a station's entire audience.  
See Office of Communication of the United Church of Christ 
v. FCC, 359 F.2d 994, 1002 (D.C. Cir. 1966).

     But Huddy's theory breaks down on causation.  At best he 
raises concerns about Cobb's integrity with respect to the 
Commission's rules regarding future licensees' behavior in 
financial matters and to pre-acquisition station control.  But 
he makes no effort to link these business behavior issues with 
plausible predictions about Cobb's likely programming deci-
sions.  To be sure, in the interests of "preserv[ing] the 
integrity" of its operations, FCC v. WOKO, Inc., 329 U.S. 223, 
228 (1946);  see also id. at 226 (noting Commission authority 
under 47 U.S.C. s 312(a)), the Commission is entitled to 
consider a would-be licensee's deceptive behavior as grounds 

for rejecting an application, id., and even to make denial of a 
license virtually automatic on evidence of intentional misrep-
resentations in license applications, see, e.g., In re Opal 
Chadwell, Dorothy O. Schulze and Deborah Brigham, Blanco 
Communications, Ltd., 2 FCC Rcd. 5502 at p 14 (1987).  
Presumably the Commission adopts such sanctions in the 
interests of good broadcasting--i.e., where it believes they 
will have a sufficiently favorable effect on broadcasting, in the 
long run, to justify the various costs of imposing them.  But 
the run may be long indeed.  So the authority of the Commis-
sion to apply such sanctions doesn't ipso facto support an 
inference that FCC underenforcement of financial integrity 
policies is likely to cause the sort of "material impairment of 
[a viewer's] hopes or expectations" that is needed to support 
standing.  Jaramillo v. FCC, 162 F.3d 675, 677 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

     Indeed, we've already held that the Commission's failure to 
inflict pecuniary penalties on a licensee for an isolated breach 
of the Commission's program-related requirements does not 
increase the probability of future violations enough to afford a 
listener standing to insist that it pursue those penalties.  
Branton v. FCC, 993 F.2d 906, 909 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  Huddy's 
claim is, of course, stronger in the sense that the relief sought 
would knock out Cobb altogether.  But it is weaker in that 
Huddy shows no logical link between the FCC's overlooking 
Cobb's alleged business misconduct and a materially in-
creased risk that KADY's programming will not advance the 
public interest.  Rather than offer some affirmative reason to 
think that FCC neglect of Cobb's alleged improprieties mate-
rially increases the risks of harm to listeners, Huddy relies 
only on the always available supposition that it just might.  If 
that were enough to show standing, listeners could always 
challenge any underenforcement of any license-related provi-
sion of communications law.  Jaramillo, 162 F.3d at 677.

     Huddy's theory here is quite a stretch from prior cases 
allowing listener standing.  In United Church of Christ, for 
instance, listeners sought denial of license renewal on the 
ground that a TV licensee had failed to "give a fair and 
balanced presentation of controversial issues, especially those 

concerning Negroes," and thus violated the Fairness Doc-
trine, 359 F.2d at 998-99, 1000, a (now-defunct) Commission 
policy expressly directed at broadcasting content.  See Syra-
cuse Peace Council v. FCC, 867 F.2d 654 (D.C. Cir. 1989).  
And in Llerandi v. FCC, 863 F.2d 79 (D.C. Cir. 1988), 
listeners challenged FCC approval of a license assignment 
that allegedly violated the Commission's (since-modified) 
"duopoly" rule prohibiting common ownership of two stations 
whose signals overlap, a rule aimed at enhancing "diversifica-
tion of viewpoints."  Id. at 85.  In these cases, FCC underen-
forcement of rules aimed at quality or diversity of program 
content left a station in the control of a party that allegedly 
violated such rules.

     To bolster his claim Huddy argues that Cobb breached a 
promise to add a news program to the KADY schedule.  To 
Huddy this is evidence that Cobb will not serve the public 
interest.  Had Cobb made such a promise in an effort to 
induce favorable action by the Commission, we might agree.  
But in fact Cobb made no such promise.  He simply respond-
ed to Huddy's allegation that he had exercised premature 
control, explaining that in his contacts with the KADY staff 
he had sought to explore the possibility of launching a news-
cast after the FCC approved his application.  Cobb made no 
commitment to the FCC or to KADY viewers.

     Huddy points out that Cobb had KADY's rating market 
changed from Santa Barbara to Los Angeles in January 2000, 
evidently to enable it to force cable companies in Los Angeles 
to carry its signal.  This change was possible only with the 
approval of the Commission after it considered the effect on 
local programming.  See In re Comcast Cablevision of Santa 
Maria, Inc., 13 FCC Rcd. 24,192 at p p 3, 14-17 (1998) 
(applying standards specified in 47 U.S.C. s 534(h)(1)(C)).  
Huddy alleges no illegality in that process.  In any event, the 
fact that the change originated with action by Cobb does 
nothing to overcome Huddy's failure to offer evidence, or 
even a theory, as to how an alleged lack of candor on financial 
matters might increase the likelihood of market switches that 
injure listeners.

     Huddy's second theory of standing begins with the observa-
tion that KADY is more valuable today than when Biltmore 
purchased it.  Here Huddy turns, surprisingly, to the very 
fact previously invoked to show Cobb's programming treach-
ery, namely his securing Commission approval to shift 
KADY's market to Los Angeles, with prospects of more 
lucrative cable carriage.  He also says that when the FCC 
changed its "television duopoly rules" in August 1999 to allow 
common ownership of more than one local commercial televi-
sion station in the same market, the value of stations in all big 
markets jumped.  In the Matter of Review of the Commis-
sion's Regulations Governing Television Broadcasting, 14 
FCC Rcd. 12,903 (1999).  Huddy argues that if this court 
were to remand to the FCC for a hearing on Cobb's integrity, 
and if the FCC were to revoke Biltmore's license, and if the 
trustee were to re-auction KADY, Huddy would profit as a 
residual claimant of the Riklis bankruptcy estate.  Although 
Huddy's counsel seemed to abandon this second theory of 
standing at oral argument, we include a brief treatment to 
dispel any belief that it might hold water.

     First, the injury to Huddy is (at most) the result of Cobb's 
alleged lack of candor only in a narrow "but for" sense.1  Yes, 
had Cobb not acquired the station, he would not have been 
able to switch KADY's market.  And yes, had the FCC not 
changed its rules since the bankruptcy sale, the station's 
market value would not have benefited from the rule change.  
But there is nothing inherent in the FCC's slack policing of 
its rules on candor about financial resources or on when a 
buyer may first exercise control, that tends to bring about the 
kinds of increases in station value that Huddy asserts.  See 

__________
     1  We say "at most" because even "but for" causation is ques-
tionable (apart from the issue discussed in the text below--whether 
Commission rejection of Biltmore's application would have led to a 
new auction).  The FCC did not change its duopoly rules for 
another 16 months after its approval of the transfer.  Had its 
decision been the other way, a new auction might well have been 
completed before the rule change was made or the prospect of its 
adoption apparent, and Huddy would not have garnered his wind-
fall.

Movitz v. First National Bank of Chicago, 148 F.3d 760, 762-
63 (7th Cir. 1998);  see also United States v. Dyer, 216 F.3d 
568, 570-71 (7th Cir. 2000).  Huddy seems implicitly to 
recognize the lack of any inherent tendency of the FCC's 
alleged error to produce the alleged injury, identifying the 
causal link simply as the passage of time since the FCC's 
action, coupled with two fortuities, Cobb's strategic decision 
and the Commission's rule change.  Reply Br. at 6-7.

     We question whether "but for" causation of this sort could 
ever be sufficient to confer constitutional standing.  Certainly 
Huddy does not point to any standing decision that finds a 
causal relation based on merely the passage of time and an 
accompanying change of market conditions.  And acceptance 
of such "but for" causation would effectively enable parties to 
secure constitutional standing purely at their own volition.  
Suppose that two persons, without interests at stake in an 
agency process, had bet a sum of money on its outcome.  If 
"but for" causation of the kind involved here were enough, the 
party picking the losing side would satisfy the causation 
prong, and, unless the wager were illegal, standing would 
ensue.  It seems improbable that the Court intends all its 
learning on constitutional standing to be so readily evaded.

     We need not finally decide whether such "but for" causa-
tion can ever be enough, as Huddy has not shown that the 
supposed injury could be redressed.  As his counsel conceded 
at oral argument, the record says nothing on the conse-
quences of an FCC veto of the transfer to Cobb.  For all we 
know, the trustee in bankruptcy would then be required 
simply to award KADY to the next highest bidder in the 
original auction.  As we have no reason to believe that Huddy 
would even reap his desired windfall, he flunks the redressa-
bility criterion.  Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights 
Organization, 426 U.S. 26, 41-43 (1976);  Branton v. FCC, 993 
F.2d at 911.

     As Huddy lacks standing, his petition for review is

                                                             Dismissed.

    