                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                      Decided March 27, 2001

                           No. 00-7130

                      William T. Gray, III, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                     Theisha Poole, et al., 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 99cv02233)

                            ---------

                On Motions for Summary Affirmance 

                            ---------

     Robert Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, Charles Reischel, 
Deputy Corporation Counsel, and Mary L. Wilson, Assistant 
Corporation Counsel, were on the motion for summary affir-
mance filed by appellees Theisha Poole, et al.

     Kevin C. Newsom and Kurt G. Calia were on the motion 
for summary affirmance filed by appellee Lisa M. Farabee.

     William T. Gray, III, appearing pro se, was on the opposi-
tions to appellees' motions for summary affirmance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Randolph, and Garland, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Garland.

     Garland, Circuit Judge:  This case poses the question 
whether attorneys of the District of Columbia's Office of 
Corporation Counsel are absolutely immune from damages 
under 42 U.S.C. s 1983 for their conduct in initiating and 
prosecuting a child neglect action.  We conclude that they are 
and summarily affirm the district court's dismissal of a dam-
ages suit brought by a custodian charged with neglect.

                                I

     Appellant William Thomas Gray, III was the custodian of 
his minor brother and the legal guardian of his brother's 
estate.  In April 1998, the Probate Division of the District of 
Columbia Superior Court removed Gray as legal guardian, 
finding him to be "mentally ill and in need of relief from his 
duties."  Robertson v. Gray, GDN 12-97, Admin. No. 
0057-97, slip op. at 4 (D.C. Super. Ct., Prob. Div. Apr. 30, 
1998).  In March of the following year, the District of Colum-
bia instituted a separate child neglect action, charging that 
Gray, who was still serving as his brother's custodian, was not 
providing his brother with adequate care.  Pet., In re P.G., 
No. N-363-99, S.F. No. 211453 (D.C. Super. Ct., Family Div., 
Neglect Branch Mar. 27, 1999).  Two months later, citing the 
decision of the Probate Division, the District amended its 
neglect petition to add as an additional ground that Gray 
lacked the mental capacity to care for his brother.

     Appellee Lisa M. Farabee filed and prosecuted the neglect 
action against Gray as part of her duties as Special Assistant 
Corporation Counsel for the District of Columbia.1  At the 
time the neglect suit was filed, appellee Jo Anne Robinson 

__________
     1 Farabee served in this capacity from December 1998 to June 
1999, while on temporary assignment as part of the pro bono 
program of Covington & Burling, a District of Columbia law firm.

was Acting Corporation Counsel for the District of Columbia.  
Appellee Theisha Poole was the social worker assigned to the 
neglect case by the District's Child and Family Services 
Agency.

     In August 1999, while the neglect proceeding was pending, 
Gray sued Farabee, Robinson, and Poole in the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia, asserting a cause 
of action under 42 U.S.C. s 1983.2  Gray alleged that the 
defendants filed the neglect action with knowledge that it was 
"without a basis or cause," and that they subsequently 
amended the action based on "unreliable and unverified" 
statements of the judge in the Superior Court probate case.  
Compl. at 2.  Gray sought $10 million in damages for uncon-
stitutional "harassment, defamation of character, [and] libel-
ous and slanderous statements, created by Defendants."  Id. 
at 4.

     In January 2000, Farabee filed a motion to dismiss pursu-
ant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), contending 
that she was absolutely immune from liability because of her 
role as the government prosecutor of the neglect action.  
Robinson filed a similar motion to dismiss in March 2000.  In 
an order dated April 27, 2000, the district court granted 
defendants' motions, holding that "[g]overnment attorneys 
are absolutely immune from liability for their actions in 
initiating and prosecuting civil child welfare cases."  Gray v. 
Poole, No. 99-cv-2233, slip op. at 2 (D.D.C. Apr. 27, 2000).  
Because Gray "d[id] not allege that Farabee injured him in 
any manner outside the scope of the neglect proceedings," the 
district court found that absolute immunity covered Farabee.  
Id. at 3.  The court also found Robinson "entitled to absolute 
immunity[,] for the same reasons as the attorney she super-

__________
     2 Section 1983 provides that every person who, under color of 
law "of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia," deprives 
another of a constitutional right "shall be liable to the party 
injured."  42 U.S.C. s 1983.  Although Gray's complaint did not 
expressly state that it was based on s 1983, the district court 
construed it as such, and all parties have adopted that construction.

vised, defendant Farabee."  Id. at 4.

     Gray appealed the district court's ruling, and Robinson and 
Farabee now move for summary affirmance.3

                                II

     We review the dismissal of plaintiff's complaint de novo, 
and accept its factual allegations as true.  See Buckley v. 
Fitzsimmons, 509 U.S. 259, 261 (1993);  Sloan v. United 
States Dep't of Hous. and Urban Dev., 236 F.3d 756, 759 
(D.C. Cir. 2001).  We will grant summary affirmance only 
when the merits of the parties' positions are so clear that 
expedited action is justified and further briefing unnecessary.  
Taxpayers Watchdog, Inc. v. Stanley, 819 F.2d 294, 297-98 
(D.C. Cir. 1987).  In this case, because the merits are so 
clear, we summarily affirm the dismissal of Gray's complaint 
against Farabee and Robinson.

                                A

     The Supreme Court has recognized two kinds of immunity 
applicable to public officials sued for damages under s 1983.  
Most officials receive only qualified immunity, which protects 
them from liability for the performance of discretionary func-
tions when "their conduct does not violate clearly established 
statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable per-
son would have known."  Buckley, 509 U.S. at 268 (quoting 
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982)).  The Court 
has also determined, however, that "some officials perform 
'special functions' which ... deserve absolute protection from 
damages liability."  Id. at 268-69 (quoting Butz v. Economou, 
438 U.S. 478, 508 (1978)).  Where absolute immunity is 

__________
     3 The district court dismissed the complaint against Poole as 
well, stating that it "agree[d] with those courts that have extended 
absolute immunity to social workers who assist with the prosecution 
of child neglect cases."  Gray v. Poole, slip op. at 4-5.  Without 
commenting on the merits of that decision, we conclude that it does 
not meet the stringent standards for summary affirmance.  We 
have therefore, by separate order, directed full briefing and argu-
ment for Gray's appeal of Poole's dismissal.

deemed appropriate, an official is protected from all suits 
attacking conduct within the scope of the immunity, even if 
the official is alleged to have acted in bad faith.  See Moore v. 
Valder, 65 F.3d 189, 194 (D.C. Cir. 1995).

     The Court has recognized as "special functions" deserving 
of absolute immunity those that are similar "to functions that 
would have been immune when Congress enacted s 1983."  
Buckley, 509 U.S. at 268-69.  Even where there is a common-
law tradition of absolute immunity for a given function, the 
Court further considers "whether s 1983's history or pur-
poses nonetheless counsel against recognizing the same im-
munity in s 1983 actions."  Id. at 269 (quoting Tower v. 
Glover, 467 U.S. 914, 920 (1984)).  In making these determi-
nations, the Court applies a "functional approach," looking to 
"the nature of the function performed, not the identity of the 
actor who performed it."  Id. (quoting, respectively, Burns v. 
Reed, 500 U.S. 478, 486 (1991) and Forrester v. White, 484 
U.S. 219, 229 (1988)).

     In Imbler v. Pachtman, the Supreme Court followed this 
general approach in holding that a criminal prosecutor is 
immune from damages under s 1983 for "initiating a prosecu-
tion" and "presenting the State's case."  Imbler v. Pachtman, 
424 U.S. 409, 431 (1976).  The Court first found the common-
law immunity of prosecutors for such functions to be "well 
settled," and then concluded that "the same considerations of 
public policy that underlie the common-law rule likewise 
countenance absolute immunity under s 1983."  Id. at 424.  
These considerations included the "concern that harassment 
by unfounded litigation would cause a deflection of the prose-
cutor's energies from his public duties, and the possibility 
that he would shade his decisions instead of exercising the 
independence of judgment required by his public trust."  Id. 
at 423.  Such unfounded litigation, the Court feared, "could 
be expected with some frequency, for a defendant often will 
transform his resentment at being prosecuted into the ascrip-
tion of improper and malicious actions to the State's advo-
cate."  Id. at 425;  see also Buckley, 509 U.S. at 270 n.4;  
Burns, 500 U.S. at 485-86.

     The Supreme Court extended Imbler beyond the context of 
criminal prosecutions in Butz v. Economou, holding absolute 
immunity applicable to agency attorneys in administrative 
enforcement proceedings.  Butz, 438 U.S. at 516-17.  Butz 
concerned a plaintiff who controlled a company registered 
with the Department of Agriculture as a commodity futures 
commission merchant.  The Department sought to revoke or 
suspend the company's registration by filing an administra-
tive complaint and conducting administrative proceedings be-
fore an agency hearing examiner.  Plaintiff responded by 
suing senior Department officials and the Department attor-
ney who had prosecuted the proceeding.  Id. at 481-82.

     In analyzing the defendants' immunity claims, Butz first 
recounted the historical immunity of prosecutors previously 
discussed in Imbler, and particularly noted "the common-law 
precedents extending absolute immunity to parties participat-
ing in the judicial process:  judges, grand jurors, petit jurors, 
advocates, and witnesses."  Id. at 509 (emphasis added);  see 
also Burns, 500 U.S. at 489-90 ("Like witnesses, prosecutors 
and other lawyers were absolutely immune from damages 
liability at common law for making false or defamatory state-
ments in judicial proceedings...." (emphasis added)).  Em-
ploying the functional approach described above, the Court 
declared that "agency officials performing certain functions 
analogous to those of a prosecutor should be able to claim 
absolute immunity with respect to such acts."  Butz, 438 U.S. 
at 515.

     The Butz Court then turned its attention to two classes of 
defendants.  Considering first those officials "responsible for 
the decision to initiate or continue a proceeding subject to 
agency adjudication," id. at 516, the Court held:  "The deci-
sion to initiate administrative proceedings against an individu-
al or corporation is very much like the prosecutor's decision 
to initiate or move forward with a criminal prosecution," id. at 
515.  As with prosecutors, the Court explained, "[t]he discre-
tion which executive officials exercise with respect to the 

initiation of administrative proceedings might be distorted if 
their immunity from damages arising from that decision was 
less than complete."  Id.  And as with the decision to prose-
cute, there is "a serious danger that the decision to authorize 
proceedings will provoke a retaliatory response," and that 
"[a]n individual targeted by an administrative proceeding will 
react angrily and may seek vengeance in the courts."  Id.  
Furthermore, the Court noted, "[t]he defendant in an en-
forcement proceeding has ample opportunity to challenge the 
legality of the proceeding," id., and to have "[h]is claims that 
the proceeding is unconstitutional ... heard by the courts," 
id. at 516.  Accordingly, the Court held that those officials 
who are responsible for the decision to initiate or continue 
administrative proceedings are "entitled to absolute immunity 
from damages liability for their parts in that decision."  Id.

     Focusing next on the role of an agency attorney who 
"present[s] evidence in an agency hearing," the Court de-
clared that it could "see no substantial difference between the 
function" of such an attorney "and the function of the prose-
cutor who brings evidence before a court."  Id.  If agency 
attorneys were held personally liable for damages, the Court 
reasoned, they, like prosecutors, "might hesitate to bring 
forward some witnesses or documents."  Id. at 517.  More-
over, because the evidence submitted by agency attorneys, 
like that submitted by prosecutors, is "subject to attack 
through cross-examination, rebuttal, or reinterpretation by 
opposing counsel," defendants' interests are adequately pro-
tected.  Id.  Thus, the Court concluded, "an agency attorney 
who arranges for the presentation of evidence on the record 
in the course of an adjudication is absolutely immune from 
suits based on the introduction of such evidence."  Id.4

__________
     4 Although Butz involved a suit brought against federal officials 
directly under the Constitution pursuant to Bivens v. Six Unknown 
Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U.S. 388 (1971), Butz held that there is 
no distinction for purposes of immunity between such a suit and one 
brought against state officials under s 1983.  Butz, 438 U.S. at 504;  
see also Antoine v. Byers & Anderson, Inc., 508 U.S. 429, 433 n.5 
(1993).

                                B

     Neither the Supreme Court nor this court has yet ad-
dressed the specific question raised in this case:  whether 
absolute immunity extends to government attorneys for their 
conduct in initiating and prosecuting civil child neglect ac-
tions.  Butz, however, is indistinguishable from the situation 
before us.  We "can see no substantial difference" between 
the function of agency attorneys in bringing enforcement 
actions before administrative tribunals and that of District 
attorneys in bringing neglect actions in Superior Court.  
Butz, 438 U.S. at 516.  In both contexts, government attor-
neys "must make the decision to move forward ... free from 
intimidation or harassment."  Id.  The prospect of angry, 
retaliatory litigation by targets of the attorneys' actions is at 
least as likely in child neglect cases as in efforts to suspend 
the registration of commodities merchants.  Moreover, as was 
true in Butz, "the legal remedies already available" to those 
involved in child neglect proceedings "provide sufficient 
checks on agency zeal."  Id.  Gray may challenge the legality 
of the District's actions directly in those proceedings and may 
raise claims of unconstitutional conduct both there and on 
appeal.

     Seeing no substantial difference between the function of 
prosecutors and that of agency attorneys in initiating pro-
ceedings and presenting evidence, the Butz Court extended 
the historical immunity of the former to the latter.  If 
anything, the function of an attorney who litigates a Superior 
Court neglect action is closer to that of the prosecutor in 
Imbler than was the function of the agency attorney who 
litigated administrative hearings in Butz itself:  Although 
neither this case nor Butz involved a criminal prosecution, all 
of the conduct here was "intimately associated with the 
judicial phase," Imbler, 424 U.S. at 430 (emphasis added), 
rather than the administrative phase, of the enforcement 
process.  Accordingly, we hold that government attorneys 
who prosecute child neglect actions perform "functions analo-
gous to those of a prosecutor [and] should be able to claim 
absolute immunity with respect to such acts."  Butz, 438 U.S. 
at 515.  In so doing, we join every circuit that has addressed 

the question.  See Snell v. Tunnell, 920 F.2d 673, 692-94 
(10th Cir. 1990);  Weller v. Dep't of Soc. Servs., 901 F.2d 387, 
397 n.11 (4th Cir. 1990);  Myers v. Morris, 810 F.2d 1437, 
1452 (8th Cir. 1987), overruled on other grounds by Burns, 
500 U.S. at 496;  Walden v. Wishegrad, 745 F.2d 149, 152 (2d 
Cir. 1984).

     The only remaining question is whether the conduct of the 
District of Columbia attorneys at issue here falls within the 
scope of the immunity.  At a minimum, it is clear that 
absolute immunity extends to "initiating a prosecution" and to 
"presenting the State's case."  Imbler, 424 U.S. at 431;  see 
Buckley, 509 U.S. at 269;  Moore, 65 F.3d at 193;  cf. Buckley, 
509 U.S. at 273 (holding that absolute immunity does not 
apply "[w]hen a prosecutor performs the investigative func-
tions normally performed by a detective or police officer").  
This precludes us from assessing s 1983 liability against 
defendants for "making false or defamatory statements dur-
ing, and related to, judicial proceedings."  Buckley, 509 U.S. 
at 270;  see Burns, 500 U.S. at 489-90;  Moore, 65 F.3d at 194.

     The district court found that Gray's complaint "does not 
allege that Farabee injured him in any manner outside the 
scope of the neglect proceedings."  Gray v. Poole, slip op. at 
3.  That finding is correct.  The complaint alleges that Fara-
bee "filed [the] neglect action without a basis or cause," and 
that she then proceeded to amend the action with "unreliable 
and unverified probate matters."  Compl. at 2.  It further 
alleges that the materials she filed were "libelous and slan-
derous."  Id.  All of these allegations against Farabee involve 
statements she made to the court and thus fall well within the 
scope of her absolute immunity.5

__________
     5 Gray's complaint also asserts that the D.C. Superior Court did 
not have jurisdiction over the neglect action because Gray had not 
been properly served.  Compl. at 2.  Federal district courts, howev-
er, "lack jurisdiction to review judicial decisions by state and 
District of Columbia courts."  Richardson v. Dist. of Columbia 
Court of Appeals, 83 F.3d 1513, 1514 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (citing Rooker 
v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U.S. 413, 415 (1923) and Dist. of Columbia 
v. Feldman, 460 U.S. 462, 476 (1983)).  Other than the D.C. Court 

     Although the caption of Gray's complaint also names then-
Acting Corporation Counsel Robinson as a defendant, the 
body of the complaint does not mention any specific action 
taken by her;  indeed, it does not mention her at all.  Gray's 
papers in this court describe Robinson as "Farabee's supervi-
sor," and assert only that she "should have never allowed 
Defendant Farabee to proceed with an unlawful case."  Opp'n 
to Defs.' Mot. for Summ. Affirm. at 3-4.  At most, this would 
make Robinson "responsible for the decision to initiate or 
continue [the] proceeding"--a function Butz clearly held to be 
within the scope of absolute immunity.  Butz, 438 U.S. at 516.

                               III

     We conclude that attorneys for the District of Columbia are 
absolutely immune from damages under 42 U.S.C. s 1983 for 
their conduct in initiating and prosecuting child neglect ac-
tions.  As this conclusion follows necessarily from the Su-
preme Court's decision in Butz, as well as from the holdings 
of all the circuits to have addressed the question, this case is 
appropriate for summary disposition.  The decision of the 
district court dismissing Gray's complaint against Farabee 
and Robinson is

                                                                 Affirmed.

__________
of Appeals, the United States Supreme Court is the only court with 
jurisdiction to review this aspect of Gray's complaint.  Id.  We 
note, moreover, that this is the second time Gray has sought review 
of the neglect action in federal court on this ground.  In 1999, he 
attempted to remove the case from Superior Court to the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia.  That case was 
dismissed and no appeal was taken.  In re:  Patrick Gray, No. 
99-cv-2230 (D.D.C. Aug. 19, 1999).

                                                                            