                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued February 8, 2002    Decided June 28, 2002 

                           No. 00-7244

                      Michael H. Price and 
                         Roger K. Frey, 
                            Appellees

                                v.

           Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 97cv00975)

     Arman Dabiri argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     James Cooper-Hill argued the cause for appellees.  With 
him on the brief were Andrew C. Hall and Nelson M. Jones 
III.

     Michael L. Martinez argued the cause for amicus curiae 
Blake Kilburn on his behalf and as administrator of the 

estate of Peter Kilburn.  With him on the brief was Stuart H. 
Newberger.

     Before:  Edwards and Sentelle, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

      Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Circuit Judge:  This case involves a lawsuit 
brought under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act 
("FSIA"), 28 U.S.C. ss 1330, 1602-1611 (1999), by two Ameri-
can citizens who sued the Socialist People's Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya ("Libya") for torture and hostage taking.  Plain-
tiffs' lawsuit seeks cover under a recent amendment to the 
FSIA which strips certain foreign states - including Libya - 
of their sovereign immunity in American courts when they 
engage in such conduct.  See 28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(7).

     In response to plaintiffs' suit, Libya moved to dismiss, 
claiming sovereign immunity and a lack of personal jurisdic-
tion.  The District Court denied the motion to dismiss and 
Libya now seeks review in this interlocutory appeal.  Two 
central questions have been raised on appeal:  first, whether 
plaintiffs have alleged facts that are legally sufficient to 
revoke Libya's immunity under the FSIA;  and, second, 
whether the assertion of personal jurisdiction over Libya in 
the manner specifically authorized by the FSIA violates the 
Due Process Clause.

     We hold, first, that plaintiffs have failed to state a claim for 
hostage taking adequate to abrogate sovereign immunity and 
establish subject matter jurisdiction.  The allegations set 
forth in the complaint do not come close to satisfying the 
definition of "hostage taking" prescribed by the FSIA.  We 
hold further that the allegations supporting plaintiffs' torture 
claim are not adequate to bring the case within the statutory 
exceptions to foreign sovereign immuntiy.  The complaint in 
its present form is simply too conclusory to satisfy 
s 1605(a)(7).  In contrast to the hostage-taking claim, howev-
er, plaintiffs have at least intimated that they can allege facts 
that might state a proper claim for torture under the FSIA.  
Accordingly, we will remand the case to allow plaintiffs to 

attempt to amend their complaint in an effort to satisfy the 
statute's rigorous definition of torture.  As a word of caution, 
we note that there is a question as to whether the complaint 
states a claim for relief upon which plaintiffs can recover;  
although this matter is not properly before us on interlocu-
tory review, we are not foreclosing review of the issue in the 
District Court.

     Finally, we hold that Libya, as a foreign state, is not a 
"person" within the meaning of the Due Process Clause.  We 
therefore conclude that the Constitution imposes no limitation 
on the exercise of personal jurisdiction by the federal courts 
over Libya.

                          I. Background

     The facts and procedural history of this case are relatively 
straightforward.  Plaintiffs Michael Price and Roger Frey, 
Americans who had been living in Libya in the employ of a 
Libyan company, were arrested in March of 1980 after taking 
pictures of various places in and around Tripoli.  Libyan 
government officials apparently believed that these photo-
graphs constituted anti-revolutionary propaganda, because 
they would portray unfavorable images of life in Libya.

     Price and Frey allege that, following their arrest, they 
were denied bail and kept in a "political prison" for 105 days 
pending the outcome of their trial.  In their complaint, plain-
tiffs assert that they endured deplorable conditions while 
incarcerated, including urine-soaked mattresses, a cramped 
cell with substandard plumbing that they were forced to 
share with seven other inmates, a lack of medical care, and 
inadequate food.  The complaint also asserts that the plain-
tiffs were "kicked, clubbed and beaten" by prison guards, and 
"interrogated and subjected to physical, mental and verbal 
abuse."  Compl. at p 4.  The complaint contends that this 
incarceration was "for the purpose of demonstrating Defen-
dant's support of the government of Iran which held hostages 
in the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran."  Id. at p 7.

     Ultimately, plaintiffs were tried and acquitted of the crimes 
with which they had been charged.  After the verdict was 
announced, however, the Libyan government retained their 
passports for another 60 days while the prosecution pursued 

an appeal, which is permitted under the Libyan Code of 
Criminal Procedure.  When this appeal was eventually reject-
ed, plaintiffs were permitted to leave Libya.

     On May 7, 1997, Price and Frey commenced a civil action 
against Libya in federal court.  Their complaint asserted 
claims for hostage taking and torture and sought $20 million 
in damages for each man.  Following receipt of process, 
Libya filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that (1) the grant of 
subject matter jurisdiction over plaintiffs' action was uncon-
stitutional, (2) the court's exercise of personal jurisdiction was 
unconstitutional, and (3) plaintiffs had failed to state a claim 
on which relief could be granted.  The District Court rejected 
each of these arguments, thus vitiating Libya's sovereign 
immunity defense and allowing the court to assert both 
subject matter jurisdiction over plaintiffs' claims and personal 
jurisdiction over the defendant.  Libya now pursues an inter-
locutory appeal.

                          II. Discussion

     On appeal, Libya has not renewed its constitutional attack 
on the court's subject matter jurisdiction.  Instead, it claims 
that the District Court erred in not resolving certain disputed 
issues of fact, proceeding instead as if plaintiffs' factual 
allegations had already been established.  Libya also argues 
that, even assuming that these facts were true, the plaintiffs 
have failed to make out a valid claim either for torture or 
hostage taking under the FSIA.  Finally, Libya asserts that 
the Due Process Clause does not permit an American court to 
take jurisdiction over a foreign sovereign based on conduct 
that has no connection to the United States save for the 
nationality of the plaintiff.

A.   Plaintiffs' Cause of Action

     Before we address the issues arising under the FSIA and 
the Due Process Clause, we first want to make it clear that 
our decision today does not address or decide whether the 
plaintiffs have stated a cause of action against Libya.  The 
parties appear to assume that a substantive claim against 
Libya arises under the FSIA, but this is far from clear.  The 
FSIA is undoubtedly a jurisdictional statute which, in speci-

fied cases, eliminates foreign sovereign immunity and opens 
the door to subject matter jurisdiction in the federal courts.  
See First Nat'l City Bank v. Banco Para El Comercio 
exterior de Cuba, 462 U.S. 611, 620 (1983).  There is a 
question, however, whether the FSIA creates a federal cause 
of action for torture and hostage taking against foreign 
states.  See Roeder v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 195 F. Supp. 
2d 140, 171-73 (D.D.C. 2002).

     The "Flatow Amendment" to the FSIA confers a right of 
action for torture and hostage taking against an "official, 
employee, or agent of a foreign state," Pub. L. No. 104-208, 
Div. A, Title I, s 101(c) (Sept. 30, 1996), codified at 28 U.S.C. 
s 1605 (note);  see Flatow v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 999 
F. Supp. 1, 12-13 (D.D.C. 1998), but the amendment does not 
list "foreign states" among the parties against whom such an 
action may be brought.  While it is possible that such an 
action could be brought under the "international terrorism" 
statute, 18 U.S.C. s 2333(a), cf. Boim v. Quranic Literacy 
Inst., ___ F.3d ___, 2002 WL 1174558 (7th Cir. June 5, 2002), 
no such claim has been raised in this case.

     The question relating to plaintiffs' cause of action has yet to 
be raised or addressed in the District Court, and it was 
neither briefed nor argued by the parties during this appeal.  
Therefore, although we flag the issue, we will leave its 
disposition to the District Court in the first instance following 
remand of this case.  We will turn our attention now to the 
matters before us, i.e., the issues arising under the FSIA and 
the Due Process Clause.

B.   The 1996 Amendments to the Foreign Sovereign Im-
     munities Act

     The FSIA provides a basis for asserting jurisdiction over 
foreign nations in the United States.  Argentine Republic v. 
Amerada Hess Shipping Corp., 488 U.S. 428, 443 (1989).  The 
statute, which was originally enacted in 1976, confers immuni-
ty on foreign states in all cases that do not fall into one of its 
specifically enumerated exceptions.  See 28 U.S.C. ss 1605, 
1607;  McKesson HBOC, Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 271 
F.3d 1101, 1105 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  These exceptions were 
crafted in order to codify the "restrictive theory" of sovereign 
immunity, under which immunity is generally limited to a 

foreign state's public or governmental acts (jure imperii) but 
withheld from its private or commercial acts (jure gestionis).  
See H.R. Rep. No. 94-1487, at 7 (1976);  Jackson v. People's 
Republic of China, 794 F.2d 1490, 1493 (11th Cir. 1986).

     The FSIA thus begins with a presumption of foreign sover-
eign immunity, 28 U.S.C. s 1604, qualified by a list of specific 
circumstances in which that immunity is unavailable.  These 
include cases in which the state has waived its immunity, id. 
at s 1605(a)(1), cases based upon various forms of commercial 
activity, id. at s 1605(a)(2), takings of property in violation of 
international law, id. at s 1605(a)(3), and torts committed in 
the United States, id. at s 1605(a)(5).  The original FSIA was 
not intended as human rights legislation.  See Jennifer A. 
Gergen, Human Rights and the Foreign Sovereign Immuni-
ties Act, 36 Va. J. Int'l L. 765, 771 (1996).  Thus, no matter 
how allegedly egregious a foreign state's conduct, suits that 
did not fit into one of the statute's discrete and limited 
exceptions invariably were rejected.  See, e.g., Saudi Arabia 
v. Nelson, 507 U.S. 349 (1993) (holding that a claim arising 
from the detention and torture of an American citizen in 
Saudi Arabia was not "based upon a commercial activity 
carried on in the United States");  Smith v. Socialist People's 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 101 F.3d 239 (2d Cir. 1996) (hold-
ing that Libya retained its sovereign immunity for the bomb-
ing of Pam Am 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland);  Princz v. Fed. 
Republic of Germany, 26 F.3d 1166 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (holding 
that plaintiff could not recover for slave labor performed at 
Nazi concentration camps, because Germany's conduct was 
not commercial activity causing a "direct effect in the United 
States" and did not constitute an implied waiver of sovereign 
immunity);  Siderman de Blake v. Republic of Argentina, 965 
F.2d 699 (9th Cir. 1992) (holding that Argentina was immune 
from liability for acts of torture committed by the ruling 
junta);  Tel-Oren v. Libyan Arab Republic, 726 F.2d 774, 775 
n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (Edwards J., concurring) (FSIA precludes 
jurisdiction over Libya for armed attack on civilian bus in 
Israel);  cf. Amerada Hess, 488 U.S. at 436 ("[I]mmunity is 
granted in those cases involving violations of international law 
that do not come within one of the FSIA's exceptions.").

     Under the original FSIA, therefore, terrorism, torture, and 
hostage taking committed abroad were immunized forms of 
state activity.  See H.R. Rep. No. 103-702, at 4 (1994) ("[T]he 
FSIA does not currently allow U.S. citizens to sue for gross 
human rights violations committed by a foreign sovereign on 
its own soil.").  Indeed, in Nelson, the Supreme Court recog-
nized that conduct of the sort alleged in the present case - 
"wrongful arrest, imprisonment, and torture" - amounted to 
abuses of police power, and "however monstrous such abuse 
undoubtedly may be, a foreign's state's exercise of the power 
of its police has long been understood for purpose of the 
restrictive theory as peculiarly sovereign in nature."  507 
U.S. at 361;  see also Mathias Reimann, A Human Rights 
Exception to Sovereign Immunity:  Some Thoughts on Princz 
v. Federal Republic of Germany, 16 Mich. J. Int'l L. 403, 417-
18 (1995) (observing that under the unamended FSIA "efforts 
to persuade the courts to recognize a human rights exception 
to sovereign immunity" had failed).

     The mounting concern over decisions such as these eventu-
ally spurred the political branches into action.  See John F. 
Murphy, Civil Liability for the Commission of International 
Crimes as an Alternative to Criminal Prosecution, 12 Harv. 
Hum. Rts. J. 1, 34 (1999).  In 1996, as part of the comprehen-
sive Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act 
("AEDPA"), Pub. L. No. 104-132, s 221(a), 110 Stat. 1214 
(Apr. 24, 1996), Congress amended the FSIA to add a new 
class of claims for which certain foreign states would be 
precluded from asserting sovereign immunity.  Specifically, 
the amendment vitiates immunity in cases

     in which money damages are sought against a foreign 
     state for personal injury or death that was caused by an 
     act of torture, extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, 
     hostage taking, or the provision of material support or 
     resources ... for such an act if such act or provision of 
     material support is engaged in by an official, employee, 
     or agent of such foreign state while acting within the 
     scope of his or her office, employment, or agency[.]
     
28 U.S.C. s 1605(a)(7).  In enacting this provision, Congress 
sought to create a judicial forum for compensating the victims 

of terrorism, and in so doing to punish foreign states who 
have committed or sponsored such acts and deter them from 
doing so in the future.  See Daliberti v. Republic of Iraq, 97 
F. Supp. 2d 38, 50 (D.D.C. 2000);  Molora Vadnais, The 
Terrorism Exception to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities 
Act, 5 UCLA J. Int'l L. & Foreign Aff. 199, 216 (2000).

     While such legislation had long been sought by victims' 
groups, it had been consistently resisted by the executive 
branch.  See Alan Gerson & Jerry Adler, The Price of 
Terror 212-26 (2001);  H.R. Rep. No. 102-900, at 3-4, 11 
(1992).  Executive branch officials feared that the proposed 
amendment to FSIA might cause other nations to respond in 
kind, thus potentially subjecting the American government to 
suits in foreign countries for actions taken in the United 
States.  See Murphy, supra, at 35-37;  H.R. Rep. No. 103-702, 
at 12 (1994).  Although these reservations did not prevent the 
amendment from passing, they nevertheless left their mark in 
the final version of the bill.

     Section 1605(a)(7) has some notable features which reveal 
the delicate legislative compromise out of which it was born.  
First, not all foreign states may be sued.  Instead, only a 
defendant that has been specifically designated by the State 
Department as a "state sponsor of terrorism" is subject to the 
loss of its sovereign immunity.  s 1605(a)(7)(A).  Second, 
even a foreign state listed as a sponsor of terrorism retains 
its immunity unless (a) it is afforded a reasonable opportunity 
to arbitrate any claim based on acts that occurred in that 
state, and (b) either the victim or the claimant was a U.S. 
national at the time that those acts took place.  
s 1605(a)(7)(B).  In the present case, Libya has been desig-
nated as a sponsor of terrorism.  See 31 C.F.R. s 596.201 
(2001);  Rein v. Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
162 F.3d 748, 764 (2d Cir. 1998).  Moreover, both plaintiffs 
are American citizens, and Libya does not contend that it has 
been denied a chance to arbitrate their claims.

     If service of process has been made under s 1608, personal 
jurisdiction over a foreign state exists for every claim over 
which the court has subject matter jurisdiction.  See 28 
U.S.C. s 1330(b).  In turn, the statute automatically confers 
subject matter jurisdiction whenever the state loses its immu-

nity pursuant to s 1605(a)(7).  See id. at s 1330(a).  Personal 
jurisdiction determinations always have been made in this 
way under the FSIA.  See Joseph W. Dellapenna, Suing 
Foreign Governments and Their Corporations 9 (1988) (com-
menting on this "significant compression," whereby both 
"competence [subject matter jurisdiction] and personal juris-
diction depend upon whether the foreign state is immune 
under the substantive rules in the act");  see also Harris v. 
VAO Intourist, Moscow, 481 F. Supp. 1056, 1065 (E.D.N.Y. 
1979) (Weinstein, J.) (noting the way in which the FSIA 
collapses subject matter jurisdiction, in personam jurisdic-
tion, and sovereign immunity into a single inquiry).

     Under the original FSIA, however, it was generally under-
stood that in order for immunity to be lost, there had to be 
some tangible connection between the conduct of the foreign 
defendant and the territory of the United States.  See Verlin-
den B.V. v. Cent. Bank of Nigeria, 461 U.S. 480, 490 & n.15 
(1983);  Lee M. Caplan, The Constitution and Jurisdiction 
over Foreign States:  The 1996 Amendments to the Foreign 
Sovereign Immunities Act in Perspective, 41 Va. J. Int'l L. 
369, 406-08 (2001);  cf. McKeel v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 
722 F.2d 582, 588 (9th Cir. 1983) ("[N]othing in the legislative 
history [of the 1976 Act] suggests that Congress intended to 
assert jurisdiction over foreign states for events occurring 
wholly within their own territory.  Such an intent would not 
be consistent with the prevailing practice in international 
law.").  In this way, the original statute's immunity excep-
tions "prescribe[d] the necessary contacts which must exist 
before our courts can exercise personal jurisdiction."  H.R. 
Rep. No. 94-1487, at 13 (describing the Act's personal jurisdic-
tion provisions as a kind of federal long-arm statute, one 
patterned after the District of Columbia's own long-arm law);  
see also Jurisdiction of U.S. Courts in Suits against Foreign 
States:  Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Administra-
tive Law and Governmental Relations of the House Commit-
tee on the Judiciary on H.R. 11315, 94th Cong., 2d Sess. 31 
(1976) (statement of Bruno A. Ristau) (noting that this fea-
ture of the bill "will insure that only those disputes which 
have a relation to the United States are litigated in the courts 
of the United States").

     When Congress passed the original FSIA, it was assumed 
that the exercise of personal jurisdiction over foreign states 
under the statute always would satisfy the demands of the 
Constitution.  See Joseph W. Glannon & Jeffery Atik, Politics 
and Personal Jurisdiction:  Suing State Sponsors of Terror-
ism under the 1996 Amendments to the Foreign Sovereign 
Immunities Act, 87 Geo. L.J. 675, 681-82 (1999).  This as-
sumption proved accurate.  See, e.g., Shapiro v. Republic of 
Bolivia, 930 F.2d 1013, 1020 (2d Cir. 1991);  Callejo v. Ban-
comer, S.A., 764 F.2d 1101, 1107 n.5 (5th Cir. 1985);  cf. S & D 
David Int'l, Inc. v. Republic of Yemen, 218 F.3d 1292, 1304 
(11th Cir. 2000) (noting that "the 'direct effects' language of 
s 1605(a)(2) closely resembles the 'minimum contacts' lan-
guage of constitutional due process and these two analyses 
have overlapped").  Indeed, as some courts have noted, the 
nexus requirements imposed by the original FSIA sometimes 
exceeded the constitutional standard.  See In re Papandreou, 
139 F.3d 247, 253 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("substantial contact" 
required by s 1603(e) requires more than the "minimum 
contacts" necessary to ensure due process).

     The antiterrorism amendments changed this statutory 
framework.  Under s 1605(a)(7), the only required link be-
tween the defendant nation and the territory of the United 
States is the nationality of the claimant.  Thus, s 1605(a)(7) 
now allows personal jurisdiction to be maintained over defen-
dants in circumstances that do not appear to satisfy the 
"minimum contacts" requirement of the Due Process Clause.  
See Caplan, supra, at 408 ("Under its plain terms, the new 
law extends extraterritoriality much further than the tradi-
tional reach of the International Shoe [Co. v. Washington, 
326 U.S. 310 (1945)] standard.").

C.   Challenges to the Factual Underpinnings of an FSIA 
     Complaint

     Before we turn to the due process issue, as well as to the 
antecedent question of whether plaintiffs have stated valid 
claims under s 1605(a) for hostage taking and torture, we 

must first address a separate argument that Libya has ad-
vanced on appeal.  Libya contends that the District Court 
erred in assuming the truth of the factual allegations in 
plaintiffs' complaint for purposes of determining whether it 
had subject matter jurisdiction.  Appellant correctly points 
out that in Phoenix Consulting, Inc. v. Republic of Angola, 
216 F.3d 36, 40 (D.C. Cir. 2000), we held that when a foreign 
state defendant raises "a dispute over the factual basis of the 
court's subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA," the trial 
court is required to "go beyond the pleadings and resolve any 
disputed issues of fact the resolution of which is necessary to 
a ruling upon the motion to dismiss."

     Libya now claims that it did not engage in the actions 
described in plaintiffs' complaint.  Thus, it contends that we 
must reverse the District Court's finding of subject matter 
jurisdiction and remand for further fact-finding on that issue.  
See Foremost-McKesson, Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 
905 F.2d 438, 448-49 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (holding that where the 
"conclusory allegations" in a plaintiff's complaint are chal-
lenged by a sovereign defendant, "the district court must do 
more than just look to the pleadings to ascertain whether to 
grant the motion to dismiss").  We reject this argument.

     In its original motion to dismiss, Libya specifically stated 
that, for purposes of that pleading, it was not challenging "the 
well-pleaded facts in the complaint."  Def.'s Mot. to Dismiss, 
at 2 (Jan. 21, 1998).  When it renewed this motion, Libya still 
did not challenge the factual basis of plaintiffs' allegations.  
Instead, it wrote that, "[e]ven viewed in the light most 
favorable to the plaintiffs, the facts alleged in the complaint 
do not establish 'acts of torture' by Libya."  Def.'s Mot. to 
Dismiss, at 26 (Feb. 9, 2000).  The District Court then 
properly "[took] the plaintiff's factual allegations as true and 
determine[d] whether they [brought] the case within any of 
the exceptions to immunity invoked by the plaintiff."  Phoe-
nix Consulting, 216 F.3d at 40.  It now falls to this court to 
review this determination, which we do de novo.  See McKes-
son HBOC, 271 F.3d at 1105.

D.   Appellate Jurisdiction

     Price and Frey claim that we lack jurisdiction over Libya's 
appeal, because the denial of a motion to dismiss for failure to 
state a claim is neither a "final decision," see 28 U.S.C. 
s 1291, nor the proper subject of an immediate appeal under 
the "collateral order" doctrine, see Cohen v. Beneficial Indus. 
Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541, 546 (1949);  Coopers & Lyband v. 
Livesay, 437 U.S. 463 (1978).  These propositions are gener-
ally correct;  however, insofar as the instant appeal addresses 
the denial of Libya's motion to dismiss on grounds of foreign 
sovereign immunity, that question is immediately appealable.  
See Princz v. Federal Republic of Germany, 998 F.2d 1, 1 
(D.C. Cir. 1993);  Foremost-McKesson, 905 F.2d at 443 (ob-
serving that sovereign immunity confers not merely a defense 
against liability but a right not to be tried).  Thus, an FSIA 
defendant can take an immediate appeal if the District Court 
rejects its argument that the facts alleged in the plaintiff's 
complaint do not bring the case within one of the statute's 
immunity exceptions.

     This is in substance what Libya argued below, and what it 
now asserts on appeal.  See Br. for Appellant 24 ("The fact 
that Price & Frey received a trial and were acquitted and 
subsequently released, must deprive the district court of 
subject matter jurisdiction as their confinement cannot be 
considered an act of hostage taking under s 1605(a)(7).") 
(emphasis added).  In other words, the basis for Libya's 
motion to dismiss and for this appeal was that plaintiffs had 
not set forth an adequate factual basis for applying the 
FSIA's torture and hostage taking exceptions.  It follows 
therefore that we have jurisdiction to review this challenge at 
this time.

E.   Torture

     The FSIA's definition of torture derives from the meaning 
given that term in section 3 of the Torture Victim Protection 
Act of 1991 ("TVPA"), Pub. L. No. 102-256, 106 Stat. 73 (Mar. 
12, 1992), codified at 28 U.S.C. s 1350 (note).  See 28 U.S.C. 
s 1605(e)(1).  Section 3(b)(1) of the TVPA defines "torture" 
to include

     any act, directed against an individual in the offender's 
     custody or physical control, by which severe pain or 
     suffering (other than pain or suffering arising only from 
     or inherent in, or incidental to, lawful sanctions), whether 
     physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on that indi-
     vidual for such purposes as obtaining from that individual 
     or a third person information or a confession, punishing 
     that individual for an act that individual or a third person 
     has committed or is suspected of having committed, 
     intimidating or coercing that individual or a third person, 
     or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind.
     
(Emphases added).  This definition, in turn, borrows exten-
sively from the 1984 United Nations Convention Against 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment 
or Punishment, G.A. Res. 39/46, U.N. GAOR, 39th Sess., 
Supp. No. 51, at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984) ("Torture 
Convention"), which the United States signed in 1988 and 
ratified two years later.  See H.R. Rep. No. 102-367, Part 1, at 
4-5 (1991).  Indeed, the TVPA was passed in part to fulfill the 
Convention's mandate that ratifying nations take action to 
ensure that torturers are held legally accountable for their 
actions.  See S. Rep. No. 102-249, at 3 (1991).

     While the legislative history of AEDPA gives no indication 
as to how broadly the definition of torture was intended to 
sweep, Congress considered this question both in ratifying 
the Torture Convention and in enacting the TVPA.  See Beth 
Stephens & Michael Ratner, International Human Rights 
Litigation in U.S. Courts 64 & n.4 (1996).  Specifically, the 
drafting histories of both the Convention and the statute 
address two ambiguities lurking in that definition that must 
be confronted as we consider whether Price and Frey have 
alleged facts sufficient to bring this case within the FSIA's 
definition of torture.  The first concerns the meaning of 
"severe":  how much actual pain or suffering must defendants 
inflict before their conduct rises to the level of torture?  The 
second involves the "for such purposes" language:  what must 
plaintiffs prove about the motivation for the alleged torture if 
they hope to deprive foreign states of their immunity?

     The severity requirement is crucial to ensuring that the 
conduct proscribed by the Convention and the TVPA is 
sufficiently extreme and outrageous to warrant the universal 
condemnation that the term "torture" both connotes and 
invokes.  See David P. Stewart, The Torture Convention and 
the Reception of International Criminal Law Within the 
United States, 15 Nova L. Rev. 449, 455 (1991) (noting that 
what the Convention forbade was likely already illegal under 
most domestic legal systems);  Filartiga v. Pena-Irala, 630 
F.2d 876, 890 (2d Cir. 1980) ("Among the rights universally 
proclaimed by all nations ... is the right to be free of 
physical torture.");  S. Rep. No. 102-249, at 3 ("Official torture 
... violate[s] standards accepted by virtually every nation.").  
The drafters of the Convention, as well as the Reagan Admin-
istration that signed it, the Bush Administration that submit-
ted it to Congress, and the Senate that ultimately ratified it, 
therefore all sought to ensure that "only acts of a certain 
gravity shall be considered to constitute torture."  J. Herman 
Burgers & Hans Danelius, The United Nations Convention 
against Torture 117 (1988);  see also S. Exec. Rep. No. 101-30, 
at 14 (1990) ("The term 'torture,' in the United States and 
international usage, is usually reserved for extreme, deliber-
ate and unusually cruel practices, for example, sustained 
systematic beating, application of electric currents to sensi-
tive parts of the body, and tying up or hanging in positions 
that cause extreme pain.").

     The critical issue is the degree of pain and suffering that 
the alleged torturer intended to, and actually did, inflict upon 
the victim.  The more intense, lasting, or heinous the agony, 
the more likely it is to be torture.  See S. Exec. Rep. No. 101-
30, at 15 ("The United States understands that, in order to 
constitute torture, an act must be a deliberate and calculated 
act of an extremely cruel and inhuman nature, specifically 
intended to inflict excruciating and agonizing physical or 
mental pain or suffering.") (internal quotation marks omit-

ted).  This understanding thus makes clear that torture does 
not automatically result whenever individuals in official custo-
dy are subjected even to direct physical assault.  Not all 
police brutality, not every instance of excessive force used 
against prisoners, is torture under the FSIA.

     As to the purposes for which abuse must be inflicted, it is 
clear from the text of the TVPA that the list of purposes 
provided was not meant to be exhaustive.  See Murphy, 
supra, at 27.  Instead, this list was included in order to 
reinforce that torture requires acts both intentional and mali-
cious, and to illustrate the common motivations that cause 
individuals to engage in torture.  See S. Exec. Rep. No. 101-30, 
at 14.  The "for such purposes" language thus suggests that 
any non-enumerated purpose would have to be similar in 
nature to those mentioned in order to elevate an act of 
violence into an act of torture.  See Burgers & Danelius 118-
19 (suggesting that there must be some, even if remote, 
connection with the interests or policies of the State).  More-
over, this requirement ensures that, whatever its specific 
goal, torture can occur under the FSIA only when the pro-
duction of pain is purposive, and not merely haphazard.  In 
order to lose its sovereign immunity, a foreign state must 
impose suffering cruelly and deliberately, rather than as the 
unforeseen or unavoidable incident of some legitimate end.

     When reviewing a plaintiff's unchallenged factual allega-
tions to determine whether they are sufficient to deprive a 
foreign state defendant of sovereign immunity, we assume 
those allegations to be true.  Foremost-McKesson, 905 F.2d 
at 440 n.3.  Thus, where the defendant contests only the legal 
sufficiency of plaintiff's jurisdictional claims, the standard is 
similar to that of Rule 12(b)(6), under which dismissal is 
warranted if no plausible inferences can be drawn from the 
facts alleged that, if proven, would provide grounds for relief.  
See Browning v. Clinton, No. 01-5050, slip op. at 5-6 (D.C. 
Cir. June 11, 2002).  A claimant need not set out all of the 
precise facts on which the claim is based in order to survive a 

motion to dismiss.  Sinclair v. Kleindienst, 711 F.2d 291, 293 
(D.C. Cir. 1983).  However, in light of the serious and far-
reaching implications of the 1996 FSIA amendments, it is 
especially important for the courts to ensure that foreign 
states are not stripped of their sovereign immunity unless 
they have been charged with actual torture, and not mere 
police brutality.

     In this case, plaintiffs' complaint offers no useful details 
about the nature of the kicking, clubbing, and beatings that 
plaintiffs allegedly suffered.  As a result, there is no way to 
determine from the present complaint the severity of plain-
tiffs' alleged beatings - including their frequency, duration, 
the parts of the body at which they were aimed, and the 
weapons used to carry them out - in order to ensure that 
they satisfy the TVPA's rigorous definition of torture.  In 
short, there is no way to discern whether plaintiffs' complaint 
merely alleges police brutality that falls short of torture.  
Thus, the facts pleaded do not reasonably support a finding 
that the physical abuse allegedly inflicted by Libya evinced 
the degree of cruelty necessary to reach a level of torture.

     Furthermore, the present complaint says virtually nothing 
about the purpose of the alleged torture.  Plaintiffs seemingly 
have left it for the courts to conjure some illicit purpose to fill 
in this pleading gap.  Obviously this will not do.

     In sum, plaintiffs' allegations of torture as presently stated 
are insufficient to survive defendant's motion to dismiss.  
Plaintiffs must allege more than that they were abused.  
They must demonstrate in their pleadings that Libya's con-
duct rose to such a level of depravity and caused them such 
intense pain and suffering as to be properly classified as 
torture.  Although it is far from certain, their complaint hints 
that they might be able to state a proper claim for torture 
under the FSIA.  Accordingly, we will remand the case to the 
District Court to allow plaintiffs to attempt to amend their 
complaint in an effort to satisfy TVPA's stringent definition of 
torture.

F.   Hostage Taking

     As with torture, the FSIA draws its definition of "hostage 
taking" from an exogenous legal source, here article 1 of the 
International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages.  
See 28 U.S.C. s 1605(e)(2).  This provision reads as follows:

     Any person who seizes or detains and threatens to kill, to 
     injure or to continue to detain another person in order to 
     compel a third party, namely, a State, an international 
     governmental organization, a natural or judicial person 
     or a group of persons, to do or abstain from doing any 
     act as an explicit or implicit condition for the release of 
     the hostage commits the offense of taking hostages within 
     the meaning of the Convention.
     
(Emphases added).  Under no reasonable reading of the 
plaintiffs' complaint does their admittedly unpleasant impris-
onment qualify as hostage taking so defined.

     The Convention does not proscribe all detentions, but in-
stead focuses on the intended purpose of the detention.  In 
this case, the complaint asserts only that Libya incarcerated 
Price and Frey "for the purpose of demonstrating Defen-
dant's support of the government of Iran which held hostages 
in the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran."  Compl., at p 7.  Such 
motivation does not satisfy the Convention's intentionality 
requirement.  The definition speaks in terms of conditions of 
release;  the defendant must have detained the victim in order 
to compel some particular result, specifically to force a third 
party either to perform an act otherwise unplanned or to 
abstain from one otherwise contemplated so as to ensure the 
freedom of the detainee.  Accordingly, detention for the goal 
of expressing support for illegal behavior - even for behavior 
that would itself qualify as "hostage taking" - does not 
constitute the taking of hostages within the meaning of the 
FSIA.

     In this case, the plaintiffs have suggested no demand for 
quid pro quo terms between the government of Libya and a 
third party whereby Price and Frey would have been re-
leased upon the performance or non-performance of any 
action by that third party.  Indeed, even when read most 
favorably to them, their complaint points to no nexus between 
what happened to them in Libya and any concrete concession 
that Libya may have hoped to extract from the outside world.  
The one purpose that plaintiffs have alleged is plainly inade-
quate, and they have advanced no others.  Their allegation 
thus falls short of the standard for hostage taking under 
s 1605(a)(7).

     For these reasons, Libya cannot be stripped of its sover-
eign immunity based on plaintiffs' allegation of hostage tak-
ing.  The District Court thus erred in refusing to dismiss this 
count.  Accordingly, we reverse on this point.

G.   Personal Jurisdiction

     The last question that we face is whether the Due Process 
Clause is offended by the District Court's assertion of person-
al jurisdiction over Libya.  If, on remand, plaintiffs can state 
a claim of torture under s 1605(a)(7) sufficient to survive a 
motion to dismiss, and if they have properly served process 
on the defendant, personal jurisdiction will be established 
under the FSIA.  See 28 U.S.C. s 1330(b);  Practical Con-
cepts, Inc. v. Republic of Bolivia, 811 F.2d 1543, 1548 n.11 
(D.C. Cir. 1987) (noting that under the FSIA, "subject matter 
jurisdiction plus service of process equals personal jurisdic-
tion").  However, it is well-settled that "a statute cannot 
grant personal jurisdiction where the Constitution forbids it."  
Gilson v. Republic of Ireland, 682 F.2d 1022, 1028 (D.C. Cir. 
1982).

     The Due Process Clause requires that if the defendant "be 
not present within the territory of the forum, he have certain 
minimum contacts with it such that the maintenance of the 
suit does not offend 'traditional notions of fair play and 
substantial justice.' "  Int'l Shoe, 326 U.S. at 316 (quoting 
Milliken v. Meyer, 311 U.S. 457, 463 (1940)).  In the absence 

of such contacts, the liberty interest protected by the Due 
Process Clause shields the defendant from the burden of 
litigating in that forum.  See Burger King Corp. v. Rudzew-
icz, 471 U.S. 462, 471-72 (1985).  Libya argues that foreign 
states, no less than private individuals and corporations, are 
protected by these constitutional strictures.

     In the present case, it is undisputed that Libya has no 
connection with the District of Columbia or with the United 
States, except for the alleged fact that it tortured two Ameri-
can citizens in Libya.  This would be insufficient to satisfy the 
usual "minimum contacts" requirement.  See, e.g., IMO In-
dus., Inc. v. Kiekert AG, 155 F.3d 254, 265-66 (3d Cir. 1998) 
(holding that minimum contacts do not exist in an intentional 
tort case unless the defendant "expressly aimed its tortious 
conduct at the forum";  the mere fact that the harm caused by 
the defendant was primarily felt in the forum because the 
plaintiff resided there is not enough);  Wallace v. Herron, 778 
F.2d 391, 394-95 (7th Cir. 1985) (rejecting the suggestion that 
"any plaintiff may hale any defendant into court in the 
plaintiff's home state, where the defendant has no contacts, 
merely by asserting that the defendant has committed an 
intentional tort against the plaintiff").  Therefore, Libya ar-
gues, the Fifth Amendment precludes the exercise of personal 
jurisdiction in this case.

     Implicit in Libya's argument is the claim that a foreign 
state is a "person" within the meaning of the Due Process 
Clause.  See U.S. Const. amend. V ("nor shall any person ... 
be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process 
of law").  In previous cases, we have proceeded as if this 
proposition were true, but we have never so held.  See, e.g., 
Gilson, 682 F.2d at 1028 (finding that Ireland had sufficient 
contacts with the United States to allow for personal jurisdic-
tion without specifically addressing whether it was a person 
protected by the Fifth Amendment);  Foremost-McKesson, 
905 F.2d at 442 n.10 (noting, in a case against Iran, the Fifth 
Amendment's minimum contacts requirements, but ultimately 

finding that the defendant had waived any such constitutional 
defense to personal jurisdiction).

     Moreover, both the Supreme Court and this court have 
expressly indicated that the constitutional issue remains an 
open one.  See Republic of Argentina v. Weltover, Inc., 504 
U.S. 607, 619 (1992) (assuming without deciding that a foreign 
state is a person for purposes of the Due Process Clause);  
Creighton Ltd. v. Gov't of Qatar, 181 F.3d 118, 124-25 (D.C. 
Cir. 1999) (noting that the view that foreign states are 
entitled to constitutional due process is merely an "unchal-
lenged assumption").  Now, however, this assumption has 
been challenged.  And, with the issue directly before us, we 
hold that foreign states are not "persons" protected by the 
Fifth Amendment.

     Our conclusion is based on a number of considerations.  
First, as the Supreme Court noted in Will v. Michigan 
Department of State Police, there is an "often-expressed 
understanding that 'in common usage, the term "person" does 
not include the sovereign, and statutes employing the word 
are ordinarily construed to exclude it.' "  491 U.S. 58, 64 
(1989) (quoting Wilson v. Omaha Indian Tribe, 442 U.S. 653, 
667 (1979)).  In the context of a specific statute, "person" may 
be given a broader meaning.  Compare Will, 491 U.S. at 71 
(holding that a State is not a "person" within the meaning of 
42 U.S.C. s 1983), and Breard v. Greene, 523 U.S. 371, 378 
(1998) (holding that a foreign state is not a "person" entitled 
to bring suit under s 1983), with Pfizer v. Government of 
India, 434 U.S. 308, 320 (1978) (holding that a foreign state is 
a "person" entitled to sue under the federal antitrust laws).  
In this case, however, what is at issue is the meaning of the 
Due Process Clause, not a statutory provision.  And, on this 
score, it is highly significant that in South Carolina v. Kat-
zenbach, 383 U.S. 301, 323-24 (1966), the Court was unequivo-
cal in holding that "the word 'person' in the context of the 
Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment cannot, by any 
reasonable mode of interpretation, be expanded to encompass 
the States of the Union."  Therefore, absent some compelling 
reason to treat foreign sovereigns more favorably than 

"States of the Union," it would make no sense to view foreign 
states as "persons" under the Due Process Clause.

     Indeed, we think it would be highly incongruous to afford 
greater Fifth Amendment rights to foreign nations, who are 
entirely alien to our constitutional system, than are afforded 
to the states, who help make up the very fabric of that 
system.  The States are integral and active participants in 
the Constitution's infrastructure, and they both derive impor-
tant benefits and must abide by significant limitations as a 
consequence of their participation.  Compare U.S. Const. art. 
IV s 4 ("The United States shall guarantee to every State in 
this Union a Republican form of Government, and shall 
protect each of them against Invasion;"), with id. at art. VI, 
cl. 2 ("This Constitution ... shall be the supreme Law of the 
Land;  and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, 
any Thing in the Constitution or Law of the State to the 
Contrary notwithstanding."), and id. at art. 1 s 10 (listing 
specific acts prohibited to the States).  However, a "foreign 
State lies outside the structure of the Union."  Principality 
of Monaco v. Mississippi, 292 U.S. 313, 330 (1934).  Given 
this fundamental dichotomy between the constitutional status 
of foreign states and States within the United States, we 
cannot perceive why the former should be permitted to avail 
themselves of the fundamental safeguards of the Due Process 
Clause if the latter may not.

     It is especially significant that the Constitution does not 
limit foreign states, as it does the States of the Union, in the 
power they can exert against the United States or its govern-
ment.  Indeed, the federal government cannot invoke the 
Constitution, save possibly to declare war, to prevent a for-
eign nation from taking action adverse to the interest of the 
United States or to compel it to take action favorable to the 
United States.  It would therefore be quite strange to inter-
pret the Due Process Clause as conferring upon Libya rights 
and protections against the power of federal government.

     In addition to text and structure, history and tradition 
support our conclusion.  Never has the Supreme Court sug-

gested that foreign nations enjoy rights derived from the 
Constitution, or that they can use such rights to shield 
themselves from adverse actions taken by the United States.  
This is not surprising.  Relations between nations in the 
international community are seldom governed by the domes-
tic law of one state or the other.  See Lori Fisler Damrosch, 
Foreign States and the Constitution, 73 Va. L. Rev. 483, 520 
(1987) ("The most a foreign state can demand is that other 
states observe international law, not that they enforce provi-
sions of domestic law.").  And legal disputes between the 
United States and foreign governments are not mediated 
through the Constitution.  See Nat'l Council of Resistance of 
Iran v. Dep't of State, 251 F.3d 192, 202 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
(recognizing that "sovereign states interact with each other 
through diplomacy and even coercion in ways not affected by 
constitutional protections such as the Due Process Clause").

     Rather, the federal judiciary has relied on principles of 
comity and international law to protect foreign governments 
in the American legal system.  This approach recognizes the 
reality that foreign nations are external to the constitutional 
compact, and it preserves the flexibility and discretion of the 
political branches in conducting this country's relations with 
other nations.  See Damrosch, supra, at 521 (describing the 
ways in which "the recognition that foreign states and the 
United States interact as juridical equals on the level of 
international law and diplomacy outside the constitutional 
system, with rights and duties on the international plane not 
deriving from the Constitution, has shaped the Supreme 
Court's approach to various problems of domestic law");  
Harisiades v. Shaughnessy, 342 U.S. 580, 588-89 (1952) (mat-
ters such as the conduct of foreign relations are "so exclusive-
ly entrusted to the political branches of government as to be 
largely immune from judicial inquiry or interference").

     An example of this approach is seen with respect to the 
right of access to the courts.  Private individuals have "a 
constitutional right of access to the courts," Bounds v. Smith, 
430 U.S. 817, 821 (1977), that is, the "right to sue and defend 

in the courts," Chambers v. Baltimore & Ohio R.R., 207 U.S. 
142, 148 (1907).  See also Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539, 
579 (1974) (holding that this right derives from the Due 
Process Clause).  Foreign states also have been afforded the 
right to use the courts of the United States to prosecute civil 
claims "upon the same basis as a domestic corporation or 
individual might do."  Pfizer, 434 U.S. at 318-19;  see also 
Principality of Monaco, 292 U.S. at 323 n.2 ("There is no 
question but that foreign States may sue private parties in 
the federal courts.").  But the right of access enjoyed by 
foreign nations derives from "principles of comity," and it is 
"neither a matter of absolute obligation, on the one hand, nor 
of mere courtesy and good will, upon the other."  Banco 
Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino, 376 U.S. 398, 408-09 (1964) 
(quoting Hilton v. Guyot, 159 U.S. 113, 164-65 (1895)).  This 
privilege is not to be denied lightly, because to do so "would 
manifest a want of comity and friendly feeling."  The Sap-
phire, 78 U.S. (11 Wall.) 164, 167 (1870).  Nonetheless, for-
eign nations do not have a constitutional right of access to 
the courts of the United States.  Indeed, only nations recog-
nized by and at peace with the United States may avail 
themselves of our courts, and "it is within the exclusive power 
of the Executive Branch to determine which nations are 
entitled to sue."  Pfizer, 434 U.S. at 319-20 (noting that the 
rule is one of "complete judicial deference to the Executive 
Branch").

     While we recognize that the present case implicates not the 
right of affirmative access to the courts, but rather its 
reverse - the right not to be haled into court - this does not 
change the analysis under the Due Process Clause.  The 
personal jurisdiction requirement is not a structural limitation 
on the power of courts.  Rather, "[t]he personal jurisdiction 
requirement recognizes and protects an individual liberty 
interest.  It represents a restriction on judicial power not as 
a matter of sovereignty, but as a matter of individual liberty."  
Ins. Corp. of Ire. v. Compagnie des Bauxites de Guinee, 456 
U.S. 694, 702 (1982).  This makes sense, because "[t]he 
requirement that a court have personal jurisdiction flows not 

from Art. III, but from the Due Process Clause."  Id.  And 
the "core of the concept" of due process is "to secure the 
individual from the arbitrary exercise of the powers of gov-
ernment, unrestrained by the established principles of private 
right and distributive justice."  County of Sacramento v. 
Lewis, 523 U.S. 833, 845-46 (1998).  It is thus quite clear that 
the constitutional law of personal jurisdiction secures inter-
ests quite different from those at stake when a sovereign 
nation such as Libya seeks to defend itself against the 
prerogatives of a rival government.  It therefore follows that 
foreign states stand on a fundamentally different footing than 
do private litigants who are compelled to defend themselves 
in American courts.

     Unlike private entities, foreign nations are the juridical 
equals of the government that seeks to assert jurisdiction 
over them.  See Damrosch, supra, at 519-20 & n.150 
("Foreign states exist within the United States as coequal 
sovereigns on the international plane.  International law 
recognizes the juridical equality of each member of the in-
ternational community, and establishes for all states a ser-
ies of rights and duties flowing from this principle.").  If 
they believe that they have suffered harm by virtue of 
being haled into court in the United States, foreign states 
have available to them a panoply of mechanisms in the in-
ternational arena through which to seek vindication or re-
dress.  Id. at 525. These mechanisms, not the Constitution, 
set the terms by which sovereigns relate to one another.  
We would break with the norms of international law and 
the structure of domestic law were we to extend a consti-
tutional rule meant to protect individual liberty so as to 
frustrate the United States government's clear statutory 
command that Libya be subject to the jurisdiction of the 
federal courts in the circumstances of this case.  The con-
stitutional limits that have been placed on the exercise of 
personal jurisdiction do not limit the prerogative of our 
nation to authorize legal action against another sovereign.  
Conferring on Libya the due process trump that it seeks 

against the authority of the United States is thus not only 
textually and structurally unsound, but it would distort the 
very notion of "liberty" that underlies the Due Process 
Clause.

     The distinction between privileges conferred on foreign 
states without reference to the Constitution and correspond-
ing rights enjoyed by other entities because of the Constitu-
tion extends to sovereign immunity itself.  The Supreme 
Court has made clear that Congress lacks the power under 
Article I to abrogate the sovereign immunity of the States of 
the Union.  Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 712 (1999);  Semi-
nole Tribe of Fl. v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44, 72-73 (1996).  Such 
immunity from suit, if not created by the Constitution, see 
Blatchford v. Native Village of Noatak, 501 U.S. 775, 779 
(1991), is at least protected by it.  Thus, the national govern-
ment is prevented from undoing this immunity except under 
limited and unusual circumstances.  See, e.g., Bd. of Trustees 
of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356 (2001).  In contrast, 
however, nothing in the Constitution limits congressional 
authority to modify or remove the sovereign immunity that 
foreign states otherwise enjoy.  Instead, like the right of 
access to courts, such immunity is "a matter of grace and 
comity on the part of the United States, and not a restriction 
imposed by the Constitution."  Verlinden, 461 U.S. at 486.

     In short, we are unwilling to interpret the Due Process 
Clause as conferring rights on foreign nations that States of 
the Union do not possess.  Neither the text of the Constitu-
tion, Supreme Court decisions construing the Due Process 
Clause, nor long standing tradition provide a basis for extend-
ing the reach of this constitutional provision for the benefit of 
foreign states.

     Finally, it is worth noting that serious practical problems 
might arise were we to hold that foreign states may cloak 
themselves in the protections of the Due Process Clause.  
For example, the power of Congress and the President to 

freeze the assets of foreign nations, or to impose economic 
sanctions on them, could be challenged as deprivations of 
property without due process of law.  The courts would be 
called upon to adjudicate these sensitive questions, which in 
turn could tie the hands of the other branches as they sought 
to respond to foreign policy crises.  The Constitution does not 
command this.  See Regan v. Wald, 468 U.S. 222, 242 (1984);  
DKT Mem'l Fund Ltd. v. Agency for Int'l Dev., 887 F.2d 275, 
291 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (describing the need for the nation to 
speak with "a single voice" in foreign affairs);  People's Moja-
hedin Org. of Iran v. Dep't of State, 182 F.3d 17, 22 (D.C. Cir. 
1999) ("No one would suppose that a foreign nation had a due 
process right to notice and a hearing before the Executive 
imposed an embargo on it for the purpose of coercing a 
change in policy.").

     In sum, we hold that the Fifth Amendment poses no 
obstacle to the decision of the United States government to 
subject Libya to personal jurisdiction in the federal courts.  
Our decision on this point reaches only an actual foreign 
government;  we express no view as to whether other entities 
that fall within the FSIA's definition of "foreign state" - 
including corporations in which a foreign state owns a majori-
ty interest, see 28 U.S.C. s 1603(b) - could yet be considered 
persons under the Due Process Clause.  We also note that 
the unavailability of constitutional due process protections will 
not render foreign states helpless when sued in the United 
States, for the doctrine of forum non conveniens remains 
fully applicable in FSIA cases.  See Verlinden, 461 U.S. at 
490 n.15;  Proyecfin de Venezuela, S.A. v. Banco Industrial 
de Venezuela, S.A., 760 F.2d 390, 394 (2d Cir. 1985) (suggest-
ing that the forum non conveniens doctrine helps mitigate 
the concern that "United States courts will become the courts 
of choice for local disputes between foreign plaintiffs and 
foreign sovereign defendants and thus be reduced to interna-
tional courts of claims") (internal quotation marks omitted).

                         III.  Conclusion

     For the reasons given above, we reverse in part and 
remand the case to the District Court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion.

                                                                  