                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 7, 2000   Decided December 12, 2000 

                           No. 99-1450

                           Joe Jacoby, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

             Steamfitters Local Union No. 342 of the 
      United Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and 
            Pipefitting Industry of the United States 
                       and Canada, AFL-CIO 
                            Intervenor

            On Petition for Review of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Dylan B. Carp argued the cause for petitioner.  With him 
on the briefs were Jeffrey L. Rhodes and Glenn M. Taubman.

     Meredith L. Jason, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, 
Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy 
Associate General Counsel and Fred L. Cornnell, Supervisory 
Attorney.

     James B. Coppess argued the cause for intervenor. With 
him on the brief were John L. Anderson and Laurence Gold.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  Under a labor agreement govern-
ing construction work at a refinery jobsite in California, 
Steamfitters Local Union No. 342 held an exclusive right to 
dispatch workers to subcontractor Contra Costa Electric.  
Petitioner Joe Jacoby, a member of the union for 27 years, 
registered for employment through the union's hiring hall;  
due to his skills and experience, his name was placed on the 
highest priority "A" list.  For a period the union mistakenly 
dispatched several lower-priority individuals ahead of Jacoby.  
On discovery of the error, it dispatched Jacoby.  All parties 
agree, for current purposes at least, that the priority mix-up 
was merely negligent, and reflected no intentional wrongdo-
ing.

     Jacoby filed an unfair labor practice charge with the Na-
tional Labor Relations Board, and the Board's General Coun-
sel issued a complaint.  After a hearing an administrative law 
judge found that the union's negligent deviation from estab-
lished hiring hall rules breached its duty of fair representa-
tion and thereby violated ss 8(b)(1)(A) & (2) of the National 
Labor Relations Act as amended (the "NLRA"), 29 U.S.C. 
s 158(b)(1)(A) & (2).  Steamfitters Local No. 342 (Contra 
Costa Electric), 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 10-12 (Dec. 5, 
1995).  The Board reversed, ruling that the union's negli-
gence violated neither the duty of fair representation nor the 
Act.  Steamfitters Local No. 342 (Contra Costa Electric), 329 
N.L.R.B. No. 65 (Sept. 30, 1999) ("Board Decision").  Al-
though the Board agreed that the ALJ had correctly applied 

the Board's previous decision in Iron Workers Local 118 
(California Erectors), 309 N.L.R.B. 808 (1992), it reasoned 
that that decision, as well as the ALJ's findings, were incon-
sistent with the Supreme Court's pronouncements about the 
duty of fair representation in United Steelworkers of America 
v. Rawson, 495 U.S. 362 (1990), and Air Line Pilots Ass'n, 
Int'l v. O'Neill, 499 U.S. 65 (1991).  Board Decision, 329 
N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 2-4.  In addition, the Board found 
that the union's negligent conduct did not, apart from the fair 
representation issue, independently violate the Act.  Id. at 4.

     We have held that the Board's interpretation of the duty of 
fair representation is entitled to deference under Chevron, 
U.S.A., Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837 (1984), when the Board 
enforces that duty as part of its jurisdiction to identify and 
remedy unfair labor practices.  Ferriso v. NLRB, 125 F.3d 
865, 869 (D.C. Cir. 1997);  Finerty v. NLRB, 113 F.3d 1288, 
1291 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  We shall explain why this is so despite 
the fact that the duty also exists as a judge-made, court-
enforced duty.  But Chevron does not help an agency that 
rests its decision on a misinterpretation of Supreme Court 
precedent, as the Board did here.  Accordingly, we reverse 
and remand the case to the Board for it to address the duty 
of fair representation anew.

     In addition, the Board's conclusion that the union's negli-
gence did not independently violate the Act is, as we explain 
below, intertwined with the issue of the duty of fair represen-
tation.  Accordingly, we find that it would be premature to 
rule on it before the Board has had an opportunity to revisit 
the question on remand.

                             *  *  *

     The duty of fair representation originated in the context of 
the Railway Labor Act, judicially inferred from that statute 
and enforceable in the courts.  See Steele v. Louisville & 
Nashville R.R. Co., 323 U.S. 192 (1944).  The Supreme Court 
extended the Steele principle to the NLRA in Ford Motor Co. 
v. Huffman, 345 U.S. 330 (1952), finding that the statutory 
authority of unions as exclusive bargaining representatives 

under Sec. 9(a) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. s 159(a), also gave 
rise to a duty of fair representation, requiring unions to 
"make an honest effort to serve the interests of all [bargain-
ing unit] members, without hostility to any."  Id. at 337.  A 
union breaches this duty when its actions are "arbitrary, 
discriminatory, or in bad faith."  Vaca v. Sipes, 386 U.S. 171, 
190 (1967).

     Originally, the duty was the exclusive province of the 
courts, falling within the federal courts' general federal ques-
tion jurisdiction.  See Syres v. Oil, Chemical and Atomic 
Workers Local 23, 350 U.S. 892 (1955)(mem.), rev'g 223 F.2d 
739 (5th Cir. 1955).  Beginning with its decision in Miranda 
Fuel Co., 140 N.L.R.B. 181 (1962), however, the NLRB has 
enforced the duty of fair representation itself as part of its 
authority to identify and remedy unfair labor practices.  We 
have upheld this branch of the Board's unfair labor practice 
jurisdiction.  See Plumbers & Pipe Fitters Local Union No. 
32 v. NLRB, 50 F.3d 29, 31-32 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  Truck 
Drivers and Helpers, Local Union 568 v. NLRB, 379 F.2d 
137, 141-42 (D.C. Cir. 1967).

     At the same time, the Supreme Court refused to find that 
the Board's enforcement of the duty of fair representation 
preempted judicial jurisdiction over the duty of fair represen-
tation inferred from the NLRA.  Vaca v. Sipes, 386 U.S. 171, 
183, 188 (1967).  See also Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild, 
Inc., 525 U.S. 33, 49 (1998);  Breininger v. Sheet Metal 
Workers Int'l Ass'n Local No. 6, 493 U.S. 67, 74-75 (1989).  
As a result the duty is subject to a kind of dyarchy.  The 
Board is entitled to Chevron deference when it interprets the 
duty as part of its unfair labor practice jurisdiction, yet many 
cases involving the duty continue to originate in the courts.  
See, e.g., Air Line Pilots Ass'n, Int'l v. O'Neill, 499 U.S. 65 
(1991);  United Steelworkers of America v. Rawson, 495 U.S. 
362 (1990).

     And it is important to emphasize that for these court-
adjudicated cases the Board's definition of the duty of fair 
representation for purposes of adjudicating unfair labor prac-
tices appears only marginally relevant.  The Supreme Court 

in Breininger explicitly "reject[ed] the proposition that the 
duty of fair representation should be defined in terms of what 
is an unfair labor practice."  493 U.S. at 86.  "[T]here is no 
reason to equate breaches of the duty of fair representation 
with unfair labor practices."  Id.  Thus, for cases arising in 
the courts, NLRB interpretations are relevant for what they 
may contribute on their intellectual merits, enjoying defer-
ence to the extent of their "power to persuade."  Skidmore v. 
Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944).  Nonetheless, as we 
explained, the Board's decision here is reviewable under the 
Chevron doctrine.

     The duty of fair representation clearly extends to a union's 
operation of an exclusive hiring hall.  See Breininger, 493 
U.S. at 87-88 (1989).  Prior decisions of the Board described 
the duty, in the hiring hall context, in rather demanding 
terms.  Ruling in favor of the Board in such a case, we said:

     [A]ny departure from established exclusive hiring hall 
     procedures which results in a denial of employment to an 
     applicant falls within that class of discrimination which 
     inherently encourages union membership, breaches the 
     duty of fair representation owed to all hiring hall users, 
     and violates Section 8(b)(1)(A) and (2) [of the NLRA], 
     unless the union demonstrates that its interference with 
     employment was pursuant to a valid union-security 
     clause or was necessary to the effective performance of 
     its representative function.
     
Boilermakers Local No. 374 v. NLRB, 852 F.2d 1353, 1358 
(D.C. Cir. 1988) (quoting Teamsters Local 519 (Rust Engi-
neering), 276 N.L.R.B. 898, 908 (1985)).  And we also said 
that breach of the duty required no evidence of intent to 
discriminate:

     No specific intent to discriminate on the basis of union 
     membership or activity is required;  a union commits an 
     unfair labor practice if it administers the exclusive hall 
     arbitrarily or without reference to objective criteria and 
     thereby affects the employment status of those it is 
     expected to represent.  "By wielding its power arbitrari-
     ly, the Union gives notice that its favor must be curried, 
     
     thereby encouraging membership and unquestioned 
     adherence to its policies."
     
Id. (quoting NLRB v. International Ass'n of Bridge, Struc-
tural & Ornamental Iron Workers, Local 433, 600 F.2d 770, 
777 (9th Cir. 1979)).

     The Board itself, applying the standard that we upheld in 
Boilermakers, found a breach of the duty (and an unfair labor 
practice) in circumstances virtually identical to the present 
ones.  In Iron Workers Local 118 (California Erectors), 309 
N.L.R.B. 808 (1992), it ruled that union officials breached 
their duty of representation when, "through mistake and 
inadvertence," they failed to dispatch a worker to a job to 
which he should have been referred under exclusive hiring 
hall procedures.  Id. at 812.  Unsurprisingly, the ALJ applied 
California Erectors in its decision below.

     In reversing the ALJ, the Board here acknowledged that 
her reading of that case was "correct," but found that contin-
ued application of California Erectors would be inconsistent 
with the Supreme Court decisions in United Steelworkers of 
America v. Rawson, 495 U.S. 362 (1990), and Air Line Pilots 
Ass'n, Int'l v. O'Neill, 499 U.S. 65 (1991).  Board Decision, 
329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 2.

     There is undoubtedly language in these Supreme Court 
decisions supporting the Board's view.  Both explicate the 
standard earlier laid down by the Court in Vaca v. Sipes, 386 
U.S. 171 (1967), which said that a union breached the duty of 
fair representation when its actions were "arbitrary, discrimi-
natory, or in bad faith."  Id. at 190.  In Rawson, the Court 
rejected a claim that a union breached the duty when it 
negligently performed mine-safety related duties pursuant to 
a collective bargaining agreement.  The Court observed that 
"[t]he courts have in general assumed that mere negligence, 
even in the enforcement of a collective-bargaining agreement, 
would not state a claim for breach of the duty of fair 
representation, and we endorse that view today."  495 U.S. at 
372-73.

     O'Neill involved a claim that the Air Line Pilots Association 
breached its duty of fair representation in its negotiation and 
acceptance of a strike settlement.  The Court held that the 
Vaca standard "applies to all union activity, including contract 
negotiation."  499 U.S. at 67.  Moreover, it explained that "a 
union's actions are arbitrary only if, in light of the factual and 
legal landscape at the time of the union's actions, the union's 
behavior is so far outside a 'wide range of reasonableness' as 
to be irrational."  Id. (quoting Ford Motor Co. v. Huffman, 
345 U.S. 330, 338 (1953)) (internal citation omitted).

     Neither Rawson nor O'Neill specifically concerned the duty 
owed by a union when it operates an exclusive hiring hall.  In 
its decision here, however, the Board reasons that the two 
cases, read together, mandate that merely negligent conduct 
can never breach the duty of representation in any context, 
including that of the hiring hall.  See Board Decision, 329 
N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 2.

     But as Jacoby points out, the Board's reading of Rawson 
and O'Neill cannot be reconciled with our decision in Plumb-
ers & Pipe Fitters.  There we considered and rejected the 
argument that O'Neill undermined the standard governing a 
union's operation of an exclusive hiring hall--specifically the 
principle that a union operate a hiring hall by "reference to 
objective criteria."  50 F.3d at 32-33.  We acknowledged that 
fragments from O'Neill such as the passage quoted above 
might, if read in isolation, support the contention that a 
"highly deferential" standard must be applied to the evalua-
tion of union's actions operating a hiring hall.  50 F.3d at 33.  
But we concluded that the "Court did not intend to weaken 
the standard of review applied to a union's operation of a 
hiring hall."  Id.

     In support of this conclusion we relied on the drastic 
difference in context.  In O'Neill the Court's focus was on 
"protecting the content of negotiated agreements from judi-
cial second-guessing."  Id.  The operation of a hiring hall, by 
contrast, was one "where the union has assumed the role of 
employer, as well as representative, and where the risk of 
judicial second-guessing of a negotiated agreement that was 

of such concern to the Court in O'Neill is simply not present."  
Id.  We also relied on the Supreme Court's decision in 
Breininger, issued only one year before Rawson and two 
years before O'Neill, where the Court said that the imbalance 
of power and possibilities for abuse created by union opera-
tion of a hiring hall were such that "if a union does wield 
additional power in a hiring hall by assuming the employer's 
role, its responsibility to exercise that power fairly increases 
rather than decreases."  Breininger, 493 U.S. at 89 (quoted in 
Plumbers & Pipe Fitters, 50 F.3d at 34).  Thus, we wound 
up, "[w]e remain confident that unions that operate hiring 
halls without objective criteria violate their duty of fair 
representation.  This was the standard we approved in Boil-
ermakers and that the ALJ properly applied in this case.  
Absent clear instructions from the Supreme Court, we decline 
to weaken this principle."  50 F.3d at 34.

     In its decision here, the Board sought to reconcile Brein-
inger's statement that "additional power" entailed increased 
responsibility with its interpretation of Rawson and O'Neill.  
It reasoned that in Breininger the Court was merely reject-
ing the argument that the duty of fair representation did not 
apply at all in the hiring hall context and had meant the 
language about a union's increased responsibility not to refer 
to any heightened degree of duty, but merely to the fact that 
a union "takes on additional responsibilities" when it operates 
a hiring hall.  Board Decision, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. 
at 2.  Nothing in the surrounding language in Breininger 
lends support to this theory.

     The question before us today differs from that in Plumbers 
& Pipe Fitters primarily with regard to two details, both 
ultimately insignificant.  First, this case turns on a different 
aspect of the legal standard defined in Boilermakers.  
Whereas Plumbers & Pipe Fitters involved the operation of a 
hiring hall "without reference to objective criteria," see Boil-
ermakers, 852 F.2d at 1358, the facts here implicate the rule 
precluding departures "from established exclusive hiring hall 
procedures," id.  But this distinction does nothing to help the 
Board's position.  That position is premised on the conclusion 
that O'Neill generally precludes heightened scrutiny in the 

hiring hall context, but in Plumbers & Pipe Fitters we 
concluded that the "Court did not intend to weaken the 
standard of review applied to a union's operation of a hiring 
hall."  50 F.3d at 33.  See also Radio-Electronics Officers 
Union (Radio Officers Union) v. NLRB, 16 F.3d 1280, 1284-
85 (D.C. Cir 1994) (applying Boilermakers's "departure" stan-
dard).

     In addition, one might argue that in the present context the 
Boilermakers standard is more vulnerable to the claim of 
erasure by O'Neill and Rawson, as this case involves a claim 
of negligence, thus encountering Rawson's conclusion that 
"mere negligence" did not violate the duty of fair representa-
tion in the contract administration context.  But the Board's 
application of Rawson relies exclusively on the type of "one-
size-fits-all" theory that Plumbers & Pipe Fitters rejected.  
And, once again, Rawson is not a hiring hall case.  It 
concerned the specific question of whether a union violates 
the duty of fair representation through negligent enforcement 
of a collective bargaining agreement.  Although the Court 
endorsed what courts had "in general assumed," namely, that 
negligence does not "state a claim for breach of the duty of 
fair representation," 495 U.S. at 372-73, it never considered 
the applicability of this principle to the hiring hall.  Thus we 
see no reason why Rawson's general statements on negli-
gence should be regarded as any less subject to qualification 
than O'Neill's statements about "behavior so far outside a 
range of reasonableness as to be irrational."  499 U.S. at 67.

     The Board's decision here seems in effect to recognize its 
contradiction of Plumbers & Pipe Fitters.  Rather than try to 
distinguish the case, the Board simply observed that "the 
circuit court's assertion that the standard for operation of a 
hiring hall can and should be different from the standard for 
contract administration seems to us to be unsupportable."  
Board Decision, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 3 n.19.

     Intervenor's brief relies on two additional decisions issued 
after Plumbers & Pipe Fitters, one from the Supreme Court, 
Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild, Inc., 525 U.S. 33 (1998), and 
one from this circuit, Thomas v. NLRB, 213 F.3d 651 (D.C. 

Cir. 2000).  As neither case concerned nor even mentioned 
the hiring hall context, neither affects our analysis in Plumb-
ers & Pipe Fitters.

     The Board's reliance on its mistaken analysis of O'Neill and 
Rawson compels a remand.  "An agency action, however 
permissible as an exercise of discretion, cannot be sustained 
'where it is based not on the agency's own judgment but on 
an erroneous view of the law.' "  Sea-Land Service, Inc. v. 
Department of Transportation, 137 F.3d 640, 646 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (quoting Prill v. NLRB, 755 F.2d 941, 947 (D.C. Cir. 
1985)).  On remand, the Board must consider whether, given 
the union's heightened duty of fair dealing in the context of a 
hiring hall, the union's negligent failure to adhere to its 
referral standards was an unfair labor practice.  In remand-
ing, of course, we express no opinion on the validity of any 
alternate grounds that the Board might use to overrule 
California Erectors.

     We now turn to the Board's second holding--that the 
union's conduct did not, quite apart from any breach of the 
duty of fair representation, violate ss 8(b)(1)(A) & 8(b)(2) of 
the Act.  The latter bars a union from causing an employer to 
discriminate against an employee in violation of s 8(a)(3), 
which in turn bars an employer's discrimination against an 
employee "to encourage or discourage union membership."  
A violation of s 8(b)(2) would derivatively violate 
s 8(b)(1)(A)'s ban on union restraint of employees in the 
exercise of their rights under s 7 of the Act.  Board Deci-
sion, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 4;  see also id. at 8 
(Member Brame, dissenting);  Radio Officers' Union of Com-
mercial Telegraphers Union v. NLRB, 347 U.S. 17, 42 (1954).

     The Board in effect has said that its rationale in Boiler-
makers is inapplicable to this context.  There we upheld its 
finding that "[a]ny departure from established exclusive hir-
ing hall procedures which results in a denial of employment to 
an applicant falls within that class of discrimination which 
inherently encourages union membership," and thereby vio-
lates ss 8(b)(1)(A) and (2) of the Act.  852 F.2d at 1358.  And 
we endorsed its underlying rationale:  "By wielding its power 

arbitrarily, the Union gives notice that its favor must be 
curried, thereby encouraging membership and unquestioned 
adherence to its policies."  Id.  Here the Board reasoned:

     While this reasoning makes sense when applied to the 
     volitional actions of union officials, it is unpersuasive 
     when applied to simple mistakes.  When as in this case, a 
     union officer in charge of referrals intends to follow the 
     prescribed procedures and thinks he has done so, his 
     inadvertent failure to do so, even to the detriment of an 
     applicant, simply does not carry the message that appli-
     cants had better stay in the good graces of the union if 
     they want to ensure fair treatment in referrals.
     
Board Decision, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 4.

     Given the focus of s 8(b)(2) on discrimination, we cannot 
fault the Board's view that a purely negligent breach of the 
rules would lack the signaling effect that the provision, and 
the Board, sought to avoid.  But the Board's analysis is 
complicated by its additional holding that this approach does 
not contradict any of its earlier decisions--a statement that, if 
true, renders inapplicable the Board's duty to give a "rea-
soned justification for any departure from its prior policies or 
practices."  Pittsburgh Press Co. v. NLRB, 977 F.2d 652, 655 
(D.C. Cir. 1992) (citing Motor Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n v. State 
Farm Mut. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 57 (1983)).  Given that the 
underlying theory in California Erectors (which the Board 
does explicitly overrule) and other duty of fair representation 
cases is that breaches of the duty are themselves violations of 
ss 8(b)(1)(A) & (2), see, e.g., California Erectors, 309 
N.L.R.B. at 811, 812 (treating duty of fair representation 
breach as a violation of ss 8(b)(1)(A) and (2)), the Board in 
essence argues that the standard for judging violations of the 
same statutory provisions may depend upon whether or not a 
complaint or ruling specifically invokes the magic words "duty 
of fair representation."  The Board does not cite, and we have 
been unable to find, any evidence that in hiring hall cases the 
Board has ever applied different standards depending on 
whether the complaint invoked the duty of fair representation 
or not.  See, e.g., Laborers Local No. 135 (Bechtel Corp.), 271 

N.L.R.B. 777, 780 (1984) (cited by the Board in the non-duty 
of fair representation context, see Board Decision, 329 
N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 4 & n.26, and holding that "[a] 
departure from established exclusive hiring hall procedures 
that results in a denial of employment to any applicant 
inherently encourages union membership and therefore vio-
lates Section 8(b)(1)(A) and (2) without regard to the presence 
of unlawful motivation.")  Rather, the Board appears merely 
to argue that in cases in which it has found a violation of 
ss 8(b)(1)(A) & (2) without explicitly invoking the duty of fair 
representation, the facts have never involved purely negligent 
departures from exclusive hiring hall rules.  See id.

     At the time of the Board's decision, of course, the effect of 
its holding regarding these "independent" violations of 
ss 8(b)(1)(A) & (2) was to ensure that, in the relevant con-
text, the statute imposed no broader liability independent of 
the duty of fair representation than as construed with that 
duty.  Our reversal on the duty of fair representation theory 
now puts the question in a different light.  If, on remand, the 
Board again decides to overrule California Erectors, it will 
need to provide a reasoned justification beyond its current 
theory of compulsion by the Supreme Court--and any suc-
cessful justification is likely to support the Board's more 
general interpretation of the relevant statutory provisions, 
assuming that that interpretation does in fact depart from 
prior Board precedent.  So our remand on the Board's first 
holding makes it, as a practical matter, premature to rule on 
the sufficiency of its second one.

     Similarly, we do not pass judgment on the theory proposed 
by Member Brane in his dissent, to the effect that if Blevins's 
individual negligence did not itself constitute an unfair labor 
practice, then the union's subsequent failure to make Jacoby 
whole did.  Board Decision, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 7 
(Member Brame, dissenting).  The Board refused to consider 
this theory on the grounds that it was raised neither in the 
General Counsel's complaint nor during oral argument, see 
Board Decision, 329 N.L.R.B. No. 65, slip op. at 4 n.27, and 
Jacoby has not properly appealed this ruling.

     For the reasons given we reverse and remand the case to 
the Board.

                                                         So ordered.

                                                            