                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

                    Decided September 7, 2001

                           No. 00-5438

    Alternative Research and Development Foundation, et al., 
                            Appellees

                                v.

                   Ann M. Veneman, Secretary, 
             U.S. Department of Agriculture, et al., 
                            Appellees

          National Association for Biomedical Research, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                          (No. 99cv0581)

                            ---------

                       On Motion to Dismiss

                            ---------

     John Mendelson, III, was on the motion to dismiss filed by 
plaintiffs-appellees Alternative Research and Development 
Foundation, et al.

     Michael Jay Singer and John S. Koppel, Attorneys, U.S. 
Department of Justice, for federal appellees, were on a 
pleading in support of the motion to dismiss.

     Michael P. Socarras and Elliot H. Scherker, for appellant 
National Association for Biomedical Research, were on the 
response to appellees' motion to dismiss.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Chief Judge;  Williams and Randolph, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed Per Curiam.

     Per Curiam:  Alternative Research and Development Foun-
dation filed a petition for rulemaking requesting that the 
Secretary of Agriculture amend the definition of "animal" in 
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Animal Welfare Act 
("Act") to remove the current exclusion of birds, mice, and 
rats bred for use in research.  Under the Act, the Secretary 
of Agriculture is authorized to promulgate standards and 
other requirements to govern the handling, care, and treat-
ment of animals by dealers, research facilities, and exhibitors.  
7 U.S.C. s 2143(a)(1).  On January 28, 1999, the United 
States Department of Agriculture ("USDA") published the 
petition and requested comments.  See 64 Fed. Reg. 4356 
(1999).  While its agency petition was pending, Alternative 
Research and Development Foundation, as well as In Vitro 
International, and Kristine Gausz (collectively, "Alternative 
Research") filed a complaint for declaratory and injunctive 
relief in the district court, alleging that the USDA's exclusion 
of birds, rats, and mice from the definition of "animal" in 9 
C.F.R. s 1.1 violates the Act.  It sought an order enjoining 
the exclusion and directing USDA to amend the regulation by 
eliminating the exclusion.

     After the district court denied a motion to dismiss filed by 
USDA, see Alternative Research v. Glickman, 101 F. Supp. 
2d 7, 11-14 (D.D.C. 2000), the National Association for 
Biomedical Research ("NABR"), an association engaged in 
research using birds, rats, and mice, sought intervention as of 
right or, alternatively, permissive intervention.  Subsequent-
ly, Alternative Research and USDA entered into a stipulation 

of dismissal without prejudice under Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 41(a)(1).  The stipulation provides, in pertinent 
part, that USDA will grant Alternative Research's petition for 
rulemaking to amend the USDA regulation, and USDA 
agrees to initiate and complete a rulemaking on the regula-
tion of birds, rats, and mice within a reasonable time.  NABR 
then filed a motion to vacate the stipulation under Rule 
60(b)(4).  After a hearing, the district court filed the stipula-
tion of dismissal and denied the motions to intervene and to 
vacate the stipulation under Rule 60(b), concluding that it 
lacked jurisdiction to decide the motions in light of the 
stipulated dismissal.  Alternatively, the district court denied 
the motion to intervene as of right on the merits, concluding 
that NABR's interests would not be impaired by the proposed 
rulemaking.

     NABR appeals from the stipulated dismissal and the order 
denying intervention and Rule 60(b) relief.  Alternative Re-
search moves to dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction.  
The district court's order denying intervention is appealable, 
but was not in error;  we therefore grant summary affirmance 
of that ruling.  Because intervention was properly denied, 
NABR is not a party to the action and lacks standing to 
appeal from the stipulated dismissal and from the order 
denying relief under Rule 60(b);  we therefore grant the 
motion to dismiss as to those appeals.

                              * * *

     Appealability of denial of intervention as of right. In 
considering whether it had jurisdiction to review an order of 
the district court denying intervention to a would-be interve-
nor, the Supreme Court in Brotherhood of Railroad Train-
men v. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co., 331 U.S. 519, 524 (1947), 
stated:

          Our jurisdiction to consider an appeal from an order 
     denying intervention ... depends upon the nature of the 
     applicant's right to intervene.  If the right is absolute, 
     the order is appealable and we may judge it on its 
     merits....  [O]ur jurisdiction is identified by the neces-
     sary incidents of the right to intervene in each particular 
     
     instance.  We must therefore determine the question of 
     our jurisdiction in this case by examining the character 
     of the [would-be intervenor's] right to intervene in the 
     proceeding....  
     
Id. at 524-25.

     In Brotherhood, and certain subsequent cases, the Supreme 
Court postponed consideration of whether the denial of inter-
vention as of right was appealable until it decided the appeal 
on the merits, thus suggesting that the appealability of the 
denial turned on the merits of the applicant's right to inter-
vene.  See Sam Fox Publishing Co. v. United States, 366 
U.S. 683, 687-88 (1961) (noting that answer to question 
whether court has jurisdiction to review order denying inter-
vention as of right also determines merits of appeal from 
denial);  Brotherhood, 331 U.S. at 524-32;  see also Sutphen 
Estates v. United States, 342 U.S. 19, 20-21 (1951).  Upon 
concluding that intervention as of right was properly denied, 
the Court in Sam Fox Publishing and Sutphen Estates 
dismissed the appeals.  See Sam Fox Publishing, 366 U.S. at 
695;  Sutphen Estates, 342 U.S. at 22-23.  More recently, 
however, the Supreme Court assumed jurisdiction over an 
appeal from the denial of intervention as of right without first 
determining the merits of the applicant's right to intervene, 
and, after concluding that a lower court's denial of interven-
tion was correct, affirmed the decision.  Donaldson v. United 
States, 400 U.S. 517, 530-31 (1971).

     The Court's inconsistent treatment is mirrored in the fed-
eral courts of appeals.  Some decisions make appealability of 
the denial of intervention automatic once the district court 
issues its denial;  that is, the denial is held to be a final order 
that is immediately appealable.  This approach is followed by 
a majority of the circuit courts.  See Cotter v. Massachusetts 
Ass'n of Minority Law Enforcement Officers, 219 F.3d 31, 33 
(1st Cir. 2000);  League of United Latin American Citizens v. 
Wilson, 131 F.3d 1297, 1302 (9th Cir. 1997);  Development 
Finance Corp. v. Alpha Housing & Health Care, Inc., 54 F.3d 
156, 158 (3d Cir. 1995);  Shea v. Angulo, 19 F.3d 343, 344-45 
(7th Cir. 1994);  Corby Recreation, Inc. v. General Electric 

Co., 581 F.2d 175, 176 n.1 (8th Cir. 1978) (per curiam);  
Securities and Exchange Comm'n v. Everest Management 
Corp., 475 F.2d 1236, 1238 n.2 (2d Cir. 1972).  Having con-
cluded that this type of order is appealable, these courts 
review the order denying intervention on the merits and will 
affirm the district court's ruling if they find no error.

     The second approach makes appealability turn on the mer-
its of the motion for intervention as of right, and the denial of 
intervention is not automatically an appealable, final order.  
This approach is followed by the Eleventh Circuit.  See 
EEOC v. Eastern Airlines, Inc., 736 F.2d 635, 637 (11th Cir. 
1984).  Under its self-styled "anomalous rule," the Eleventh 
Circuit has jurisdiction only to decide whether the district 
court was correct in denying intervention.  Under this rule, if 
the circuit court concludes that the district court's order was 
correct, the circuit court's jurisdiction evaporates because the 
ruling was not a final order, and the circuit court must 
dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction.  See id. Converse-
ly, if the circuit court concludes that the district court erred, 
the circuit court retains jurisdiction and reverses the district 
court ruling.  Either way, the circuit court first decides 
whether the motion to intervene was properly denied before 
determining whether the order is appealable.  See id. at 641 
(concluding that trial court's denial of intervention was cor-
rect and that denial was thus not an appealable final order, 
and dismissing appeal);  see United States v. Georgia, 19 F.3d 
1388, 1393 (11th Cir. 1994) (same).

     Our circuit has not been entirely consistent in its approach.  
In Hodgson v. United Mine Workers of America, 473 F.2d 
118, 127 (D.C. Cir. 1972), this court concluded that a district 
court's denial of intervention as of right was "amenable to 
review on the merits" and reversed the district court's denial.  
The court stated that where intervention is sought as of right, 
a denial of the application may be appealed, and that where 
permissive intervention is sought, a denial may only be ap-
pealed where the trial court has clearly abused its discretion.  
See id. And in Moten v. Bricklayers, Masons and Plasterers 
International Union of America, 543 F.2d 224, 228-32 (D.C. 
Cir. 1976), a would-be intervenor challenged the district 

court's orders denying a motion to intervene and approving a 
settlement between the parties.  On appeal, this court noted 
that denial of intervention as of right is an appealable final 
order and affirmed the district court's denial of intervention 
as of right under Rule 24.

     In United States v. American Telephone and Telegraph 
Co., 642 F.2d 1285 (D.C. Cir. 1980), on the other hand, we 
suggested that the appealability of a district court order 
denying intervention as of right depends on whether the 
applicant had a "valid claim" for intervention as of right.  See 
id. at 1290-91.  But in that case the court determined that 
appellant had a right to intervene, and therefore the court did 
not need to reach the issue whether the district court's order 
denying intervention would be appealable in the absence of a 
valid claim.  Id. at 1290-91.

     This court now clarifies that the denial of intervention as of 
right is an appealable, final order regardless of the merits of 
the claim for intervention as of right.  This approach is in 
accord with the majority of circuits and is consistent with two 
recent rulings from this circuit.  In Smoke v. Norton, 252 
F.3d 468, 470 (D.C. Cir. 2001), this court considered an appeal 
from a district court order denying a motion to intervene as 
of right under Rule 24(a).  Appellants moved to intervene 
after the district court granted summary judgment in order 
to appeal from the underlying judgment, which remanded the 
case to the agency.  The district court denied the motion to 
intervene as untimely.  In reversing the district court's deni-
al, this court stated that the denial of intervention as of right 
is an appealable final order because it is conclusive with 
respect to the distinct interest asserted by the movant.  See 
id. (quoting Brotherhood, 331 U.S. at 524).  The court treated 
the denial of intervention as immediately appealable and 
independent from the underlying judgment, noting that the 
question whether the underlying judgment is final would not 
be before the court unless appellants were allowed to inter-
vene and they appealed from that judgment.  See id. at 470 
n.1.

     Similarly, in In re:  Vitamins Antitrust Class Actions, 215 
F.3d 26 (D.C. Cir. 2000), we also considered an appeal from 
the district court's denial of intervention as of right under 
Rule 24(a).  Appellants, who were presumptive members of 
the class but who had opted out, moved to intervene under 
Rule 24(a) for the limited purpose of opposing a clause in the 
proposed settlement of class claims.  While the appeal from 
the denial of intervention was pending, the district court 
approved the settlement, which was not appealed.  See id. at 
28.  This court affirmed the district court's denial of interven-
tion, concluding that appellants were not entitled to intervene 
as of right because their asserted interest in being able to opt 
out of the class was insufficient to give them standing to 
challenge the settlement agreement.  Id.

     Although In re:  Vitamins does not directly address wheth-
er the denial of intervention as of right is appealable, the 
court's statement that it may exercise pendent jurisdiction to 
reach the issue of permissive intervention because it is inex-
tricably intertwined with the issue of intervention as of right, 
see 215 F.3d at 31, and the court's affirmance of the district 
court's denial of intervention (rather than dismissal of the 
appeal), indicate it considered the denial of intervention as of 
right independently appealable.  Thus we conclude that the 
district court's denial of NABR's motion to intervene as of 
right is an independently appealable, final order.  See Hodg-
son, 473 F.2d at 124 & n.29 (entry of final order starts time 
period for filing notice of appeal as to that order under 
Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 4(a)).

     Furthermore, our jurisdiction to review that denial is not 
affected by the fact that the district court denied intervention 
after the stipulated dismissal was entered;  the dismissal does 
not render the appeal moot.  See Massachusetts School of 
Law at Andover, Inc. v. United States, 118 F.3d 776, 780-81 
(D.C. Cir. 1997) (where would-be intervenor sought to chal-
lenge consent decree, appeal from denial of intervention as of 
right reviewable even though district court denied interven-
tion after it entered consent judgment).  NABR appeals from 
both the denial of intervention and the denial of its Rule 60(b) 
motion, which challenged the dismissal.  If this court were to 

conclude that NABR was entitled to intervene in the litiga-
tion, NABR would have standing to appeal the district court's 
denial of the Rule 60(b) motion attacking the stipulated 
dismissal, and we would review that Rule 60(b) denial.  See 
Purcell v. Bank Atlantic Fin. Corp., 85 F.3d 1508, 1511 n.3 
(11th Cir. 1996) (appeal from denial of intervention not moot-
ed by district court's entry of judgment in underlying case);  
see also League of United Latin American Citizens, 131 F.3d 
at 1301 n.1 (appeal from denial of intervention not mooted 
despite district court issuance of memorandum disposing of 
claims).  Because we can potentially grant NABR effective 
relief, this appeal is not moot.  See Purcell, 85 F.3d at 1511 
n.3.

                              * * *

     Entitlement to intervention as of right. An applicant seek-
ing to intervene as of right must show, among other things, 
that it is "so situated that the disposition of the action may as 
a practical matter impair or impede [its] ability to protect [its] 
interest."  Mova Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Shalala, 140 F.3d 
1060, 1074 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  The relevant inquiry here is 
whether NABR's concerns about the terms of the stipulated 
dismissal were sufficient to constitute an interest requiring 
intervention.  See Moten, 543 F.2d at 229, 232-34;  see also 
Natural Resources Defense Council v. Costle, 561 F.2d 904, 
908-11 (D.C. Cir. 1977).  NABR asserts that "USDA's collu-
sive stratagem with [Alternative Research] to expand USDA's 
regulatory jurisdiction without public comment or judicial 
review" shows that USDA was not adequately representing 
NABR's interest.

     But NABR's rights were not impaired by the initiation of a 
rulemaking.  NABR is a non-profit association whose mem-
bers are engaged in biomedical research that involves the use 
of birds, rats, and mice.  NABR's position is that the exclu-
sion for birds, rats, and mice should be removed only if 
regulations can be developed that take into account enforce-
ment needs, current scientific practices, standards already 
established in other policy statements, and administrative and 
financial burdens on research facilities.  As the district court 

noted during the hearing on the motion to intervene, NABR 
will not be precluded from participating in the rulemaking 
and, if USDA decides to issue a final rule, NABR is not 
precluded from challenging that rule.  Significantly, the stip-
ulated dismissal does no more than what the agency could 
have done by granting Alternative Research's pending agency 
petition for rulemaking, and the stipulated dismissal does not 
bind the agency in its rulemaking.  Cf. Massachusetts School 
of Law at Andover, 118 F.3d at 780-81 (noting that consent 
decree "with res judicata, collateral estoppel, or stare decisis 
effect might very well affect MSL's ability to protect its 
interests," but because the consent decree had no such effect, 
MSL's interest was not impaired).  Accordingly, NABR's 
concerns about the terms of the stipulated dismissal are 
insufficient to constitute an interest requiring intervention 
before the district court under Rule 24(a)(2).

                              * * *

     Appeal from stipulated dismissal and denial of Rule 60(b) 
motion. Finally, because the district court correctly denied 
intervention, NABR is not a party to the action and lacks 
standing to appeal from either the stipulation of dismissal or 
the order denying its Rule 60(b) motion, which challenged the 
stipulated dismissal.  See Fed. R. Civ. P. 60(b) (relief limited 
to a party);  Farmland Dairies v. Commissioner of the New 
York State Department of Agriculture and Markets, 847 F.2d 
1038, 1045 (2d Cir. 1988) (concluding that because court was 
affirming district court order denying intervention, appellants 
had no standing to appeal any other order entered by district 
court, and court dismissed their appeals from those orders).

                              * * *

     For the preceding reasons, we conclude this court has 
jurisdiction to review the denial of intervention as of right 
and affirm the denial because NABR has not shown that the 
stipulated dismissal may impair its ability to protect its 
interest.  Because the district court correctly denied inter-
vention, NABR is not a party to the action and does not have 
standing to appeal from either the stipulated dismissal or the 

order denying its Rule 60(b) motion;  the court dismisses the 
appeal from those rulings.

             