                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 6, 2000   Decided November 14, 2000 

                           No. 98-3111

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Spencer L. Johnson, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00062-01)

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.

     Valinda Jones, Assistant United States Attorney, argued 
the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were Wilma A. 
Lewis, United States Attorney, John R. Fisher and Darrell C. 
Valdez, Assistant United States Attorneys.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Ginsburg and Tatel, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  A jury convicted Spencer L. John-
son of possession with intent to distribute over 50 grams of 
cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. s 841(a)(1) & 
(b)(1)(A)(iii) (1994), and simple possession of marijuana, in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. s 844(a) (1994).  Judge Harold H. 
Greene sentenced Johnson to 121 months in prison and five 
years of supervised release on count one, and concurrent 
terms of 12 months in prison and one year of supervised 
release on count two.

     Johnson appeals and requests a new trial.  He asserts that 
the prosecutor substantially prejudiced the verdict by arguing 
to the jurors that their function included protecting the 
community from drugs.  Defense counsel raised a timely 
objection to the prosecutor's comments at trial.  Johnson is 
correct that the prosecutor's comments were error.  Howev-
er, the error was harmless.  The improper comments did not 
substantially or injuriously affect the determination of the 
jury's verdict.  As a result, we affirm the judgment.

     In the alternative, Johnson argues that this court should 
remand the case for resentencing.  Johnson has not been 
provided with a transcript of his sentencing proceedings in 
violation of the Court Reporter Act, 28 U.S.C. s 753(b) 
(1994).  The Miller Reporting Company lost the stenomask 
tape and any transcript that might have been prepared.  
Johnson asserts that without resentencing there can be no 
meaningful review.  The Government argues that the likeli-
hood of a lower sentence is small, but concedes that it is not 
out of the realm of possibility.

     This case presents a highly unusual circumstance.  Ordi-
narily, if a sentencing record is lost, the judge who sentenced 
the defendant makes definitive findings as to the content of 
the sentencing proceedings pursuant to Rule 10(c) of the 
Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure.  In this case, however, 
the judge who sentenced Johnson became seriously ill before 

the record could be reconstructed.  The judge who succeeded 
the original trial judge issued an order stating that the record 
could not be reconstructed.  Given what is known here about 
the sentencing proceedings before the original trial judge, it 
is possible that Johnson was entitled to a lesser sentence.  In 
light of these unusual circumstances, and to ensure that all 
appropriate possibilities are considered, we remand the case 
for resentencing.

                          I. Background

     A.   Trial
          
     On February 24, 1998, a federal grand jury indicted John-
son for possession with intent to distribute over 50 grams of 
cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. s 841(a)(1) & 
(b)(1)(A)(iii), and simple possession of marijuana, in violation 
of 21 U.S.C. s 844(a).  Johnson's first trial ended in a mistrial 
when certain jurors became unavailable entering the fourth 
day of deliberations.  During Johnson's second trial, the 
Government presented the testimony of five police officers 
involved in appellant's arrest:  Investigator Tommy Miller, 
Sergeant Curt Sloan, and Officers John Branch, Devinci 
Wooden, and Andre Wright.  The Government also presented 
the testimony of a chemist and a police detective with exper-
tise in narcotics.  The defense presented the testimony of 
Johnson, and Johnson's friend, Larry Holmes, who witnessed 
the arrest.

     The officers testified to the following.  On February 6, 
1998, they were patrolling the neighborhood surrounding 
Clifton Street, N.W., Washington D.C.  Around 5:00 p.m., 
Officer Tommy Miller, sitting with his partner in a police car, 
noticed a broken light on Johnson's car.  They radioed the 
other officers that they were going to make a traffic stop.  
See Trial Transcript ("Tr.") 6/17/98 at 17.  When they 
reached Johnson, he had driven around the corner, parked his 
car, and started walking towards an alley.  See id. at 18-19.

     Officer Branch pursued Johnson through the alley.  Officer 
Branch wore a black police raid jacket with "Police" written 
on front.  He wore a badge at his waistband and a gun on his 

hip.  Officer Branch did not identify himself, but believed 
Johnson realized he was a police officer.  See id. at 83-84.  In 
the alley, Sergeant Sloan saw Johnson use a hook-shot twice 
to toss objects onto the roof.  See Tr. 6/18/98 at 57.  Officers 
Wooden and Wright saw Johnson throw two objects onto the 
roof.  See id. at 95-96;  Tr. 6/19/98 at 12.  Officer Branch saw 
one of Johnson's throws.  See Tr. 6/17/98 at 49-50.  After the 
police reached Johnson, Officer Miller heard Johnson say he 
ran because he did not have his driver's license.  See id. at 
27.  Officer Branch recovered two plastic bags from the roof 
containing 64 grams of cocaine.  See id. at 51.  A police 
detective with expertise in narcotics testified that this was 
more than an individual would normally possess for personal 
use.  See Tr. 6/19/98 at 69.  The officers also found a bag in 
Johnson's coat containing 26.5 grams of marijuana.  See Tr. 
6/17/98 at 62-63;  Tr. 6/19/98 at 47.

     Johnson's story was quite different from the testimony of 
the officers.  He testified that on February 6, 1998, he parked 
near his former home on Chapin Street.  See Tr. 6/19/98 at 
105, 108-09.  As he walked away from his car, a man jumped 
out of another car and chased him.  Because his brother had 
been killed recently in crossfire in a drive-by shooting in the 
same area, Johnson feared for his life and ran instinctively.  
See id. at 106.  He did not know the man chasing him was a 
police officer.  See id. at 106-07.  After he was stopped by 
the police in the alley, an officer told him the police were 
going to say he threw illegal drugs onto the roof.  See id. at 
118.  Johnson testified that he could not have made a hook-
shot motion because of an injury to his right shoulder.  See 
id. at 104.  He testified that he did not possess any drugs.  
See id. at 112.  Larry Holmes testified that he saw Johnson 
run down an alley before being stopped by police.  He did not 
see Johnson throw anything.  See id. at 86.

     B.   Prosecutor's Statement
          
     In his rebuttal argument to the jury, the prosecutor stated:

     [Y]ou heard in his closing defense counsel make a lot 
     about truth and justice and the Pledge of Allegiance.  
     Well, ladies and gentlemen, justice does not have one 
     
     eye;  it's got two eyes.  Justice protects not only the 
     person who is accused, but it also protects persons like 
     those individuals who--those 400-plus individuals that 
     the crack cocaine were intended for.  That is another 
     person justice is intended to serve.
     
Tr. 6/22/98 at 48.  Defense counsel requested curative in-
structions.  Initially, Judge Greene did not remember the 
statement.  After being reminded of the comment by both 
defense counsel and the prosecutor, Judge Greene denied the 
request explaining:

     I don't think that is improper.  It is a little of pressure 
     on the jury, which is probably what Mr. Jones objected 
     to, but I don't think it is improper enough that I should 
     now tell the jury to forget about that.  That is what you 
     want me to do, right?  That is reserved for a future time, 
     for the third and fourth and fifth time.
     
Id. at 71.  The jury subsequently returned guilty verdicts on 
all charges.

     C.   Sentencing
          
     Judge Greene sentenced Johnson to 121 months in prison 
and five years of supervised release on count one, and concur-
rent terms of 12 months in prison and one year of supervised 
release on count two.  Unfortunately, the official court re-
porter, Miller Reporting Company, lost the stenomask tape of 
the sentencing proceedings, so no transcript of the proceed-
ings could be prepared.  Subsequently, Johnson, pursuant to 
Rule 10(c) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, 
served a statement of proceedings on the Government in 
which Johnson, his trial attorney, and his mother, attempted 
to reconstruct the sentencing proceedings.  In response, the 
Government elected not to contest or supplement Johnson's 
statement.

     Ordinarily the judge who presides at sentencing makes 
definitive findings regarding the content of the sentencing 
proceedings.  Judge Greene, however, as a result of serious 
illness, was not available.  In his absence, Chief Judge Norma 
Holloway Johnson entered an order finding that complete 

reconstruction and settlement of the sentencing record was 
not possible.  See United States v. Johnson, Crim. No. 
98-062, Order (D.D.C. Dec. 23, 1999) ("Order"), reprinted in 
Appellant's Appendix ("Appellant's App.") at 40.

                           II. Analysis

     A.   Prosecutor's Statement
          
     Johnson raised a timely objection to the prosecutor's rebut-
tal argument to the jury;  therefore, we review the contested 
remarks for harmless error.  See United States v. Saro, 24 
F.3d 283, 287 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  In any invocation of the 
harmless error standard, the Government carries the burden 
of proof;  and the measure of "harm" under the standard is 
whether the error had substantial and injurious effect or 
influence in determining the jury's verdict, not merely wheth-
er the record evidence is sufficient absent the error to 
warrant a verdict of guilt.  See United States v. Smart, 98 
F.3d 1379, 1390 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     In assessing claims of prosecutorial misstatements, the 
court is required to determine whether the disputed remarks 
constituted error and whether they substantially prejudiced 
the defendant's trial.  See United States v. Childress, 58 F.3d 
693, 715 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  We typically consider several 
factors in this analysis:  the closeness of the case, the centrali-
ty of the issue affected by the error, and the steps taken to 
mitigate the effects of the error.  See Gaither v. United 
States, 413 F.2d 1061, 1079 (D.C. Cir. 1969).

     There is no doubt here that the prosecutor's rebuttal 
argument to the jury was impermissible.  A prosecutor may 
not make comments designed to inflame the passions or 
prejudices of the jury.  See Childress, 58 F.3d at 715.  And a 
prosecutor may not ask jurors to find a defendant guilty as a 
means of promoting community values, maintaining order, or 
discouraging future crime.  See United States v. Monaghan, 
741 F.2d 1434, 1441 (D.C. Cir. 1984).  On its face, the 
prosecutor's argument in this case improperly suggested that 
the jury should convict the defendant in order to protect 
others from drugs.

     The Government argues that the prosecutor's comments 
were a moderate response to defense counsel's allegations 
that the police employed Nazi tactics to frame the defendant.  
See Appellee's Br. at 15-16.  It is undoubtedly correct that, in 
assessing the severity of impermissible arguments, a court 
must consider whether prosecutorial comments were offered 
in response to inflammatory statements by defense counsel.  
See United States v. Burnett, 890 F.2d 1233, 1241-42 (1989).  
In this case, defense counsel did indeed invoke Nazi practices 
in discussing police tactics.  See Tr. 6/22/98 at 42.  However, 
read in context, the prosecutor was not responding directly to 
allegations of police misconduct.  Rather, the prosecutor was 
responding to defense counsel's legitimate statement that the 
promise of liberty and justice for all in the Pledge of Alle-
giance applies to Johnson.  See id. at 28.

     The Government further argues that the prosecutor im-
plied that the police, not the jury, had a duty to protect the 
community from drugs.  See Appellee's Br. at 16.  Despite 
this claim, the prosecutor's comments give no explicit indica-
tion that their subject is the police.  The plain meaning of the 
prosecutor's comments is that the jury should give justice not 
only to Johnson, but also to the individuals the drugs were 
intended to reach.  See id. at 48.

     There is no claim here that precise measures were taken to 
cure the prosecutor's misconduct.  However, the absence of 
curative instructions is not dispositive of the question of 
prejudice.  See Monaghan, 741 F.2d at 1443 n.43.  Rather, an 
appellate court generally defers to the District Court's judg-
ment as to "[w]hether the prosecutor has struck a foul blow 
instead of just a hard one."  United States v. Dean, 55 F.3d 
640, 665 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  We also consider the jurors' 
common sense in assessing the effect of a prosecutor's state-
ment.  See Monaghan, 741 F.2d at 1440.  In the judgment of 
Judge Greene, the prosecutor's comments would have merit-
ed judicial intervention had they been repeated a "third and 
fourth and fifth time."  Tr. 6/22/98 at 71.  Although he did 
not issue a curative instruction, Judge Greene urged the 
jurors in his general instructions to convict based only on the 

evidence and reminded the jury that the lawyers' arguments 
were not evidence.  See id. at 53-54.

     The final thing that we must consider in assessing a claim 
of prosecutorial misstatement is the likely impact of the 
improper remarks on the verdict.  See United States v. 
Williams-Davis, 90 F.3d 490, 507 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Johnson 
argues that his conviction was uncertain.  He points out that 
the first trial ended in a mistrial after three and one-half days 
of jury deliberations.  See Appellant's Br. at 16-17.  Though 
complete certainty is not to be had in this circumstance, we 
do not think it plausible, in light of the formidable evidence 
arrayed against Johnson, that the prosecutor's remarks are 
what account for Johnson's relatively speedy conviction at the 
second trial.

     Johnson also argues that the Government's evidence was 
infected with the aura of collusion.  In support of this claim, 
Johnson points out that two police officers, along with the 
prosecutor, admitted they revisited the crime scene during 
the trial.  See Tr. 6/18/99 at 61, 71.  Furthermore, Johnson 
alleges that a photograph the officers used to illustrate their 
testimony contained markings that enabled them to co-
ordinate their testimony.  See 6/22/98 at 35.  Finally, Johnson 
argues that the odd consistency of the testimony among the 
officers, such as repetition of the term "hook-shot" and refer-
ences to eye contact with Johnson, indicates collusion.  See 
Tr. 6/17/98 at 16, 84;  Tr. 6/18/98 at 16-17, 92, 125;  Tr. 6/19/98 
at 9-10, 37;  Tr. 6/22/98 at 37.

     Despite Johnson's assertions, we find that the great weight 
of the evidence strongly supports Johnson's conviction.  Five 
police officers testified that Johnson possessed drugs.  Their 
eyewitness accounts were corroborated by physical evidence.  
The only challenge to their testimony came from the defen-
dant and the defendant's friend.  Furthermore, at issue in 
Johnson's collusion argument is the credibility of the Govern-
ment's witnesses versus the credibility of Johnson and his 
witness.  If the prosecutor improperly addressed the issue of 
witness credibility, Johnson's argument might have more 
force.  Instead, the prosecutor urged the jury to convict 

Johnson in order to protect the community from drugs.  
Given the content of the prosecutor's misstatement, it was not 
likely to have affected the outcome of the case.  Regardless 
of the prosecutor's statement, the evidence clearly supported 
the jury's verdict.  Having considered these factors, we hold 
that, although the prosecutor's comments were impermissible, 
the error was harmless.  Accordingly, the jury's verdict must 
stand.

     B.   Loss of Sentencing Record
          
     The Court Reporter Act, 28 U.S.C. s 753(b), requires that 
court reporters record verbatim all proceedings in criminal 
cases held in open court.  However, failure to record a 
proceeding or make a whole transcript available does not per 
se require reversal.  See United States v. Carrazana, 70 F.3d 
1339, 1342 (D.C. Cir. 1995).  We evaluate the burdens and 
benefits of remand on a case-by-case basis and consider "(1) 
the goal of deterring violations of the Court Reporter Act;  (2) 
the ability (and reasonable efforts of the parties) to correct 
for violations of the Act by reconstructing the record;  and (3) 
the likelihood that reversible error occurred."  Id.

     In this case, Miller Reporting Company defaulted on its 
responsibilities by losing the transcript.  There is no mitigat-
ing evidence that the transcript was lost as a result of 
inadvertent mechanical error.  See, e.g., United States v. 
Winstead, 74 F.3d 1313, 1321 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  Appellant 
asserts that Miller Reporting Company has engaged in a 
pattern of negligence.  The Assistant Federal Public Defend-
er in this case attests that this is the fifth case she has 
handled in six years in which the Miller Reporting Company 
has lost a transcript.  See Appellant's Br. at 21.  The Govern-
ment admits that it has "been frustrated from time to time by 
lapses in the performance of this reporting company."  Ap-
pellee's Br. at 25 n.15.  In light of this record, our interest in 
deterring violations of the Court Reporter Act weighs heavily 
in favor of remanding this case for resentencing.

     An additional consideration here is the confluence of cir-
cumstances which prevented the parties from reconstructing 
the record.  Appellant made a good faith effort to reconstruct 

the record pursuant to Rule 10(c) of the Federal Rules of 
Appellate Procedure.  However, due to the unavailability of 
the transcript, the inability of the parties to recall everything 
that occurred at sentencing, and the illness of the presiding 
District Court Judge, Chief Judge Norma Holloway Johnson 
determined that complete reconstruction of the sentencing 
record was not possible.  See Order, reprinted in Appellant's 
App. at 40.  As a result, there is no reconstructed record in 
this case.

     Finally, we must consider whether Johnson was prejudiced 
by the violation of the Court Reporter Act.  In particular, we 
must consider

     the ability of the defendant to allege specific prejudice 
     arising out of an event in the missing portions [of the 
     transcript];  the extent of the missing portions;  the sig-
     nificance of the missing portions in a typical trial (e.g., 
     final jury instructions are presumptively more significant 
     than a bench conference);  the likely significance of the 
     missing portions in the context of the specific trial in 
     question;  and the use of new counsel on appeal.
     
Carrazana, 70 F.3d at 1343.  In this context, since the 
burden of resentencing is comparatively light, these factors 
need not weigh as heavily in favor of remand as when a new 
trial is at stake.  See Saro, 24 F.3d at 288.  We thus consider 
the Carrazana factors in light of this lower burden.

     First, appellant does not allege specific prejudice arising 
out of an event in the sentencing proceedings.  This is not 
dispositive, however.  We have found reversible error where 
a crucial stage of trial was missing even though the defendant 
could not allege specific prejudice.  See United States v. 
Workcuff, 422 F.2d 700, 702 (1970) (per curiam).

     Second, in this case, the extent of the missing transcript of 
the sentencing proceedings is significant, as the entire tran-
script was lost.  In both Carrazana and Winstead, we con-
cluded that the context of the missing transcripts, such as the 
absence of select bench conferences, suggested that the miss-
ing portions related mainly to housekeeping matters.  In 

other words, the subject matter of the missing transcripts in 
those cases was not crucial;  as a result, it was held that 
reversible errors were unlikely.  See Carrazana, 70 F.3d at 
1344;  Winstead, 74 F.3d at 1322.  In contrast, in Workcuff, 
the court reporter was absent from a crucial stage of the 
trial--a jury instruction given after jury deliberations had 
begun--and, as a result, the court could not determine that 
no substantial right of the appellant had been violated.  See 
Workcuff, 422 F.2d at 702.  Similarly, in this case, although 
Johnson cannot point to prejudice arising out of a particular 
event, the loss of the transcript of the entire sentencing 
proceedings constitutes the absence of a crucial stage and 
itself increases the likelihood of error.  The Government does 
not dispute the significance of this phase of the analysis.

     Third, in evaluating the significance of the missing portions 
of the transcript in the context of the specific trial in question, 
the court considers whether the gaps are suggestive of proba-
ble error.  See Carrazana, 70 F.3d at 1343.  The Government 
argues that the gap is not suggestive of probable error, 
because we can determine that Judge Greene properly calcu-
lated Johnson's sentence based on the Presentence Investiga-
tion Report ("PSR").  The parties agree that the statutory 
mandatory minimum for the crime was 120 months.  See 21 
U.S.C. s 841(b)(1)(A)(iii).  The Presentence Investigation Re-
port recommended a base offense level of 32, which triggers 
an imprisonment range of 121-151 months.  See PSR at 4.  
In addition, the Presentence Investigation Report recom-
mended a 2-level enhancement for obstruction of justice, for a 
total of 34 points, which triggers an imprisonment range of 
151-188 months.  See PSR at 4-5.  Judge Greene sentenced 
Johnson to 121 months.  By implication, the Government 
asserts, Judge Greene rejected the obstruction of justice 
recommendation, but accepted the remainder of the Presen-
tence Investigation Report.  The Government further argues 
that Johnson did not raise any grounds for downward depar-
ture in his objections to the Presentence Investigation Re-
port.  See Appellee's Br. at 30-31.  Nevertheless, the Govern-
ment concedes that if there were grounds for downward 
departure, Judge Greene could have sentenced appellant to 

120 months, the statutory mandatory minimum, rather than 
121 months, the minimum guidelines recommendation.  The 
Government argues this one-month discrepancy is not an 
appreciable difference.  See id.

     Johnson argues that, contrary to the Government's claims, 
the Presentence Investigation Report does not demonstrate 
that there was no error in the District Court's sentencing.  
Johnson presents the following example.  The Presentence 
Investigation Report made it clear that Johnson met the first 
four criteria for the 2-level safety valve adjustment in U.S. 
Sentencing Guidelines Manual s 5C1.2 (1997), specifically, no 
criminal history points, no violence or weapon possession in 
the offense, no death or serious bodily injury, and no leader-
ship role.  However, only the District Court Judge could 
determine whether Johnson met the fifth criteria, i.e., truth-
fully providing all information and evidence about the offense.  
See U.S.S.G. s 5C1.2.

     If Judge Greene found that Johnson met the fifth criteria, 
and he also rejected the enhancement for obstruction of 
justice as the Government suggests, Judge Greene could have 
sentenced Johnson to less than 120 months.  See U.S.S.G. 
s 2D1.1(b)(6).  The Presentence Investigation Report pro-
vides no assessment of this, and without a sentencing tran-
script, there is no record of Judge Greene's analysis of this 
provision.  See Appellant's Reply Br. at 9.  In addition, 
according to the uncontested account that Johnson submitted 
in his attempt to reconstruct the record, during sentencing 
Judge Greene spoke about how harsh the sentencing guide-
lines were, and stated that if he could sentence Johnson below 
the guidelines range, he would.  See Appellant's Statement of 
Proceedings Prepared Pursuant to Fed. R. App. P. 10(c), 
reprinted in Appellant's App. 33-35.  This further supports 
the possibility that Judge Greene would have granted John-
son a lesser sentence, had the safety valve been brought to 
his attention.

     This court has not specifically ruled on whether a defen-
dant who testified at trial and was disbelieved by the jury, 
but subsequently truthfully provided the Government with all 

information and evidence, is eligible for the safety valve.  See 
United States v. Schreiber, 191 F.3d 103, 106 (2d Cir. 1999) 
(holding that despite previous fabrications and obstruction 
defendant was eligible for safety valve).  Under the plain 
language of U.S.S.G.  s 5C1.2, a defendant has until "not 
later than the time of the sentencing hearing" to truthfully 
provide the Government with all information and evidence 
concerning the offense.  Johnson bore the burden of persuad-
ing the District Court that he was eligible for the safety 
valve.  See United States v. Mathis, 216 F.3d 18, 29 (D.C. 
Cir. 2000), cert. denied, __ S. Ct. __, 2000 WL 1468603 (U.S. 
Oct. 30, 2000) (No. 00-6297).  We are not in a position to 
weigh these factors and we cannot be certain what the trial 
judge's assessment might have been in this case.

     Finally, in this case original counsel was available in the 
attempted reconstruction.  As a result, the use of new counsel 
is not a significant factor in the likelihood of reversible error.  
See Carrazana, 70 F.3d at 1344-45.

     As we discussed in Carrazana, we consider the foregoing 
factors in assessing the likelihood that reversible error oc-
curred.  We then weigh the likelihood that reversible error 
occurred, along with deterrence and the ability and efforts of 
the parties to reconstruct the record.  See Carrazana, 70 
F.3d at 1342-43.  On balance, we find that this case presents 
a circumstance which qualifies for remand and resentencing.  
Johnson and the Government both acknowledge repeated loss 
of transcripts by Miller Reporting Company.  Despite John-
son's good faith effort to reconstruct the record, the District 
Court found that no reconstruction was possible.  Both par-
ties recognize that it is possible that Judge Greene could have 
sentenced Johnson to a lesser sentence.  In addition, the loss 
of the entire transcript of the sentencing proceedings further 
supports resentencing.  Based on these concerns, justice 
requires that the case be remanded for resentencing.

                          IV. Conclusion

     For the reasons given above, we affirm the judgment, but 
remand the case for resentencing.

                                             