                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued December 6, 1999    Decided March 24, 2000 

                           No. 99-3119

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                   Russell Eugene Weston, Jr., 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00357-01)

     Gregory L. Poe, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for the appellant.  A. J. Kramer, Federal Public 
Defender, and L. Barrett Boss, Assistant Federal Public 
Defender, were on brief for the appellant.

     David B. Goodhand, Assistant United States Attorney, 
argued the cause for the appellee.  Wilma A. Lewis, United 
States Attorney, and John R. Fisher and Erik P. Christian, 

Assistant United States Attorneys, were on brief for the 
appellee.

     Before:  Henderson, Rogers and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the court filed Per Curiam.

     Circuit Judge  Henderson filed a separate concurring 
opinion.

     Circuit Judge Rogers filed a separate concurring opinion.

     Circuit Judge Tatel filed a separate concurring opinion.

     Per Curiam:  Appellant Russell Eugene Weston Jr. appeals 
the district court's order authorizing the Bureau of Prisons 
(Bureau) to forcibly medicate Weston with antipsychotic 
drugs based on the Bureau's determination that the treat-
ment is medically appropriate and essential for Weston's 
safety and for the safety of others.  Because the district 
court's order relied on testimony supporting forced medi-
cation for the purpose of making Weston competent to stand 
trial, an additional justification which the Bureau advanced 
but the district court found unnecessary to reach, we reverse 
the district court and remand for consideration of both of the 
Bureau's justifications.

     On October 9, 1998 Weston, a diagnosed paranoid schizo-
phrenic, was charged in a six count indictment with the July 
24, 1998 murder of two United States Capitol Police officers 
and the attempted murder of a third.1  On April 22, 1999 the 
district court found Weston, who is confined at the Federal 
Correctional Institution in Butner, North Carolina (Butner), 

__________
     1 The indictment charged two counts of murder of a federal 
officer while engaged in his official duties in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
ss 1113 and 1111;  one count of attempted murder of a federal 
officer while engaged in his official duties in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
ss 1114 and 1113;  one count of carrying and using a firearm during 
and in relation to a crime of violence in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
s 924(c);  and 2 counts of carrying and using a firearm during and 
in relation to a crime of violence and causing a death thereby in 
violation of 18 U.S.C. s 924(c) and 924(j)(1).

incompetent to stand trial and committed him for treatment 
to restore his competency pursuant to 18 U.S.C. s 4241(d).  
The incompetency order provided that, should medical per-
sonnel conclude antipsychotic injections were warranted, the 
Bureau could seek involuntary medication authorization in 
accordance with "the administrative procedures under 28 
C.F.R. s 543 [sic],2 provided that counsel for Mr. Weston 
receive reasonable notice before a hearing commences."  Ap-
pendix vol. i (App. i) 47.  The order further directed:  "No 
administration of psychotropic medications to defendant 
against his will shall occur without the prior approval of this 
Court in a written Order;...."  Id.

     On May 13, 1999 the Bureau conducted an involuntary 
medication hearing without notifying Weston's counsel.  Wes-
ton was represented at the hearing by Ray Pitcairn, the Day 
Watch Nursing Supervisor at Butner.  Following the presen-
tation of evidence the hearing officer, Bryon Herbel, M.D., a 
psychiatrist, determined Weston should be forcibly medicat-
ed.  Butner's warden affirmed the determination.  The dis-
trict court held a hearing on May 28, 1999 to review the 
Bureau's decision and in an order dated June 18, 1999 re-
manded the matter to the Bureau because Weston's counsel 
had not been notified of the hearing in accordance with the 
April 22, 1999 incompetency order and because the Bureau 
had neither sought nor presented at the hearing evidence 
favorable to Weston.

     The Bureau conducted a second hearing before Dr. Herbel 
on July 8, 1999.  Weston was again represented by Pitcairn 
who presented the written report of Weston's expert witness, 
Raquel E. Gur, M.D., also a psychiatrist.  In addition, Pitc-

__________
     2 Bureau regulation 549.43 requires that, before a patient's invol-
untary medication, a hearing be conducted by a psychiatrist, with 
24-hour notice to the patient, at which he has the right to appear, to 
have a staff representative, to present evidence and to request that 
witnesses be questioned by his staff representative or by the 
hearing officer.  The hearing officer's determination regarding 
medication may be appealed to the institution's mental health 
division administrator.

airn offered arguments suggested to him by Weston's coun-
sel, who were not themselves permitted to attend the hearing.  
The government offered the expert testimony of Sally C. 
Johnson, M.D., Associate Warden for Health Services at 
Butner and Weston's treating psychiatrist.  At the conclusion 
Dr. Herbel determined Weston "suffer[s] from a mental 
illness, and that medication is an appropriate treatment for 
[his] illness, and that [he] can be treated against [his] will."  
App. ii 90-91.  He explained his decision to Weston as 
follows:

          The reason is that you are gravely disabled, you pose a 
     risk of dangerousness to others and to yourself without 
     treatment, and that you need to become competent to 
     stand trial, and that no other inter--less intrusive inter-
     vention will be successful for them.
     
Id. at 91.  Weston appealed to the warden who again affirmed 
the hearing officer, stating:

     Medical staff have diagnosed you with Schizophrenia, 
     Paranoid Type, Chronic.  The record indicates that you 
     experience a variety of grandiose and paranoid delusions 
     including a belief that you are able to reverse time, and 
     that people who are killed are not really dead.  Such 
     delusions have caused you to be dangerous to others, and 
     potentially to yourself, gravely disabled, and incompetent 
     for trial.  This conclusion is supported by the record.  
     Mental Health staff have determined that you suffer 
     from a mental disease which may be treated with psycho-
     tropic medication, and restore your competency for trial.  
     Therefore, your appeal is denied and staff may proceed 
     accordingly.
     
App. ii. 3.

     On August 20, 1999 the district court held a second judicial 
review hearing.  In a decision dated September 9, 1999 the 
court upheld the Bureau's decision to medicate Weston on the 
ground that "the proposed medication is medically appropri-
ate and that, considering less intrusive alternatives, it is 
essential for the defendant's own safety or the safety of 
others."  United States v. Weston, 69 F. Supp. 2d 99, 118 

(D.D.C. 1999).  The court declined to review the Bureau's 
additional justification, that medication was necessary to ren-
der Weston competent for trial, or to address Weston's claim 
that forced medication would infringe his Sixth Amendment 
right to a fair trial.  These two issues, the court found, were 
not then ripe "where the defendant has not yet been arraign-
ed and where there is no record evidence to suggest that the 
government's medical reasons are pretextual."  Id. at 107.  
In the court's opinion the issues could adequately be ad-
dressed later "[in] the event that medication successfully 
renders the defendant competent to stand trial."  Id.  Wes-
ton contends the Bureau's decision is unsupported by the 
record and that the Sixth Amendment argument is now ripe 
for resolution.  We agree on both points.

     As an initial matter, Weston asserts the district court 
applied the wrong standards in reviewing the Bureau's deter-
mination "that antipsychotic medication is medically appropri-
ate and that, considering less intrusive alternatives, it is 
essential for the defendant's own safety or the safety of 
others."  69 F. Supp. 2d at 118.  Following the Supreme 
Court's opinion in Washington v. Harper, 494 U.S. 210, 223 
(1990), the district court reviewed the Bureau's medical/safety 
justification substantively under a "reasonableness" standard, 
see 69 F. Supp. 2d at 116-18, and procedurally under the 
Administrative Procedure Act's "arbitrary and capricious" 
test, see 69 F. Supp. 2d at 107 (citing 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A)).  
Weston maintains that the Supreme Court's decision in Rig-
gins v. Nevada, 504 U.S. 127 (1992), in which the court 
considered forced medication of a detainee, as here, rather 
than of a convicted inmate, as in Harper, requires instead 
review under the "strict scrutiny" and "de novo" standards.  
It is true the Riggins Court recognized that decisions affect-
ing a detainee's trial rights may warrant closer scrutiny than 
those made for inmates who have already been tried and 
convicted.  See 504 U.S. at 135.  ("Under Harper, forcing 
antipsychotic drugs on a convicted prisoner is impermissible 
absent a finding of overriding justification and a determina-
tion of medical appropriateness. The Fourteenth Amendment 
affords at least as much protection to persons the State 

detains for trial.") (emphasis added;  citations omitted).  The 
Court, however, declined to clarify the standards of review for 
detainees.  The opinion makes no mention of the applicable 
procedural standard and the Court found "no occasion to 
finally prescribe ... substantive standards."  Id. at 136.  We 
likewise need not decide the issue at this point, given the lack 
of support for the district court's medical/safety determina-
tion, preferring instead to await the district court's findings 
on remand using the guidance that Riggins provides.

     In Riggins the Supreme Court overturned the Nevada 
state court conviction of a defendant who had been involun-
tarily medicated during trial.  The Court acknowledged, as 
did the district court below, that involuntary medication may 
be justified by medical/safety concerns and might be justified 
by the need to render a defendant competent for trial:

     Nevada certainly would have satisfied due process if the 
     prosecution had demonstrated, and the District Court 
     had found, that treatment with antipsychotic medication 
     was medically appropriate and, considering less intrusive 
     alternatives, essential for the sake of Riggins' own safety 
     or the safety of others.  See Harper, supra, 494 U.S., at 
     225-226, 110 S.Ct., at 1039;  cf. Addington v. Texas, 441 
     U.S. 418, 99 S.Ct. 1804, 60 L.Ed.2d 323 (1979) (Due 
     Process Clause allows civil commitment of individuals 
     shown by clear and convincing evidence to be mentally ill 
     and dangerous).  Similarly, the State might have been 
     able to justify medically appropriate, involuntary treat-
     ment with the drug by establishing that it could not 
     obtain an adjudication of Riggins' guilt or innocence by 
     using less intrusive means.  See Illinois v. Allen, 397 
     U.S. 337, 347, 90 S.Ct. 1057, 1063, 25 L.Ed.2d 353 (1970) 
     (Brennan, J., concurring) ("Constitutional power to bring 
     an accused to trial is fundamental to a scheme of 'or-
     dered liberty' and prerequisite to social justice and 
     peace").
     
504 U.S. at 135-36.  Nevertheless, the Court overturned the 
state court medication order for inadequate factual findings, 
in part because it "did not adopt the State's view, which was 

that continued administration of Mellaril was required to 
ensure that the defendant could be tried" and did not "indi-
cate a finding that safety considerations or other compelling 
concerns outweighed Riggins' interest in freedom from un-
wanted antipsychotic drugs."  Id. at 136.  The district court's 
determination below suffers from similar defects.

     First, although the district court, unlike the state court in 
Riggins, made a finding that antipsychotic medication is not 
only medically appropriate but also essential to safety, the 
finding is not supported by the record.  The evidence below 
focused on the feasibility and desirability of restoring Wes-
ton's competency.  Thus, while the record focused on whether 
the administration of antipsychotic drugs was "medically ap-
propriate" to make him competent to stand trial, there is 
comparatively little evidence on the safety issue.  Further, 
what evidence there is indicates that in his current circum-
stances Weston poses no significant danger to himself or to 
others.  Dr. Johnson herself testified at the August 20, 1999 
hearing that, given Weston's "immediate containment situa-
tion," she felt confident the Butner staff "can prevent him 
from harming himself or others under his immediate parame-
ters of incarceration where he is in an individual room with 
limited access to anything that he could harm himself with or 
anyone else with, and he remains under constant observa-
tion."  JA ii 121.  In her view, "those precautions are ade-
quate to prevent risk--to prevent episodes of harm to himself 
or to others."  Id.  In light of this testimony, we cannot 
sustain the district court's determination that involuntary 
medication is "essential for the defendant's own safety or the 
safety of others."  69 F. Supp. 2d at 118.  If the government 
advances the medical/safety justification on remand, it will 
need to present additional evidence showing that either Wes-
ton's condition or his confinement situation has changed since 
the hearing so as to render him dangerous.

     Second, the district court here (like the state court in 
Riggins) failed to address the government's theory that medi-
cation is necessary to render Weston competent for trial, 
describing the trial competency issue as "collateral" and not 
yet "ripe."  We disagree with this characterization.  Involun-

tary antipsychotic medication has the potential to adversely 
affect the defendant's ability to obtain a fair trial as guaran-
teed under the Sixth Amendment.  See United States v. 
Brandon, 158 F.3d 947, 954 (6th Cir. 1998) (concluding forced 
medication may implicate Sixth Amendment right);  United 
States v. Morgan, 193 F.3d 252, 264-65 (4th Cir. 1999) 
(acknowledging same).  Weston's challenge here, based on 
this potential, is ripe for two reasons.  First, as noted above, 
the evidence, including Dr. Johnson's testimony and the 
determinations of both the hearing officer and the warden, 
see supra p. 4, focused on the need to restore Weston's 
competency, placing the issue squarely before the district 
court.  Second, and more important, because antipsychotic 
medication may affect the defendant's ability to assist in his 
defense, see Riggins, 504 U.S. at 137;  id. at 143 (Kennedy, J., 
concurring);  Brandon, 158 F.3d at 954, post-medication re-
view may come too late to prevent impairment of his Sixth 
Amendment right.  Accordingly, both the defendant, whose 
right to present a defense may be infringed by involuntary 
medication, and the government, whose eventual prosecution 
of the defendant may be foreclosed because of the infringe-
ment, are entitled to pre-medication resolution of the Sixth 
Amendment issue.

     For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the district court's 
September 9, 1999 memorandum opinion and order and re-
mand for the court to assess each of the Bureau's justifica-
tions and to consider the potential impact of compelled 
medication on Weston's Sixth Amendment fair trial right.3  
Because the trial competency and Sixth Amendment issues 
are legal rather than medical or penological issues, on re-
mand the district court should retain jurisdiction to decide 
them itself.  See Brandon, 158 F.3d at 960 ("district court 
[must] make the legal determination of whether [defendant] 
if forcibly medicated, would be competent to participate in a 
trial that is fair to both parties," which "is distinct from the 

__________
     3 The court should also consider whether there is any merit to 
Weston's contention that medical ethics preclude ordering a patient 
medicated in a potential capital case.

medical determination that the medical experts [ ] discuss") 
(emphasis original).

                                                      So ordered.

     Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, concurring:

     I concur in the majority's opinion but write separately to 
express my belief that the applicable standards for reviewing 
an institution's medical/safety determination appear to me, at 
least, to be the same for a detainee as for a convicted inmate.

     In Washington v. Harper, 494 U.S. 210, 223 (1990), the 
Supreme Court adopted a substantive "standard of reason-
ableness" under the Due Process Clause in deciding to invol-
untarily medicate a prison inmate because "[t]he extent of a 
prisoner's right under the Clause to avoid the unwanted 
administration of antipsychotic drugs must be defined in the 
context of the inmate's confinement" and because the reason-
ableness standard satisfies "the need to reconcile [the court's] 
longstanding adherence to the principle that inmates retain at 
least some constitutional rights despite incarceration with the 
recognition that prison authorities are best equipped to make 
difficult decisions regarding prison administration."  Id. at 
222-24.  Applying this standard, the Court concluded that, 
"given the requirements of the prison environment, the Due 
Process Clause permits the State to treat a prison inmate 
who has a serious mental illness with antipsychotic drugs 
against his will, if the inmate is dangerous to himself or 
others and the treatment is in the inmate's medical interest," 
494 U.S. at 227.  The same reasoning supports applying the 
reasonableness standard before conviction and the Court 
recognized as much in Riggins v. Nevada, 504 U.S. 127 
(1992), noting that "in the trial or pretrial settings, Nevada 
certainly would have satisfied due process if the prosecution 
had demonstrated, and the District Court had found, that 
treatment with antipsychotic medication was medically appro-
priate and, considering less intrusive alternatives, essential 
for the sake of Riggins' own safety or the safety of others."  
504 U.S. at 135 (citing Harper, 494 U.S. at 225-226).

     Procedurally, the Harper Court concluded that the role of 
the courts is simply "to ensure that the decision to medicate 
an inmate against his will is neither arbitrary nor erroneous 
under the [substantive due process] standards."  494 U.S. at 
228.  "An inmate's interests," the Court concluded, "are 
adequately protected, and perhaps better served, by allowing 
the decision to medicate to be made by medical professionals 

rather than a judge," id. at 232.  Again, the Court's rationale 
applies no less to a detainee than to a convicted inmate.  I 
therefore believe that the district court correctly adopted as 
its procedural standard of review the one set forth in the 
Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. ss 551 et seq., which 
permits agency action to be set aside only if it is " 'arbitrary, 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accor-
dance with law.' "  See 69 F. Supp. 2d at 116.  I further 
believe that under this standard the district court properly 
upheld the Bureau's determination that antipsychotic medi-
cation is "medically appropriate," a finding that is well sup-
ported by the record, although the majority opinion correctly 
holds the evidence does not support the concomitant finding 
that in his then-confinement situation Weston posed a safety 
risk to himself or others.*

     Finally, far from agreeing with Judge Tatel's apparent 
concern over the defendant's "presentation" at trial, I see no 
difference between his potentially altered state then, as com-
pared to his conduct on the day of the murders, and the 
status of a defendant whose defense to murder is of the "heat 

__________
     * I say "correctly" only because Johnson expressly opined that 
Weston was not dangerous "under his immediate parameters of 
incarceration where he is in an individual room with limited access 
to anything that he could harm himself with or anyone else with, 
and he remains under constant observation" See Maj. Op. at 7 
(quoting JA ii 121).  Other testimony from Johnson, however, 
supports the court's finding of dangerousness.  See 69 F. Supp. 2d 
at 109 (citing Johnson's opinion that "when she and other staff 
members go into his room, doing so 'poses some immediate risk of 
potential harm' to herself and to those persons" and that "the 
defendant now refuses to respond to questions regarding suicide") 
(record citations omitted).  I also note that in Harper the Supreme 
Court questioned whether "physical restraints or seclusion are 
acceptable substitutes for antipsychotic drugs, in terms of either 
their medical effectiveness or their toll on limited prison resources."  
Harper, 494 U.S. at 227 (footnote omitted).  In the long term such 
"alternatives" to medication may prove both harmful to Weston and 
a drain on institutional resources, especially since, if he goes 
unmedicated, Weston may very well be institutionalized indefinitely, 
if not permanently.

of passion" variety.  No one would argue that due process 
requires that the latter duplicate his "hot blood" in court.  In 
any event the testimony of both lay and expert witnesses, 
whether on direct or cross, will suffice to address any differ-
ences in Weston's appearance.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge, concurring:  I concur in the 
judgment of the court reversing the district court's order and 
remanding the case for further findings.  I write separately 
principally to note a reservation with regard to the proper 
standard of review of a regulation of the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons as applied to a pretrial detainee, and to clarify our 
reasons for remanding.  I also join Judge Tatel's concurring 
opinion describing the "daunting task" faced by the district 
court upon remand.  See infra Tatel, J., concurring at 1.

     Confronted with the question of whether a judicial hearing 
is required before the State may treat a mentally ill convicted 
prisoner with antipsychotic drugs against his will, the Su-
preme Court in Washington v. Harper, 494 U.S. 210 (1990), 
held that, "[g]iven the requirements of the prison environ-
ment, the Due Process Clause permits the State to treat a 
prison inmate who has a serious mental illness with antipsy-
chotic drugs against his will, if the inmate is dangerous to 
himself or others and the treatment is in the inmate's medical 
interests" Id. at 227.1  Harper had been convicted of robbery, 
was incarcerated for approximately four years during which 
he was mostly housed in the prison's mental health unit, and 
was then paroled on the condition that he participate in 
psychiatric treatment.  While incarcerated he had consented 
to the administration of antipsychotic drugs, and while on 
parole he continued to receive psychiatric treatment.  Even-
tually, he was civilly committed, and his parole was revoked 
after he assaulted two hospital nurses.  Upon returning to 
prison, he initially consented again to treatment but in No-
vember 1982 he refused to continue taking his medications.  
He subsequently filed a civil action under 42 U.S.C. s 1983 
for injunctive relief and monetary damages.  Id. at 217.  The 
trial court denied relief and was reversed on appeal by the 
Washington Supreme Court, which held that Harper had a 
liberty interest in refusing antipsychotic medication and thus 
was entitled to a hearing with full adversarial procedural 
protections.  Id. at 218.

__________
     1 In so holding, the Supreme Court focused solely on the 
protections afforded the prisoner under the Due Process Clause of 
the Fourteenth Amendment.  Id. at 213.

     The Supreme Court reversed.  In the Supreme Court's 
view, while Harper possessed "a significant liberty interest in 
avoiding unwanted administration of antipsychotic drugs," 
due process was met where the State established by a 
medical finding the existence of a mental disorder likely to 
cause harm if not treated, and where the antipsychotic medi-
cation was prescribed by a psychiatrist, with the approval of a 
reviewing psychiatrist.  Id. at 221-22.  The Court noted that 
such protections "ensure[d] that the treatment in question 
will be ordered only if it is in the prisoner's medical interests, 
given the legitimate needs of his institutional confinement."  
Id. at 222.  Noting "[t]he legitimacy, and the necessity of 
considering the States' interests in prison safety and securi-
ty," the Harper Court concluded that "the proper standard 
for determining the validity of a prison regulation claimed to 
infringe on an inmate's constitutional rights is ... whether 
the regulation is 'reasonably related to legitimate penological 
interests.' "  Id. at 223 (citation omitted).  Most pertinent 
here, the Supreme Court explained that this standard applies 
"even when the constitutional right claimed to have been 
infringed is fundamental, and the State under other circum-
stances would have been required to satisfy a more rigorous 
standard of review."  Id. (emphasis added).  In other words, 
the Supreme Court observed, while "inmates retain at least 
some constitutional rights despite incarceration.... th[is] 
standard of review ... applies to all circumstances in which 
the needs of prison administration implicate constitutional 
rights."  Id. at 223-24.

     Subsequently, in Riggins v. Nevada, 504 U.S. 127 (1992), 
the Supreme Court addressed a claim by a pretrial detainee 
on direct appeal from his convictions that his right to a fair 
trial was denied under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amend-
ments by the refusal to suspend the administration of an 
antipsychotic drug during his trial.  Shortly after his arrest, 
Riggins had complained of hearing voices and a psychiatrist 
prescribed Mellaril, an antipsychotic drug.  The psychiatrist 
later increased the dosage in response to Riggins' continued 
complaints.  Id. at 129.  After he was found competent to 
stand trial, and after a hearing at which the trial judge denied 

his motion to have the medication suspended until the end of 
his trial, Riggins presented an insanity defense and testified 
on his own behalf at trial.  Id. at 130-31.  The jury found him 
guilty and he was sentenced to death.  Id. at 131.  The 
Nevada Supreme Court affirmed his convictions, rejecting 
Riggins' claims that forced administration of Mellaril denied 
him the ability to assist in his own defense and prejudicially 
affected his attitude, appearance, and demeanor at trial, and 
that the State had neither demonstrated a need to administer 
Mellaril nor explored alternatives to giving him 800 milli-
grams of the drug each day.  Id. at 131.  The Supreme Court 
reversed and remanded, concluding that "[i]t is clearly possi-
ble that [the] ... side effects [of antipsychotic medication] 
had an impact upon not just Riggins' outward appearance, 
but also the content of his testimony on direct or cross 
examination, his ability to follow the proceedings, or the 
substance of his communication with counsel."  Id. at 137.

     In considering Riggins' "core contention that involuntary 
administration of Mellaril denied him 'a full and fair trial,' " 
the Supreme Court noted that its decision in Harper "pro-
vides useful background for evaluating this claim."  Id. 134.  
But contrasting the circumstances in Riggins with the 
"unique circumstances of penal confinement" that had tem-
pered its determination in Harper of what process is due a 
convicted prisoner, the Supreme Court stated that "[t]he 
Fourteenth Amendment affords at least as much protection to 
persons the State detains for trial."  Id. at 135 (emphasis 
added).  While the Court stated that it was not adopting a 
standard of strict scrutiny, as it had "no occasion to finally 
prescribe such substantive standards...."  507 U.S. at 136, it 
nonetheless was clear that the Supreme Court did not simply 
apply the Harper standard.  Id. at 156-57 (Thomas, J., 
dissenting).2

__________
     2 See Riggins, 504 U.S. at 156-57 (Thomas, J., dissenting) 
("Either the Court is seeking to change the Harper standards or it 
is adopting different standards for detainees without stating its 
reasons.").

     The Constitution and the Supreme Court long have recog-
nized that the rights of a convicted prisoner are different 
from those of a pretrial defendant.  See U.S. Constitution, 
Amends. V & VI;  Riggins, 504 U.S. at 135;  Bell v. Wolfish, 
441 US 520, 535-36 (1979).  Similarly, the standards are 
different depending on whether the commitment because of 
mental illness occurs before or after a criminal trial.  Com-
pare Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 428-29 (1979), and 
Jackson v. Indiana, 406 U.S. 715, 738 (1972), with Jones v. 
United States, 463 U.S. 354, 370 (1983).  To the extent that 
Weston is in custody by reason of his incompetency to stand 
trial, the relevant issues are at least his dangerousness to 
himself and others, and the government's ability to bring him 
to trial.  But until he is convicted, Weston's rights and the 
relevant issues must be viewed through a somewhat different 
prism than those for a convicted prisoner.  Weston's custodial 
status does not entail the relinquishment of all rights that a 
person facing trial possesses, and Riggins' departure from 
Harper signals as much.  In other words, the issue raised by 
Weston was not settled in Harper.  But see concurring 
opinion of Henderson, J., at 1-2.

     The Supreme Court may ultimately articulate a standard 
for pretrial detainees that is different from the one applied in 
Harper to a prison inmate, particularly with regard to protec-
tion of a pretrial detainee's right to a fair trial.  See, e.g., 
United States v. Brandon, 158 F.3d 947, 956-60 (6th Cir. 
1998) (citing Bee v. Greaves, 744 F.2d 1387, 1393-94 (10th Cir. 
1984)).  Rather than foreclose the issue in this circuit at this 
point, I agree that the court should await the decision of the 
district court on remand to provide a record and analysis that 
can be helpful for review on appeal.  See opinion at 6.  As the 
record now stands, notwithstanding the district court's com-
mendable effort to get a handle on a difficult issue, the 
district court made insufficient findings and did not consider 
all of the factors.  And Riggins, while declining to enunciate 
explicitly the applicable substantive standard, nonetheless 
provides significant guidance to the district court on the 
nature of the relevant inquiry.  See opinion at 6 quoting 
Riggins, 504 U.S. at 135-36.

     As suggested by the language comprising this guidance in 
Riggins, the district court on remand must explore fully both 
the dangerousness and trial competency rationales for grant-
ing the government's motion.  The government sought forced 
medication of Weston for two reasons:  to address Weston's 
dangerousness to himself and others, and to make him com-
petent to stand trial.  The evidence before the district court 
focused on the latter, but the district court ruled that the 
forced administration of the medication was justified because 
of Weston's dangerousness.  As a result, there was no search-
ing inquiry into whether less intrusive alternatives would 
have been sufficient to control any potential danger posed by 
Weston to himself and to others.  See opinion at 7.  Insofar 
as we hold that the question of whether forced medication is 
necessary to achieve competency for trial is ripe for adjudica-
tion, the district court must also make a searching inquiry 
into whether less intrusive alternatives would make Weston 
competent to stand trial.  There also remain the attendant 
ethical issues Weston raises that the district court must 
address.

     In addition, the district court must address the effect of the 
forced administration of drugs on Weston's right to a fair 
trial.  The district court noted that Weston had argued that 
the Bureau of Prisons' "decision to medicate him against his 
will implicates his Fifth Amendment liberty interest in being 
free from unwanted medication, his Sixth Amendment rights 
to a fair trial and to counsel, and his First Amendment right 
to free expression."  Concluding that where Weston had not 
been arraigned and there was no evidence that the govern-
ment's medical reasons were pretextual, the Due Process 
Clause required the government only to satisfy Riggins' 
"medically appropriate" standard, 504 U.S. at 135, the district 
court further concluded that if the medication rendered Wes-
ton competent to stand trial the court could then address his 
argument that the Due Process Clause or the Sixth Amend-
ment required a heightened standard before he could be 
forcibly medicated during trial.  The issues of trial competen-
cy and fair-trial rights are distinct but they are not as 
separate as the district court suggests.  Weston raised a 

preliminary fair trial issue that is inextricably linked to the 
determination of whether forced medication is necessary to 
render him competent to stand trial and otherwise appropri-
ate.

     The district court, in ruling on the government's motion, 
must consider several conflicting factors, including Weston's 
right to trial and counsel, his right to be free from bodily 
invasion, the government's interests in protecting his and 
others' physical safety and in bringing him to trial.  Whether 
the underlying issue is described simply as a matter of 
whether the government has met its burden of proof or as a 
balance between the government's interests and Weston's 
rights, the issue of whether Weston's right to a fair trial will 
be unnecessarily or impermissibly infringed cannot be post-
poned altogether.  His fair trial rights implicate the rights of 
both parties, for the government has a right to know whether 
by medicating Weston it will forfeit the right to bring him to 
trial, and if not, what conditions are to be placed on his 
medication in order to preserve the prosecution.  Indeed, 
Weston contends that ethical considerations preclude the 
forced administration of psychotic drugs to make him compe-
tent in order to sentence him to death.  While other issues on 
the conduct of a trial are appropriately addressed at a later 
time, as the district court acknowledged, that circumstance 
does not make unripe the preliminary questions that Weston 
has raised.  As discussed in Judge Tatel's concurring opinion, 
the district court must engage in a searching examination of 
whether forced medication will impermissibly interfere with 
Weston's right to a fair trial in light of the serious and 
complicated issues raised by the effects that such medication 
may have upon Weston's demeanor at trial and his ability to 
assist in his own defense.  See infra, Tatel, J., concurring at 
3-6.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge, concurring:

         Cure her of that. 
         Canst thou not minister to a mind diseas'd, 
          Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, 
         Raze out the written troubles of the brain, 
         And with some sweet oblivious antidote 
         Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff 
         Which weighs upon the heart? 
         William Shakespeare, Macbeth, act 5, sc. 3.
     
     Centuries after Macbeth pleaded with his doctor to cure 
Lady Macbeth, a "sweet oblivious antidote" exists.  Psycho-
tropic drugs like Haldol and Mellaril, for example, are rou-
tinely prescribed for schizophrenia.  Powerful enough to 
"[r]aze out the written troubles of the brain," psychotropic 
drugs can also adversely affect a criminal defendant's right to 
a fair trial.  See Riggins v. Nevada, 504 U.S. 127 (1992).

     I agree with my colleagues that this case must be remand-
ed for the district court "to assess each of the Bureau's 
justifications [for forcibly medicating Weston] and to consider 
the potential impact of compelled medication on Weston's 
Sixth Amendment fair trial right."  Op. at 8.  I also agree 
with Judge Rogers' standard of review discussion, as well as 
with her explanation regarding why the fair trial issue is ripe.  
I write separately to set forth some thoughts about the 
daunting task the district court faces.

     First, a little more about Russell Eugene Weston.  Forty-
three years old and having a history of mental illness, Weston 
has lived with family members for most of his life.  He has 
worked for only brief periods as a laborer, maintenance man, 
and mechanic.  The prison psychiatrist who treated Weston 
and who concluded that he was not competent to stand trial, 
Dr. Sally Johnson, reported that Weston told her the follow-
ing:  While "working for NASA" in the early 1980's, he 
developed a "Ruby Satellite System," a powerful reverse time 
machine that enables users to "push time in reverse.... by 
passing us through the Jurassic Sea, putting us into another 
time frame."  For those like Weston with access to the "Ruby 

Satellite System," nothing is permanent--the user can simply 
reverse time.  If convicted and executed, Weston will "simply 
be time reversed, put into a safe in the Capitol, and be able to 
resume his life at whatever point he chooses."

     Weston gave Dr. Johnson considerable detail about the 
Ruby Satellite System.  Although the system was originally 
used infrequently, "those who are now in control are basically 
cannibals."  They have overused the system and "worn time 
down to 1/32 of one element of time," spawning the develop-
ment and spread of "Black Heva," a disease similar to HIV or 
the plague.  Black Heva "result[s] from human corpses rot-
ting, turning black, and spreading the most deadliest disease 
known to mankind."  Black Heva will soon reach "epidemic 
proportions," killing thirty-five percent of the people in the 
United States.  System overuse also has resulted in "comput-
ers not working right, bones being irregularly shaped, tele-
phone poles and electric poles being uneven, buildings lean-
ing, ... rock structures distorting and swelling, [and] unequal 
ground swelling and wide spread earthquakes."  Users can 
access the Ruby Satellite System through three different 
consoles, one of which is on the first floor of the U.S. Capitol 
and has the capacity to override the entire System.  Located 
in the "great safe of the U.S. Senate," the override console is 
accessible through a "room that is entered by going in the 
front of the Capitol and taking a door to the left, next to the 
elevators."  Because "time was running out," Weston had to 
get to the override console in the Capitol so that he could 
stem the spread of Black Heva and prevent further calami-
ties.

     On remand, the district court must answer the following 
question:  In pursuing its right to try Weston for murdering 
two Capitol police officers, can the government, in order to 
make Weston competent to stand trial, forcibly medicate him 
without impairing his right to a fair trial as guaranteed by the 
Fifth and Sixth Amendments?  Weston's fair trial rights 
include rights (1) not to be tried unless he is competent to 
"consult with counsel, and to assist in preparing his defense," 
Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162, 171 (1975);  (2) to testify and 
"present his own version of events in his own words," Rock v. 

Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44, 52 (1987);  (3) to be present in the 
courtroom at every stage of the trial, see Illinois v. Allen, 397 
U.S. 337, 338 (1970);  and (4) to present a defense, including 
an insanity defense.  See 18 U.S.C. s 17 (setting forth re-
quirements for insanity defense).

     Forcible administration of psychotropic drugs can burden 
these fair trial rights in several ways, one of which is through 
the drugs' various side effects.  See, e.g., Riggins, 504 U.S. at 
141-44 (Kennedy, J., concurring);  Washington v. Harper, 494 
U.S. 210, 229-230 (1990).  The medication can cause parkin-
sonism, which is "characterized by rhythmical muscular trem-
ors, rigidity of movement, ... and [a] masklike" face or 
expression, PDR Medical Dictionary 1301 (1995);  akathisia, a 
"syndrome characterized by an inability to remain in a sitting 
posture, with motor restlessness and a feeling of muscular 
quivering," id. at 41;  and tardive dyskinesia, "a syndrome 
consisting of potentially irreversible, involuntary dyskinetic 
movements ... characterized by rhythmical involuntary 
movements of tongue, face, mouth, or jaw (e.g., protrusion of 
tongue, puffing of cheeks, puckering of mouth, chewing move-
ments)."  Physicians' Desk Reference 2000 at 2156;  see also 
Harper, 494 U.S. at 230.  Should any of these side effects 
occur, Weston could find it difficult if not impossible to focus 
on the testimony of witnesses or to assist counsel with his 
defense.  Riggins, 504 U.S. at 137.

     In addition, jurors' perceptions of Weston's character could 
be adversely affected if as they watch him react to particular-
ly emotional testimony--for example the testimony of the 
officers' co-workers--his expression is "masklike" or he is 
constantly rhythmically moving.  The tendency of psycho-
tropic medication to flatten or deaden emotional responses 
could also be damaging, particularly if the government seeks 
the death penalty, for the jury would then be especially 
sensitive to Weston's character and any demonstrations of 
remorse (or lack thereof).  See Riggins, 504 U.S. at 144 
(Kennedy, J., concurring).  Justice Kennedy put it this way in 
his concurring opinion in Riggins:

     [S]erious prejudice could result if medication inhibits the 
     defendant's capacity to react and respond to the proceed-
     ings and to demonstrate remorse or compassion.  The 
     prejudice can be acute during the sentencing phase of 
     the proceedings, when the sentencer must attempt to 
     know the heart and mind of the offender and judge his 
     character, his contrition or its absence, and his future 
     dangerousness.  In a capital sentencing proceeding, as-
     sessments of character and remorse may carry great 
     weight and, perhaps, be determinative of whether the 
     offender lives or dies.
     
Id. at 143-44.

     Because the district court focused on the safety issue, the 
record contains little information about the possible effects of 
medication on Weston and nothing at all about their impact 
on his fair trial rights.  On remand, therefore, the district 
court will need to explore questions like the following:  How 
likely is it that these side effects will actually occur?  How 
severe are they likely to be?  Can side effects be mitigated or 
controlled by reducing the dosage, changing the type of 
medication, or administering medication to counteract these 
effects, and if so, can this be accomplished without reducing 
the drugs' potential for controlling delusions?  Considering 
the answers to such questions as well as Weston's previous 
experience with psychotropic drugs, the district court will 
have to determine whether it is likely that the drugs will so 
adversely affect Weston and the jury's perception of him that 
he will be unable to obtain a fair trial.  Of course, the 
difficulty inherent in predicting how a particular drug will 
affect a particular individual may well lead the district court 
to conclude that it cannot make this determination about 
Weston without first medicating him.  In that event, I see no 
reason why the potential for side effects would preclude the 
district court from ordering medication, provided that, should 
Weston become competent to stand trial, the district court 
conducts a second hearing to determine the extent to which 
any side effects Weston is actually experiencing might affect 
his fair trial rights.

     Regardless of how the district court resolves the side 
effects issue, it will also have to consider the impact of the 
drugs' intended effect--actually controlling Weston's delu-
sions--on his fair trial rights.  Rendering Weston non-
delusional may impair his ability to mount an effective insani-
ty defense.  Anyone reading Dr. Johnson's description of 
Weston's delusions might well doubt that Weston truly be-
lieves them, yet he convinced Dr. Johnson, an experienced 
prison psychiatrist.  Dr. Johnson, of course, interviewed Wes-
ton in the unmedicated, delusional state he was in when he 
allegedly committed the crime.  Will a jury that sees and 
hears a different Weston, one who is medicated and non-
delusional, be as likely to believe that he truly thought there 
was a Ruby Satellite System?  I think the answer is obvious.  
A jury listening to a non-delusional Weston explain, perhaps 
quite passively, that at the time of the crime he believed he 
had to save the world from the Ruby Satellite System will be 
considerably more skeptical than a jury that sees and hears 
the person Dr. Johnson saw and heard:  Russell Weston, 
delusional and unmedicated, explaining in the present tense 
that there is a "Ruby Satellite System" and that he in fact 
went to the Capitol in search of the override console to save 
the country from "human corpses rotting, turning black, and 
spreading the most deadliest disease known to mankind."

     Were Weston's testimony the only way for him to present 
an insanity defense, I would thus have serious doubts about 
whether the government could involuntarily medicate him.  
Unlike requiring a defendant to shave or wear glasses at trial, 
actions which merely restore a defendant's appearance to 
what it was at the time of the crime, see United States v. 
Emanuele, 51 F.3d 1123, 1132-33 (3d Cir. 1995), forcible 
medication chemically alters the brain and deprives the jury 
of the opportunity to observe the defendant in the delusional 
state he was in at the time of the crime.  To be sure, due 
process does not require that a defendant presenting a "heat 
of passion" defense "duplicate his 'hot blood' in court."  
Henderson, J., concurring at 2-3.  But because such a case 
involves no action by the government, it has nothing to do 
with the issue before us.  Here the question is whether due 

process permits the government through involuntary adminis-
tration of psychotropic drugs to alter the defendant so that it 
becomes impossible for him to appear before the jury as he 
was when he committed the crime.  No one would suggest 
that the government may prevent a defendant claiming insan-
ity from presenting relevant evidence about his delusions.  
From a due process perspective, forcibly administering psy-
chotropic medication--what Justice Kennedy called "manipu-
lat[ing] the evidence"--seems no different.  Riggins, 504 U.S. 
at 142 (Kennedy, J., concurring).

     But Weston's testimony may not be the only way for him to 
present an effective insanity defense.  Although at one point 
during oral argument defense counsel took the position that 
compulsory medication, by rendering Weston non-delusional, 
would necessarily violate Weston's fair trial rights, at another 
point he suggested that an effective insanity defense might be 
presented through the testimony of Dr. Johnson, perhaps 
assisted by videotapes of Weston.  On remand, therefore, the 
district court should review the tapes to determine whether 
they show Weston in his delusional state, and if so, whether, 
when combined with psychiatric testimony, they would enable 
defense counsel to mount an effective insanity defense.

     A final point:  In assessing whether compulsory medication 
would deprive Weston of a fair trial, the district court should 
keep in mind that "the Constitution entitles a criminal defen-
dant to a fair trial, not a perfect one."  Delaware v. Van 
Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 681 (1986);  see also Rock, 483 U.S. at 
55 ("[T]he right to present relevant testimony is not without 
limitation [and] may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommo-
date other legitimate interests in the criminal trial process.") 
(internal quotation marks omitted);  Allen, 397 U.S. at 342-45 
(holding that although a defendant has a constitutional right 
to be present at trial, expelling an obstreperous defendant 
does not unconstitutionally infringe that right).

                                                    