                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 17, 2001   Decided January 18, 2002 

                           No. 01-7029

                      Brenda Elaine Makins, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

                    District of Columbia and 
              Francis J. Henderson, Acting Warden, 
        D.C. Department of Corrections Central Facility, 
                            Appellees

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                           (98cv02693)

     Gregory L. Lattimer argued the cause and filed the briefs 
for appellant.

     Carl J. Schifferle, Assistant Corporation Counsel, argued 
the cause for appellees.  With him on the brief were Robert 

R. Rigsby, Corporation Counsel, and Charles L. Reischel, 
Deputy Corporation Counsel.

     Before:  Henderson, Randolph, and Rogers, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Randolph.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Randolph, Circuit Judge:  This appeal from a district court 
order enforcing a settlement agreement presents an issue 
much litigated in the other circuits but not yet decided by this 
court--namely, under what circumstances, if any, may an 
attorney without actual authority from his client bind the 
client to a settlement agreement.  We must also decide 
whether to look to state or federal law in answering this 
question.

                                I.

     In November 1998, Brenda Makins brought an action 
against the District of Columbia claiming sex discrimination 
and retaliatory firing, in violation of Title VII (42 U.S.C. 
s 2000e et seq.).  Makins had been employed in the District's 
Department of Corrections from 1995 until her discharge in 
1997.  Her complaint sought reinstatement, compensatory 
damages, and attorney fees.

     Makins' attorney, John Harrison, began representing her 
in 1996, after she received a notice of termination from the 
Department.  Harrison and Makins did not have a written 
retainer agreement.  In the summer of 2000, at a pre-trial 
conference, the district judge referred Makins' case to a 
magistrate judge "for settlement purposes only" and ordered 
the District to "have present at all settlement meetings ... 
an individual with full settlement authority."  The judge set 
the case for trial in December 2000.  Makins v. Dist. of 
Columbia, No. CV-98-2693, mem. op. at 2 (D.D.C. Dec. 11, 
2000).  A few days later, the magistrate ordered the "lead 
attorney(s) for the parties" to appear before him for a settle-
ment conference;  the order required that the "parties shall 

either attend the settlement conference or be available by 
telephone for the duration of the settlement conference."

     The conference, originally scheduled for August 22, took 
place on September 12, 2000.  Makins did not attend.  After 
two and a half hours of negotiations, Harrison and the 
attorneys for the District reached an agreement to end the 
case.  Makins would receive $99,000 and have her personnel 
records amended from "discharged" to "resigned" (to pre-
serve her retirement benefits if she were able to attain other 
federal employment).  In return, Makins would dismiss her 
claims against the District.  The attorneys "shook hands" on 
the deal and later reduced it to writing.  A few days later, 
when Harrison presented Makins with a copy for her signa-
ture, she refused to sign it.  The District then filed a Motion 
to Enforce Settlement.  Makins retained another attorney 
and the court held an evidentiary hearing in which Harrison, 
Makins, and the lead attorney for the District testified.

     The testimony of Makins and Harrison were at odds.  
According to Makins, she never agreed to settle her case 
under the terms Harrison and the District negotiated because 
"getting [her] job back had to be part of any agreement."  
She admitted wanting to settle the case and knowing that the 
correctional facility in which she had worked was downsizing.  
She claimed that Harrison waited until the night before the 
conference to alert her to it and specifically told her not to 
attend.  She talked to Harrison several times during the 
settlement negotiations on September 12.  But she insisted 
that she never agreed to the negotiated terms because, as she 
expressed to Harrison in one of their cell phone conversations 
that day, getting her job back was a condition to settling the 
case.  Although Makins swore in an affidavit, filed before the 
hearing, that Harrison alerted her during the negotiations 
that he was discussing the $99,000 figure, she testified that 
she did not recall such a conversation.

     Harrison disputed much of Makins' testimony.  He said 
they had extensively discussed the possibility of settlement 
the day before the conference, that he discouraged her from 
insisting on getting her job back, that he thought it made 

sense strategically for his client to remain at home so that 
"the Judge couldn't put pressure on her to settle," that she 
gave him a number where he could reach her on September 
12, and that she told him to do "what you think is right, I 
trust you."  At the conference, each side presented its case 
separately to the magistrate.  The attorneys and the magis-
trate then sat at a table and negotiations began.  On several 
occasions, the magistrate sent one of the attorneys out of the 
room and talked to the other about what he saw as strengths 
and weaknesses in the case.  By cell phone Harrison called 
Makins when he was out of the room.  He contends that she 
agreed to settle for $99,000.  Harrison testified that when the 
District agreed to this figure, he called Makins immediately 
and "told her that the 99 was done," to which she replied 
"good."  Harrison also stated that Makins did not express 
any dissatisfaction with the settlement until several days later 
when she refused to sign the papers in Harrison's office.

     The District's attorney generally confirmed Harrison's ac-
count of the conference (although he did not know what 
Harrison and his client had discussed by cell phone, or even if 
they had discussions).  In response to the District's offer of 
approximately $80,000, Harrison said his client was still at 
$120,000, or thereabouts.  The District's attorney replied that 
he would not settle the case for more than $100,000.  Harri-
son left the room, cell phone in hand, and came back a few 
minutes later.  He said $99,000 would be fine but his client 
wanted her records changed to show that she had resigned.  
The District reluctantly agreed.  Neither the attorney for the 
District nor the magistrate spoke to Makins to confirm her 
assent to the terms of the agreement.

     The district court, observing the "sharp conflict" in testimo-
ny between Makins and Harrison, declined to resolve it.  
Instead, the court assumed arguendo that Harrison did not 
have actual authority to settle the case.  The court granted 
the District's motion to enforce the settlement on the alterna-
tive ground that Harrison had apparent authority to bind 
Makins to the agreement.  The court saw "no justification for 
the District of Columbia not to reasonably believe that Mr. 

Harrison had the full confidence and authority of his client."  
Mem. op. at 7.

                               II.

     Settlement agreements are in the nature of contracts.  See 
Gaines v. Cont'l Mortgage & Inv. Corp., 865 F.2d 375, 378 
(D.C. Cir. 1989).  As in other contract negotiations, one or 
both of the parties may insist that the terms be reduced to 
writing and that only a signed agreement will be effective.  
But not all contracts, and not all settlements, must be written 
in order to be enforceable.  The parties may orally agree 
upon the material terms and intend to be bound. See United 
States v. Mahoney, 247 F.3d 279, 285 (D.C. Cir. 2001).  
"Lawsuits may, of course, be compromised by oral contract."  
Autera v. Robinson, 419 F.2d 1197, 1198 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1969);  
see also Feltman v. Sarbov, 366 A.2d 137, 141 (D.C. 1976).  
The attorney for Makins and the District agreed upon essen-
tial terms.  That Makins refused to sign the settlement 
papers is therefore not conclusive, a point she does not 
debate.  The question is whether the oral understanding 
between the attorneys may be enforced against Makins--
whether, in other words, she was bound by the deal her 
attorney negotiated.

     The District urges us to adopt local law as the rule of 
decision.  Makins thinks we should devise federal law:  the 
case was brought in federal court;  the cause of action is 
derived from federal legislation;  and the actions of attorneys 
conducting federal litigation are of particular federal concern.  
Apparently for these reasons, some federal courts agree with 
Makins.  See, e.g., Kinan v. Cohen, 268 F.3d 27, 32 (1st Cir. 
2001);  Malave v. Carney Hosp., 170 F.3d 217, 221 (1st Cir. 
1999);  Michaud v. Michaud, 932 F.2d 77, 79 n.3 (1st Cir. 
1991);  Fennell v. TLB Kent Co., 865 F.2d 498, 501 (2d Cir. 
1986);  Mid-South Towing Co. v. Har-Win, Inc., 733 F.2d 
386, 386 (5th Cir. 1984).  Makins also cites Alexander v. 
Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. 36, 52 & n.15 (1974), for the 
proposition that federal law governs settlement agreements in 
Title VII cases.  The Supreme Court, after saying that an 

employee could enter into a voluntary settlement and waive 
his cause of action under Title VII, added this:  "In determin-
ing the effectiveness of any such waiver, a court would have 
to determine at the outset that the employee's consent to the 
settlement was voluntary and knowing," 451 U.S. at 52 n.15, 
thus invoking the familiar test of Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 
458, 464 (1938).  But this was dictum.  The employee in 
Alexander had not entered into a settlement.  An arbitrator 
had rejected his grievance charging racial discrimination.  
The Court was not concerned with settlement agreements in 
general, or with the authority of attorneys to enter into them.  
The issue before the Court was whether the labor-
management arbitration, conducted pursuant to a collective 
bargaining agreement, precluded the employee from bringing 
a Title VII action alleging the same conduct.  The Court's 
remarks about settlements, contained in a footnote not citing 
any authority, can hardly be taken as representing its consid-
ered judgment that state law should not be adopted in Title 
VII cases.  And we see no good reason why Title VII cases 
should be singled out for different treatment in this respect 
than other federal causes of action.  Cf. Reeves v. Sanderson 
Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 148 (2000).

     In any event, Makins has missed--as has the District--our 
opinion in United States v. Mahoney, 247 F.3d at 285.  We 
there held that whether the parties have reached a settlement 
is a matter of local law.  For this conclusion we cited and 
relied upon the decision in Quijano v. Eagle Maintenance 
Service, Inc., 952 F. Supp. 1, 3 (D.D.C. 1998), that the 
"enforcement of settlement agreements is governed by state 
contract law."  There are good reasons behind this.

     The power of the federal courts to formulate law in this 
area, and the need for national uniformity, are doubtful at 
best, as Judge Easterbrook forcefully demonstrated in Mor-
gan v. South Bend Community School Corp., 797 F.2d 471, 
474-78 (7th Cir. 1986).  In fact, our survey of the law 
regarding settlements indicates that rather than national 
uniformity in the federal courts, there is national disarray.  
See generally Grace M. Giesel, Enforcement of Settlement 
Contracts:  The Problem of the Attorney Agent, 12 Geo. J. 

Legal Ethics 543, 563-80 (1999).  We agree that "neutral 
state laws that do not undermine federal interests should be 
applied unless some statute (or the Constitution) authorizes 
the federal court to create a rule of decision."  Morgan, 797 
F.2d at 475 (citing Miree v. DeKalb County, 433 U.S. 25, 28-
33 (1977)).  There is also an advantage for members of the 
bar to know that in negotiating settlements, the law govern-
ing the validity of their agreements will be the same in 
federal and state court.  Other federal courts of appeals 
agree.  The Seventh, Eighth, Tenth, and Eleventh Circuits, 
and perhaps the Third, Fourth, and Ninth, now look to state 
law in determining if a valid and enforceable settlement 
agreement exists.  See Pohl v. United Airlines, Inc., 213 F.3d 
336, 338 (7th Cir. 2000);  In re Airline Ticket Comm'n Anti-
trust Litig., 268 F.3d 619, 623 (8th Cir. 2001);  United States 
v. McCall, 235 F.3d 1211, 1213 (10th Cir. 2000);  Hayes v. 
Nat'l Serv. Indus., 196 F.3d 1252, 1254 & n.2 (11th Cir. 1999);  
see also Tiernan v. Devoe, 923 F.2d 1024, 1032-33 (3d Cir. 
1991);  Auvil v. Grafton Homes, Inc., 92 F.3d 226, 230 (4th 
Cir. 1996);  Mallott & Peterson v. Director, Office of Workers' 
Comp. Programs, 98 F.3d 1170, 1173 (9th Cir. 1996).  Aside 
from cases in which a settlement agreement is sought to be 
enforced against the United States, see United States v. 
Beebe, 180 U.S. 343, 352 (1901), or in which there is a statute 
conferring lawmaking power on federal courts, see Textile 
Workers v. Lincoln Mills, 353 U.S. 448, 451 (1957), we adopt 
local law in determining whether a settlement agreement 
should be enforced.

     The local law on this subject is, unfortunately, not much 
developed.  The District of Columbia Court of Appeals treats 
settlement agreements as contracts.  See Goozh v. Capitol 
Souvenir Co., 462 A.2d 1140, 1142 (D.C. 1983).  In run-of-the-
mill contract cases, the D.C. Court of Appeals relies on s 27 
of the Restatement (Second) of Agency to determine whether 
an agent has the authority to enter into a binding agreement 
on behalf of the principal.  See, e.g., Sigal Constr. Corp. v. 
Stanbury, 586 A.2d 1204, 1218 (D.C. 1991) (citing Restate-
ment (Second) of Agency s 27 (1958)). The local court distin-
guishes--as did the district court--between an agent's "actual 

authority" and his "apparent authority."  Actual "authority," 
according to the Restatement's definition, means that the 
agent has the power "to affect the legal relations of the 
principal by acts done in accordance with the principal's 
manifestations of consent to him."  Restatement (Second) of 
Agency s 7.  For settlement purposes, attorney Harrison 
possessed actual authority in certain respects.  Makins mani-
fested her consent to Harrison's attending the settlement 
conference on September 12, to negotiating on her behalf and, 
if her testimony is believed, to settling the case, but only on 
the condition that she got her job back.

     We must assume arguendo--because the district court did 
so--that Makins never gave Harrison actual authority to 
settle the case without the condition she specified.  Still, it 
does not necessarily follow that because the settlement agree-
ment lacked that condition it cannot be enforced.  As agents 
for their clients, attorneys without actual authority may have 
"apparent authority" to bind their clients to agreements.  
The local court has not, however, addressed the precise 
question presented here:  may an attorney negotiating in the 
client's absence bind the client to a settlement agreement if 
the attorney has led opposing counsel to believe he had actual 
authority from the client to settle the case?

     On the other hand, an opinion of the local court--not cited 
by the District and the only one we have found dealing with 
an attorney's authority to settle a case--holds that "regard-
less of the good faith of the attorney, absent specific authori-
ty, an attorney cannot accept a settlement offer on behalf of a 
client."  Bronson v. Borst, 404 A.2d 960, 963 (D.C. 1979).  On 
the face of it, the statement leaves no room for apparent 
authority.  If this is the meaning of Bronson, the case is at 
odds with the same court's later pronouncement in Goozh that 
the enforcement of settlement agreements is governed by the 
law applicable to the making of contracts generally, and with 
its adoption of the Restatement position that an agent lacking 
actual authority may nevertheless bind the principal to an 
agreement with a third party if the agent has apparent 
authority.  Bronson may be explained on the basis that the 
suit was brought by the attorney against the client to enforce 

the settlement in order to recover his contingent fee, and that 
at least as between an attorney and client, the court would 
not allow recovery if the attorney entered into the settlement 
against the client's wishes.  This is consistent with s 383 of 
the Restatement (Second) of Agency, although the court did 
not mention it.  Bronson, unlike this case, did not deal with 
the interests of a third party who entered into the settlement 
with the attorney.  The third party in Bronson, an insurer, 
was not named in the lawsuit.  There was thus no occasion 
for the court to consider whether an opposing party could 
enforce a settlement agreement when the other party's attor-
ney possessed only apparent authority.

     Given the vintage of Bronson, the fact that the local court 
has never again relied upon the portion of the opinion quoted, 
the distinctions we have just mentioned, and the absence of 
any recent cases on point, the content of local law is so much 
in doubt that we are reluctant to take the statement in 
Bronson at face value.  Makins herself concedes that if 
Harrison had apparent authority--as she views it--the agree-
ment he negotiated could be enforced.  Brief for Appellant at 
14.  We have therefore undertaken an analysis of whether 
Harrison had apparent authority, which puts us in the posi-
tion of deciding--to borrow from Judge Friendly--what the 
local court would think on a question about which it has never 
thought.  Nolan v. Transocean Air Lines, 276 F.2d 280, 281 
(2d Cir. 1960).

     Apparent authority may be defined as the "power to affect 
the legal relations of another person by transactions with 
third persons, professedly as agent for the other, arising 
from, and in accordance with the other's manifestations to 
such third persons."  Restatement (Second) of Agency s 8;  
see Am. Soc. of Mech. Eng'rs, Inc. v. Hydrolevel Corp., 456 
U.S. 556, 566-68 (1982).  Apparent authority, according to the 
widely-accepted rule in the Restatement, can arise from "writ-
ten or spoken words or any other conduct of the principal 
which, reasonably interpreted, causes the third person to 
believe that the principal consents to have the act done on 
[her] behalf by the person purporting to act for [her]."  Id. 
s 27.  While actual authority depends on communications 

between the client and the attorney--the principal and the 
agent--apparent authority under the Restatement turns on 
the client's communication to the third party, here the Dis-
trict of Columbia.  As the D.C. Court of Appeals put it, 
"apparent authority is derived from the principal's represen-
tations to the third-party rather than to the agent."  Sigal 
Constr. Corp., 586 A.2d at 1218.

     Given the local court's adoption of the Restatement, and its 
willingness to look at treatises to establish the general rules 
of law pertaining to agency issues, see Insurance Manage-
ment of Wash., Inc. v. Eno & Howard Plumbing Corp., 348 
A.2d 310, 312 (D.C. 1975) (citing 3 G. Couch, Insurance 
s 26:75 (2d ed. 1960) to establish the general rule for the 
apparent authority of an insurance agent), the local court 
faced with this issue might turn to the recently-issued Re-
statement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers to aid 
analysis.  The Restatement of the Law Governing Lawyers 
parallels the Restatement of Agency's approach to authority:  
"A lawyer's act is considered to be that of the client in 
proceedings before a tribunal or in dealings with a third 
person if the tribunal or third person reasonably assumes 
that the lawyer is authorized to do the act on the basis of the 
client's (and not the lawyer's) manifestations of authoriza-
tion."  Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers 
s 27 (1998).  To this the Restatement adds:  "Apparent au-
thority exists when and to the extent a client causes a third 
person to form a reasonable belief that a lawyer is authorized 
to act for the client";  and "Generally a client is not bound by 
a settlement that the client has not authorized the lawyer to 
make by express, implied, or apparent authority...."  Id. 
cmts. b & d.  It then offers the following illustration:

     Lawyer represents Client in a civil action in which the 
     court orders counsel to appear at a pretrial conference 
     with authority to settle the case or to arrange for the 
     presence of a person so authorized.  Client has not been 
     informed of the order and has not authorized Lawyer to 
     approve a settlement.  Lawyer, without disclosing that 
     
     lack of authority, attends the conference and agrees to a 
     settlement.  Client is not bound by the settlement.
     
Id. s 27, cmt. d, illus. 3.  The reasoning behind this begins 
with the principle that certain decisions in litigation are the 
client's, and the client's alone to make.  Like the decision to 
enter a plea of guilty or to pursue an appeal in a civil or 
criminal case, the decision whether to settle a case and on 
what terms is reserved to the client.  Id. s 22(1);  see also 
D.C. Rules of Prof'l Conduct R. 1.2(a) ("A lawyer shall 
accept a client's decision whether to accept an offer of settle-
ment of a matter.").  As to settlements, the client therefore 
must manifest to the third party that his lawyer has the 
authority to compromise the case.  If the matter is in doubt, 
third parties can protect themselves by "obtaining clarifica-
tion of the lawyer's authority."  Restatement (Third) of the 
Law Governing Lawyers s 27 cmt. d.  Settlements are there-
by facilitated while the client's prerogatives are preserved.

     The key here is that the client, not the lawyer, must 
indicate to the third party that the lawyer is authorized to 
act.  We have applied this rule to attorney-client transactions 
in a context other than settlement, see Williams v. WMATA, 
721 F.2d 1412, 1416-17 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  But not all courts 
agree.  The Sixth Circuit, interpreting Michigan law, held 
that "when a client hires an attorney and holds him out as 
counsel representing in a matter, the client clothes the attor-
ney with apparent authority to settle claims connected with 
the matter."  Capital Dredge & Dock Corp. v. City of Detroit, 
800 F.2d 525, 529 (6th Cir. 1986).  The Restatement (Third) 
of the Law Governing Lawyers treats this as a minority 
approach.  The general rule, embodied in the decisions of 
other federal courts relying on both federal and state law, and 
a much-quoted passage from a Supreme Court opinion are 
against the notion that merely retaining a lawyer is enough 
for this purpose.  See, e.g., Michaud, 932 F.2d at 80;  Fennell, 
865 F.2d at 502;  Edwards v. Born, Inc., 792 F.2d 387, 390 (3d 
Cir. 1986);  Auvil, 92 F.3d at 230-31;  see also Autera, 419 
F.2d at 1201 n.18;  accord Woodson v. UPS, No. 91-C6452, 
1993 WL 280759, at *2 (N.D. Ill. July 26, 2001);  Evans v. 
Skinner, 742 F. Supp. 30, 31 (D.D.C. 1990);  Ashley v. Atlas 

Mfg. Co., 7 F.R.D. 77, 77 (D.D.C. 1946), aff'd, 166 F.2d 209 
(D.C. Cir. 1948).  As the Supreme Court put it a century ago:  
"the utter want of power of an attorney, by virtue of his 
general retainer only, to compromise his client's claim, can-
not, we think, be successfully disputed."  United States v. 
Beebe, 180 U.S. at 352.  The Restatement makes the same 
point:  although "simply retaining a lawyer confers broad 
apparent authority on the lawyer" regarding some matters, it 
"does not extend to matters, such as approving a settlement, 
reserved for client decision...."  Restatement (Third) of the 
Law Governing Lawyers s 27 cmt. a;  see also id. s 27 cmt. d.

     The District thinks Makins did more than just retain 
Harrison.  It contends that she "participated in the settle-
ment proceeding through her phone conversations with her 
attorney."  Brief for Appellees at 23.  Neither the District 
nor the magistrate ever heard from Makins, in person or by 
telephone.  What the District derives from the telephone calls 
between Makins and Harrison amounts to nothing more than 
Harrison's representations of--and the District's educated 
guesses about--what was said in private between them, a 
disputed factual question the district court did not resolve.

     The district court found that:

     [Harrison] had represented Makins against the District of 
     Columbia since 1996 when he was retained before the 
     adverse action.  He then represented Ms. Makins at the 
     time she filed her EEO complaint.  Finally, he was 
     retained to represent her in the present lawsuit which 
     was filed in 1998.
     
Mem. op. at 6 (emphasis added).  As we have stated, many 
courts hold that retaining a lawyer is not enough to confer 
apparent authority to settle the case.  The district court also 
emphasized that Harrison fulfilled his duties as an attorney 
by filing pleadings, answering motions, and so forth.  Id. at 
6-7.  But if we followed the majority rule, this would not be 
enough.  The client's manifestations to the third party must 
be with respect to settlement, not the general conduct of the 
litigation.  See Auvil, 92 F.3d at 230.  If it were otherwise, an 

attorney would nearly always have apparent authority to end 
the case despite the wishes of his client.

     It may not be crucial that the settlement conference took 
place before the magistrate.  The District suggests that it 
had more reason for believing Harrison in that setting.  But 
Harrison had a duty of truthful representation, not only to 
the magistrate in court, but also to the District outside the 
courtroom.  See D.C. Rules of Prof'l Conduct R. 4.1(a).  We 
have seen nothing in the record to prove that Harrison told 
the magistrate he had authority to settle the case on the 
terms ultimately agreed upon.  Neither Harrison nor counsel 
for the District testified to that effect.

     The district court thought the opinion of the D.C. Court of 
Appeals in Feltman v. Sarbov, 366 A.2d at 138-39, strongly 
supported the District's position.  The suit was for damages 
arising from a lessor's breach of his attorney's oral promise to 
the lessee of a parking lot.  The parties had entered into a 
written lease, with the lessee dealing exclusively with the 
attorney.  When the lease was about to expire, the attorney 
convinced the lessee to renew, promising that the right of 
first refusal and the provision regarding the garage conces-
sion contained in the initial lease would remain in effect.  
Later, the attorney approached the lessee and asked him to 
vacate the premises, this time promising that he would get 
the garage concession in a new building about to be con-
structed.  The lessor had already entered into an agreement 
to develop the property, thereby abrogating the lessee's right 
of first refusal;  and when the new building was constructed, 
the lessee did not receive the garage concession the attorney 
promised.  See id.

     The D.C. Court of Appeals, holding that the attorney had 
apparent authority, sustained the award of damages to the 
lessee.  "Apparent authority arises," the court wrote, "when a 
principal places an agent in a position which causes a third 
person to reasonably believe the principal had consented to 
the exercise of authority the agent purports to hold.  This 
falls short of an overt, affirmative representation by a princi-
pal," 366 A.2d at 139 (internal quotations omitted).  To this 

the court added:  "The apparent authority of an agent arises 
when the principal places the agent in such a position as to 
mislead third persons into believing that the agent is clothed 
with authority which in fact he does not possess."  Id. at 140 
(internal quotations omitted).  There is nothing particularly 
remarkable about these statements of law.  They merely 
remind that apparent authority can arise from something 
other than statements of the principal, a proposition the 
Restatement (Second) of Agency embraces (see s 27 cmt. a 
and s 49 cmt. c).  The "something other" usually consists of 
"the ordinary habits of persons in the locality, trade or 
profession"--in other words, custom and usage.  See Restate-
ment (Second) of Agency s 49 cmt. c;  Restatement (Third) 
of the Law Governing Lawyers s 21 cmt. e (referring to 
matters ordinarily in the discretion of the lawyer).  In Felt-
man, the court therefore relied upon the facts that the 
"attorney not only had drafted the lease but also handled all 
the negotiations with regard to its initial execution, its renew-
al, and its premature termination."  366 A. 2d at 140.  This 
long course of dealing, in which the lessor held out "the 
attorney as the person with whom the lessee should deal," id., 
conferred apparent authority on the attorney.

     For several reasons we are reluctant to treat Feltman as 
dispositive. For one thing, the case did not deal with a 
settlement agreement, which at least under the Restatement 
of the Law Governing Lawyers is in the special category of 
matters reserved exclusively for the client's decision.  
(Whether the local courts would treat settlements in this 
manner remains to be seen.)  The Feltman court, though, 
placed no special emphasis on the attorney-client relationship.  
For another thing, Feltman rests on the several transactions 
between the attorney and the lessee, in the attorney's negoti-
ating and reaching contractual agreements on behalf of the 
lessor.  The settlement of a lawsuit, however, is typically the 
only contractual agreement the parties reach in litigation and 
one would therefore not expect to see a course of dealing of 
the sort present in Feltman.

     Still, it may be that it is customary for lawyers in the 
District to enter into binding, oral settlement agreements 

without the opposing side receiving some manifestation of 
assent--orally or in writing (as in a signature on an agree-
ment)--from the client.  But the District put on no evidence 
to this effect and there is nothing to indicate that the District 
had reason to believe, from previous interactions with Makins, 
that certain conduct on the part of Harrison was authorized.  
It may also be that the D.C. Court of Appeals would decide 
that a client's authorizing his attorney to attend a settlement 
conference and negotiate on the client's behalf is, in itself, 
enough to confer apparent authority.  See Capital Dredge & 
Dock Corp. v. City of Detroit, 800 F.2d at 529.  But see Auvil 
v. Grafton Homes, Inc., 92 F.3d at 230-31;  Giesel, supra, at 
573-74 (citing similar cases).  This would be an extension of 
Feltman and we are unsure whether the court would take the 
step.

     Because of our uncertainty about whether local law sup-
ports a finding of apparent authority in this case, and because 
of the importance of determining when a lawyer has apparent 
authority to settle a case, we have decided to ask the D.C. 
Court of Appeals for its views.  See Tidler v. Eli Lilly & Co., 
851 F.2d 418, 426 (D.C. Cir. 1988);  Joy v. Bell Helicopter 
Texitron, Inc., 999 F.2d 549, 563-64 (D.C. Cir. 1993).  Pursu-
ant to D.C. Code s 11-723, the following question is certified 
to the D.C. Court of Appeals:

     Under District of Columbia law, is a client bound by a 
     settlement agreement negotiated by her attorney when 
     the client has not given the attorney actual authority to 
     settle the case on those terms but has authorized the 
     attorney to attend a settlement conference before a 
     magistrate judge and to negotiate on her behalf and 
     when the attorney leads the opposing party to believe 
     that the client has agreed to those terms?
     
                                                                 So ordered.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, dissenting:

"The little plaintiff or defendant, who was promised a new 
rocking-horse when Jarndyce and Jarndyce should be settled, 
has grown up, possessed himself of a real horse, and trotted 
away into the other world."

     --Charles Dickens, Bleak House 52 (Norman Page ed., 
Penguin Books 1971) (1853)

     In my view, the majority has misconstrued District of 
Columbia (District or D.C.) agency principles and has errone-
ously certified a question whose answer is clear.  As a result, 
it has further delayed the enforcement of a valid settlement 
agreement between the District and the appellant, Brenda E. 
Makins.  Accordingly, and for the reasons set forth below, I 
dissent.

     Makins makes two separate challenges to the district 
court's order enforcing the September 12, 2000 settlement.  
First, citing dicta from Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co., 
415 U.S. 36, 52 n.15 (1974), she contends that the district 
court committed reversible error by failing to determine 
whether she had "voluntarily and knowingly" entered into the 
agreement.  Br. of Appellant at 10-14.  Second, she argues 
that the district court applied the incorrect legal standard in 
deciding that her then-lawyer, John Harrison, had apparent 
authority to settle her Title VII action.  See id. at 14-18.

     The majority correctly rejects the first of Makins's claims.  
Her assertion that "settlement agreements resolving Title 
VII claims must be entered into 'voluntarily and knowingly' 
by the plaintiff before the court will find that [she] has waived 
[her] federally protected right to seek redress," id. at 11, is 
unsupported by any holding of the United States Supreme 
Court or of any court of appeals.  Indeed, the only court to 
rule on the issue held that the voluntary-and-knowing stan-
dard "is not the applicable standard when reviewing a case in 
which the employee [seeking relief under Title VII] was 
represented by an attorney who settled the matter on the 
employee's behalf."  Hayes v. Nat'l Serv. Indus., 196 F.3d 
1252, 1254 n.2 (11th Cir. 1999) (emphasis added).  In any 
case, nothing in the text of Title VII requires that settlement 

of a suit thereunder be entered "voluntarily and knowingly."  
See generally 42 U.S.C. s 2000e et seq.

     In addressing Makins's second claim, the majority properly 
adheres to the principle that "neutral state [rules] that do not 
undermine federal interests should be applied unless some 
statute (or the Constitution) authorizes the federal court to 
create a rule of [federal law]."  Maj. op. at 7 (quoting Morgan 
v. South Bend Cmty. Sch. Corp., 797 F.2d 471, 475 (7th Cir. 
1986)).  Like the majority, I see no reason to exempt this 
case from the general rule that "enforcement of settlement 
agreements is [an issue] governed by state contract law."  
Maj. op. at 6.  Thus, I agree that District of Columbia agency 
principles govern the enforceability of the settlement between 
the District and Makins.  I dissent, however, because the 
majority's interpretation of those principles--and its certifica-
tion to the D.C. Court of Appeals for clarification thereof--is, 
in a word, unsettling.

     The District's certification statute states that its Court of 
Appeals

     may answer questions of law certified to it by ... a 
     Court of Appeals of the United States ... if there are 
     involved in any proceeding before any such certifying 
     court questions of law of the District of Columbia which 
     may be determinative of the cause pending in such 
     certifying court and as to which it appears to the certify-
     ing court there is no controlling precedent in the deci-
     sions of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
     
D.C. Code s 11-723(a) (emphasis added).  Consistent with 
the statute, we recently held that "[i]n deciding whether to 
certify a case we look to whether local law is 'genuinely 
uncertain' with respect to a dispositive question ... and to 
whether the 'case is one of extreme public importance[.]' ... 
If, however, there is a 'discernible path for the court to 
follow,' then we do not stop short of deciding the question."  
Dial A Car, Inc. v. Transp., Inc., 132 F.3d 743, 746 (D.C. Cir. 
1998) (citations omitted).  I believe the prerequisites men-
tioned in Dial A Car preclude us from certifying the question 
posed by the majority.  Plainly, the issue of whether Harri-

son had apparent authority to bind Makins under D.C. agency 
principles is a "dispositive" one.  And I am willing to concede, 
at least arguendo, that the scope of a lawyer's settlement 
authority is a matter of "extreme public importance."  None-
theless, I am not convinced that D.C. law is "genuinely 
uncertain" with respect to the question the majority certifies.

     The majority believes that the extraordinarily narrow ques-
tion it poses is one "about which [the D.C. Court of Appeals] 
has never thought."  Maj. op. at 9.  Of this there is probably 
little doubt.  The certification standard under D.C. Code 
s 11-723, however, is not whether the Court of Appeals has 
ruled precisely on the issue before us but simply whether its 
case law gives us a "discernible path ... to follow" in 
deciding the broader question:  Under what circumstances 
does a lawyer have apparent authority to effect a settlement 
on behalf of his client?

     The majority recognizes that "the D.C. Court of Appeals 
relies on s 27 of the Restatement (Second) of Agency to 
determine whether an agent has the authority to enter into a 
binding agreement on behalf of the principal."  Maj. op. at 7 
(citing Sigal Constr. Corp. v. Stanbury, 586 A.2d 1204, 1219 
(D.C. 1991)).  And it acknowledges that, under section 27, 
apparent authority arises from "written or spoken words or 
any other conduct of the principal which, reasonably inter-
preted, causes the third person to believe that the principal 
consents to have the act done on [her] behalf by the person 
purporting to act for [her]."  Id. at 9 (quoting Restatement 
(Second) of Agency s 27 (1958)) (emphasis added).  Mistak-
enly, however, the majority then throws in the towel, declin-
ing to decide what D.C. case law makes clear:  retaining a 
lawyer and holding him out as the individual with whom the 
opposing party should negotiate is sufficient to confer appar-
ent authority to settle the client's case.

     In Feltman v. Sarbov, 366 A.2d 137 (D.C. 1976)--one of the 
cases upon which the district court expressly relied--the D.C. 
Court of Appeals declared:

     Apparent authority arises when a principal places an 
     agent "in a position which causes a third person to 
     
     reasonably believe the principal had consented to the 
     exercise of authority the agent purports to hold.  This 
     falls short of an overt, affirmative representation by a 
     principal." ... [That is, apparent authority] arises when 
     the principal places the agent in such a position as to 
     mislead third persons into believing that the agent is 
     clothed with authority which in fact he does not possess.
     
Id. at 139-40 (citations omitted);  see also Sigal Constr. Corp., 
586 A.2d at 1218-19 (same standard);  Mgmt. P'ship, Inc. v. 
Crumlin, 423 A.2d 939, 941 (D.C. 1980) (same standard).  As 
the majority observes, this "not[ ] particularly remarkable" 
pronouncement reminds us that apparent authority can be 
created "from something other than statements of the princi-
pal."  Maj. op. at 14.  Citing the Restatement (Third) of the 
Law Governing Lawyers--upon which, it surmises, the D.C. 
Court of Appeals would rely in deciding a case like this one, 
see id. at 10--the majority limits the "something other" to 
what it calls "custom and usage."  Id. at 14.  While custom 
and usage are undoubtedly factors to consider when deter-
mining the existence of apparent authority, see Crumlin, 423 
A.2d at 941, the limitation is unwarranted;  Feltman contem-
plates apparent authority if the principal merely "places an 
agent in a position" that reasonably suggests authority.  
Feltman, 366 A.2d at 139 (emphasis added);  see also Crum-
lin, 423 A.2d at 941 (for apparent authority to attach, "it is 
essential that the principal have put the agent in a position 
where the power exercised would normally be within the 
reasonable scope of authority").

     The majority's reluctance to accept Feltman at face value, 
Maj. op. at 14, is baffling.  That "the case did not deal with a 
settlement agreement," id., does not render it inapplicable 
here.  As Goozh v. Capitol Souvenir Co., 462 A.2d 1140 (D.C. 
1983), makes clear, in the District of Columbia "settlement 
agreements are entitled to enforcement under general princi-
ples of contract law."  Id. at 1142 (citation omitted) (emphasis 
added).  Indeed, because D.C. "law favors the settlement of 
controversies," a "settlement will be enforced as any other 
contract."  Id. (citation omitted) (emphasis added).

     Furthermore, Bronson v. Borst, 404 A.2d 960 (D.C. 1979), a 
decision the majority cites, is consistent with Feltman and 
Goozh.  Contrary to the majority's suggestion, Maj. op. at 8, 
Bronson's declaration that "regardless of the good faith of the 
attorney, absent specific authority, an attorney cannot accept 
a settlement offer on behalf of a client," Bronson, 404 A.2d at 
963, leaves plenty of room for apparent authority.  The 
statement in Bronson means nothing more than that a lawyer 
cannot end his client's case without either actual or apparent 
authority.  As the majority itself explains, the Bronson litiga-
tion "was brought by the attorney against the client to 
enforce the settlement in order to recover his contingent fee."  
Maj. op at 8-9.  Because "Bronson, unlike this case, did not 
deal with the interests of a third party who entered into the 
settlement with the attorney," the court simply had "no 
occasion ... to consider whether an opposing party could 
enforce a settlement agreement when the other party's attor-
ney possessed only apparent authority."  Id. at 9.  In other 
words, Bronson is inapposite.  If governing D.C. precedent 
were uncertain, certification and concomitant delay would be 
justified.  But because the applicable D.C. case law--i.e., 
Feltman--is clear, I would decide the matter before us 
without further delay.

     Moreover, I believe the local courts follow the Sixth Cir-
cuit's view that "when a client hires an attorney and holds 
him out as counsel representing him in a matter, the client 
clothes the attorney with apparent authority to settle claims 
connected with the matter."  Capital Dredge & Dock Corp. v. 
City of Detroit, 800 F.2d 525, 530 (6th Cir. 1986) (applying 
Michigan law).  As the District demonstrates, see Br. of 
Appellee at 18, the facts of Feltman bear out this analysis.  
In Feltman, the court found that a lawyer had apparent 
authority to bind his client to a lease because the lawyer had 
drafted the lease and "handled all the negotiations with 
regard to its initial execution, its renewal, and its premature 
termination."  Feltman, 366 A.2d at 140.  The lessor (i.e., the 
principal) argued that he had not made any express represen-
tations directly to the lessee (i.e., the third party);  apparent 
authority attached nonetheless because the lessor "held out 

this attorney as the person with whom the lessee should 
deal."  Id.  Resisting this conclusion, the majority quotes 
from the United States Supreme Court's decision in United 
States v. Beebe, 180 U.S. 343, 352 (1901):  "[T]he utter want of 
power of an attorney, by virtue of his general retainer only, to 
compromise his client's claim, cannot, we think, be successful-
ly disputed."  Maj. op. at 12.  The D.C. court's view, however, 
is not inconsistent with the Supreme Court's--that is, both 
courts reject the Restatement's proposition that "[t]he man-
ifestation of the principal may be made ... to a third person 
... by continuously employing the agent."  Restatement 
(Second) of Agency s 8 cmt. b (emphasis added).

     The majority also expresses concern that, under Feltman, 
"an attorney [will] nearly always have apparent authority to 
end the case despite the wishes of his client."  Maj. op. at 12-
13.  But "nearly always" overstates the case;  whether the 
client has made clear her lawyer's authority by placing him in 
a position of authority--e.g., by sending him to a settlement 
conference--is only the first half of the inquiry.  For appar-
ent authority to attach, the client's manifestation must also 
"cause[ ] a third person to reasonably believe the principal 
ha[s] consented to the exercise of authority the agent pur-
ports to hold."  Feltman, 366 A.2d at 139.  In my view, the 
D.C. Court of Appeals has wisely declined to adopt a standard 
under which a lawyer's representation of his settlement au-
thority is unreliable as a matter of law if the client herself has 
made no direct representations to opposing counsel.  Such a 
standard, it seems to me, "would require litigants to go 
behind counsel to the opposing party in order to verify 
authorization for every settlement offer."  Capital Dredge, 
800 F.2d at 531.  Indeed, such a standard could render the 
settlement process "unworkable."  Id. at 532.

     Finally, I take issue with the majority's suggestion that the 
location of settlement negotiations may not affect the appar-
ent authority analysis under D.C. law.  Maj. op. at 13.  True, 
a lawyer has "a duty of truthful representation, not only to 
the magistrate in court, but also to the District outside the 
courtroom."  Id. (citing D.C. Rules of Prof'l Conduct R. 
4.1(a)).  Yet the majority ignores the likelihood that a "sol-

emn statement ... made in open [c]ourt ... as to the terms 
of the settlement," Ashley v. Atlas Mfg. Co., 7 F.R.D. 77, 77 
(D.D.C. 1946), aff'd, 166 F.2d 209 (D.C. Cir. 1948), may well 
make more reasonable a third party's belief that the lawyer 
has authority to settle than would an out-of-court statement.

     For the foregoing reasons, I would hold that the district 
court employed the proper apparent authority standard.  See 
Makins v. Dist. of Columbia, No. CV-98-2693, mem. op. at 6 
(D.D.C. Dec. 11, 2000) (quoting Crumlin, 423 A.2d at 941;  
Feltman, 366 A.2d at 139).  Moreover, because we look only 
for clear error when reviewing the district court's factual 
findings, see Foretich v. ABC, 198 F.3d 270, 273 (D.C. Cir. 
1999), I would affirm its holding that "[o]n the facts presented 
here ... Harrison had apparent authority to settle the case 
for $99,000 without job reinstatement."  Makins, mem. op. at 
6.  The "facts presented here," as the district court found 
them, are as follows:

     [Harrison] had represented Makins against the District 
     of Columbia since 1996 when he was retained before the 
     adverse action.  He then represented Ms. Makins at the 
     time she filed her EEO complaint.  Finally, he was 
     retained to represent her in the present lawsuit which 
     was filed in 1998....
     
     [In the present lawsuit, Harrison] carried out all the 
     duties an attorney ordinarily carries out in terms of filing 
     pleadings, answering motions, appearing at the pretrial 
     after filing a complete pretrial statement, and participat-
     ing in the [settlement conference] with breaks to place 
     telephone calls to his client....
     
Id. at 6-7.  Also, as the majority recognizes, Makins autho-
rized Harrison "to attend [the] settlement conference before 
[the] magistrate judge and to negotiate on her behalf."  Maj. 
op. at 15.  In other words, under the D.C. approach, Makins 
"placed [Harrison] in a position" that led the District to 
believe he had authority to settle her case.

     For at least two reasons, I am convinced the district court 
correctly held that that belief was reasonable.  See Makins, 
mem. op. at 6.  First, although the magistrate judge ordered 
the "lead attorney(s) for the parties" to appear before him at 
the settlement conference, he permitted the parties to absent 
themselves so long as they were "available by telephone for 
the duration of the settlement conference."*  Maj. op. at 2-3 
(quoting Makins v. Dist. of Columbia, No. CV-98-2693, mag. 
order at 2 (D.D.C. July 7, 2000)).  By all outward appear-
ances, Makins was available by telephone for the duration of 
the conference.  Harrison, in fact, left the conference at least 
three times to discuss with Makins by telephone the status of 
the proceedings.  See Makins, mem. op. at 2.  The third 
time, he returned with telephone in hand to accept the 
District's offer with the new condition that Makins's forms be 
amended to reflect resignation instead of termination.  See 
JA 144-45.  These circumstances, taken together, reasonably 
suggested to the District that Makins was actively involved in 
the bargaining and specifically told Harrison to settle only if 
the District agreed to alter her forms.  Second, although the 
majority "see[s] nothing in the record to prove that Harrison 
told the magistrate he had authority to settle the case on the 
terms ultimately agreed upon," Maj. op. at 13, I do.  Before 
adjourning the settlement conference, the magistrate judge 
asked the lawyers to confirm that the terms of "the parties' 
agreement" were the exchange of $99,000 and the aforemen-

__________
     * The magistrate judge's order permitting availability by tele-
phone follows the district court's rules of alternative dispute resolu-
tion:

     The Court will require, whenever possible, that representatives 
     of the parties with authority to bind them in settlement discus-
     sion be present or available by telephone during settlement 
     negotiations and ADR proceedings.
     
LcvR, App. A, Part II, Sec. 11C (cited in Br. of Appellee at 24).  
Although the September 12, 2000 settlement conference was not an 
ADR proceeding, the magistrate judge's order supports the Dis-
trict's argument that its belief in Harrison's authority was reason-
able because Makins's availability "by telephone rather than in 
person was not unusual in any way."  Br. of Appellee at 24.

tioned amendment of Makins's records for dismissal of the 
suit with prejudice.  JA 30 (emphasis added).  Both Harrison 
and counsel for the District affirmed that those were, indeed, 
the terms.  See id.  Harrison's "solemn" representation in 
open court that the parties (including Makins) had that 
agreement bolsters the reasonableness of the District's belief 
that Harrison had authority to settle on Makins's behalf.  Cf. 
Ashley, 7 F.R.D. at 77.

     I would, therefore, affirm the district court's order enforc-
ing the settlement.

                                        