                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

        Argued April 10, 2001      Decided June 15, 2001 

                           No. 00-5061

                    Edward D. Smoke, et al., 
                            Appellant

                                v.

       Gale A. Norton, Secretary of the Interior, et al., 
                      Alma Ransom, et al., 
                            Appellees

                        Consolidated with 
                             00-5062

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv01422)

     Michael Rhodes-Devey argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for appellants.  Phillip H. Tarbell, appearing pro se, 
entered an appearance.

     Peter B. Work argued the cause for appellees.  With him 
on the brief was Bradley S. Waterman.

     Before:  Ginsburg and Henderson, Circuit Judges, and 
Silberman, Senior Circuit Judge.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  The appellants moved to inter-
vene in this case after the district court granted summary 
judgment against the Government -- which had represented 
their interests in the proceedings below -- and the Govern-
ment indicated it might not appeal.  The district court denied 
the appellants' motion as untimely.  We reverse.  The appel-
lants had no occasion to intervene in order to protect their 
interests until after the judgment was entered.  Hence, their 
motion was timely when made.

                          I. Background

     The appellants in this case claim to be officers of the Saint 
Regis Mohawk Tribal Government under a constitution they 
allege was adopted in 1995 to replace the Tribe's traditional 
Three Chief System of government.  The appellees, who 
claim office pursuant to the Three Chief System, sought 
review under the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. 
s 551 et seq., of decisions of the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA) recognizing the new constitution as having been validly 
adopted by the Tribe, and of the Interior Board of Indian 
Affairs (IBIA) affirming that determination.  In Ransom v. 
Babbitt, 69 F. Supp. 2d 141 (1999), the district court recounts 
the history of the dispute that arose over which government 
and which slate of electors -- those of the 1995 Constitution 
or those of the Three Chief System -- were entitled to 
recognition.  Ultimately, the court granted summary judg-
ment for the appellees on the ground that the agencies' 
recognition of the 1995 Constitution was arbitrary, capricious, 
and contrary to law.  See id. at 155.

     As long as the United States was resolved to defend the 
decisions of the BIA and the IBIA in the district court, the 
appellants did not seek to intervene.  After the district court 
granted summary judgment for the appellees, however, and 
before the Government decided not to appeal, the appellants 
moved to intervene "in order to ensure that the appeal from 
th[at] court's decision take place."

     The district court, noting that the appellants did not specify 
what type of intervention -- as of right, or permissive -- they 
sought, observed that a motion for either type of intervention 
must be "timely."  Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(a) & (b).  The court then 
denied the appellants' motion as untimely because, "[h]aving 
foregone an opportunity to pursue intervention during the 
pendency of the action, the proposed intervenors now seek to 
inject additional arguments and materials into a very narrow 
review of agency action that had already proceeded to the 
next stage."  The appellants here seek reversal of the district 
court's order denying their motion to intervene so they may 
appeal from the underlying judgment.

                           II. Analysis

     The district court did not expressly decide whether the 
appellants' motion sought intervention as of right under Rule 
24(a) or by permission under Rule 24(b).  The court did, 
however, correctly enumerate the "four requirements for 
intervention [as of right] under Rule 24(a)(2):  (1) timeliness;  
(2) a cognizable interest;  (3) impairment of that interest;  and 
(4) lack of adequate representation by existing parties."  See, 
e.g., Williams & Humbert, Ltd. v. W. & H. Trade Marks, 
Ltd., 840 F.2d 72, 74 (D.C. Cir. 1988).  Because the appel-
lants' motion to intervene and the affidavits filed in support of 
that motion focus upon the lack of adequate representation of 
their interests -- a defining feature of intervention as of 
right -- we consider the motion to have been made under 
Rule 24(a).  Compare Rule 24(a)(2) with 24(b)(2).

     The settled rule is that the "[d]enial of intervention as of 
right is an appealable final order" because it is conclusive 
with respect to the distinct interest asserted by the movant.  
See Railroad Trainmen v. Baltimore & Ohio R.R. Co., 331 
U.S. 519, 524 (1947) ("since [a would-be intervenor as of right] 
cannot appeal from any subsequent order or judgment in the 
proceeding unless he does intervene, the order denying inter-
vention has the degree of definitiveness which supports an 
appeal therefrom").*  We review the district court's denial of 
a motion to intervene as of right for clear error.  See Foster 
v. Gueory, 655 F.2d 1319, 1324 (D.C. Cir. 1981).  The district 
court has much latitude in assessing the timeliness of a 
motion, but it must properly take account of the consider-
ations relevant to that determination.  In particular,

     timeliness is to be judged in consideration of all the 
     circumstances, especially weighing the factors of time 
     elapsed since the inception of the suit, the purpose for 
     which intervention is sought, the need for intervention as 
     a means of preserving the applicant's rights, and the 
     probability of prejudice to those already parties in the 
     case.
     
United States v. AT&T, 642 F.2d 1285, 1295 (D.C. Cir. 1980).

     Here the appellants claim that in moving to intervene they 
were prompted by the post-judgment prospect that the Gov-
ernment might not appeal.  Prior to the entry of judgment, 
the appellants say, they had no reason to intervene;  their 
interests were fully consonant with those of the Government, 

__________
     * Although we initially directed the parties to brief the question 
whether the summary judgment entered in this case is itself an 
appealable, final order (and the appellees argue it is not because it 
remands the case to the BIA for further proceedings requiring the 
exercise of discretion), we conclude that the answer to that question 
does not bear upon the narrow issue before us, namely, the timeli-
ness of the appellants' motion to intervene.  Whether the underly-
ing judgment of the district court is final and, if final, is correct are 
questions that will not be before us unless the district court grants 
the appellants' motion to intervene and they appeal from the 
judgment.

and those interests were adequately represented by the Gov-
ernment's litigation of the case.  We agree.  In these circum-
stances a post-judgment motion to intervene in order to 
prosecute an appeal is timely (if filed within the time period 
for appeal) because "the potential inadequacy of representa-
tion came into existence only at the appellate stage."  Di-
mond v. District of Columbia, 792 F.2d 179, 193 (D.C. Cir. 
1986);  see United Airlines, Inc. v. McDonald, 432 U.S. 385, 
395-96 (1977).

     The appellees do not convincingly defend the district 
court's ruling that the appellants' motion was untimely.  They 
argue only that, because the Government "effectively con-
ceded the factual premises underlying Plaintiffs' motion for 
summary judgment," the Government's representation of the 
appellants' interests was manifestly inadequate at an earlier 
point in the litigation.  That the facts of this case were not in 
dispute is irrelevant, however;  the case involved review of an 
administrative record the facts of which were settled before 
the agency.  We have no reason to doubt the adequacy of the 
Government's commitment to resisting the appellees' motion 
for summary judgment.  The Government's representation of 
the appellants' interests became potentially inadequate only 
when it equivocated about whether it would appeal the ad-
verse ruling of the district court.

     Although the district court perceived the appellants as 
"seek[ing] to inject additional arguments and materials into a 
very narrow review of agency action that had already pro-
ceeded to the next stage," the legally relevant purpose of 
their motion was simply to enable them to prosecute an 
appeal.  Policing the limits upon what the appellants may 
argue on appeal is properly left to this court.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the district court 
erred in denying the appellants' motion to intervene as un-
timely.  Accordingly, we remand this case to the district 

court for it to address in the first instance the other require-
ments for intervention as of right.

                                                       Reversed and remanded.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, concurring:

     I join the court's opinion because I agree that the district 
court incorrectly denied the appellants' motion to intervene 
on the ground of untimeliness.  I write separately, however, 
to express my view that the district court will no doubt reach 
the same result on remand and I therefore question the 
"judicial efficiency" of remanding.

     The court correctly sets forth the "four requirements for 
intervention [as of right] under Rule 24(a)(2):  (1) timeliness;  
(2) a cognizable interest;  (3) impairment of that interest;  and 
(4) lack of adequate representation by existing parties."  See 
Majority Opinion at 3 (citing Williams & Humbert, Ltd. & W. 
& H. Trade Marks, Ltd., 840 F.2d 72, 74 (D.C. Cir. 1998)).  
The court also correctly concludes that under our precedent 
the appellants' motion was timely.  That conclusion does not 
by itself, however, necessitate a different result on remand 
because failure to satisfy any of the remaining three require-
ments is a sufficient ground for denying intervention.  See 
SEC v. Prudential Sec. Inc., 136 F.3d 153, 156 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

     The appellants tell us their sole goal in seeking intervention 
is "to ensure that the appeal from [the district court's] 
decision take place."  Plaintiffs'-Appellees' Appendix 276.  
They also insist that the government's decision not to pursue 
an appeal amply demonstrates their lack of adequate repre-
sentation in this proceeding.  I am not persuaded.  In assess-
ing whether a proposed intervenor's interest is adequately 
represented by an existing party, a court must consider 
whether the proposed intervenor itself has a right to pursue 
whatever it claims it is inadequately represented in pursuing.  
If no such right exists, it cannot seriously be maintained that 
the proposed intervenor lacks adequate representation.  In 
this case, I believe an evaluation of the adequacy of represen-
tation issue turns on whether the appellants could have 
pursued an appeal from the district court order had they been 
parties to the district court proceeding.  If so, a court could 
conclude they lack adequate representation because the gov-
ernment's decision not to pursue an appeal deprives them of 

recourse to which they would otherwise be entitled.  If not, 
however, the government's decision not to appeal has no 
impact on the adequacy of representation of the appellants 
inasmuch as they are left no worse off than if they had in fact 
been parties to the litigation all along.

     The dispositive question then becomes whether the appel-
lants could have taken an appeal from the district court order 
had they been parties before the district court ruled.  In my 
view, they could not have done so.  "The jurisdiction of the 
courts of appeals to review district court actions is limited to 
'final orders.' "  Pueblo of Sandia v. Babbitt, 231 F.3d 878, 
880 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (quoting 28 U.S.C. s 1291).  Section 1291 
entitles a party to appeal "from a district court decision that 
ends the litigation on the merits and leaves nothing more for 
the court to do but execute the judgment."  Id. (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted).  However, " '[i]t is well 
settled that, as a general rule, a district court order remand-
ing a case to an agency for significant further proceedings is 
not final,' " id. (quoting In re St. Charles Preservation Inves-
tors, Ltd., 916 F.2d 727, 729 (D.C. Cir. 1990);  citing American 
Hawaii Cruises v. Skinner, 893 F.2d 1400, 1403 (D.C. Cir. 
1990)), unless the remand to the agency is for solely "ministe-
rial" action.  See id. at 881.  In my view, the district court's 
order here was not merely "ministerial" but rather left "sig-
nificant further proceedings" for the agency.  And the appel-
lants have no right to appeal a non-final order.1  Accordingly, 
even if they get no representation in seeking to appeal the 
district court's remand order, they cannot claim"inadequate" 
representation to take action they themselves could not take.

__________
     1 The agency's right to appeal such an order is based on the fact 
that if it were limited to an appeal only after remand proceedings, it 
would lose the opportunity to appeal in the event the decision to 
remand was in error.  See, e.g., County of Los Angeles v. Shalala, 
192 F.3d 1005, 1012 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (citing Occidental Petroleum 
Corp. v. SEC, 873 F.2d 325, 330 (D.C. Cir. 1989)), cert. denied, 530 
U.S. 1204 (2000).  But the appellants do not succeed to the agency's 
right to appeal which is unique to itself.

                              