                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued October 16, 2000   Decided December 19, 2000 

                           No. 99-1223

                Tesoro Alaska Petroleum Company, 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and 
                    United States of America, 
                           Respondents

             Williams Alaska Petroleum Inc., et al., 
                           Intervenors

                        Consolidated with 
                    99-1224, 99-1239, 99-1250

            On Petitions for Review of Orders of the 
               Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

                            ---------

     Virginia A. Seitz and Robert H. Benna argued the causes 
for petitioners Exxon Company, U.S.A. and Tesoro Alaska 
Petroleum Company.  With them on the briefs were Eugene 
R. Elrod, Steven S. Hill and Jeffrey G. DiSciullo.

     Andrew K. Soto, Attorney, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, argued the cause for respondents.  With him on 
the brief were John H. Conway, Acting Solicitor at the time 
the brief was filed, Timm L. Abendroth, Attorney, Joel I. 
Klein, Assistant Attorney General, John J. Powers, III and 
Robert J. Wiggers, Attorneys.  Jay L. Witkin, Solicitor, and 
Susan J. Court, Special Counsel, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, entered appearances.

     John A. Donovan argued the cause for intervenors BP 
Exploration (Alaska), Inc. et al.  With him on the brief were 
Matthew W.S. Estes, Bradford G. Keithley, Charles William 
Burton, Jason F. Leif, Richard Curtin, Randolph L. Jones, 
Jr.  John W. Griggs and W. Stephen Smith.  Dean H. Lefler 
entered an appearance.

     Albert S. Tabor, Jr., John E. Kennedy and S. Scott Gaille 
were on the brief for intervenors TAPS Carriers.  Alex A. 
Goldberg entered an appearance.

     Before:  Williams, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Williams.

     Williams, Circuit Judge:  The Trans Alaska Pipeline Sys-
tem ("TAPS") is a 48-inch diameter pipeline carrying crude 
oil from Alaska's North Slope approximately 800 miles south 
to Valdez, Alaska.  Each shipper delivers its own crude oil to 
the pipeline, in which the oils are commingled;  at the termi-
nus the shipper takes delivery of a proportional share of the 
common stream.  The crude oils delivered initially differ from 
each other in various characteristics that affect market value.  
Because of the commingling, a shipper will not in all likeli-
hood receive the same quality of oil at Valdez that it delivered 
to the pipeline.  Without some adjustment, the ones deliver-
ing relatively higher-value crudes would unfairly lose, and the 
ones delivering lower-value crudes would unfairly gain.  The 

parties here battle over the formula governing the adjust-
ment, which the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
controls in the exercise of its authority to regulate interstate 
oil pipeline rates.1

     Exxon Company, U.S.A.2 and Tesoro Alaska Petroleum 
Company filed complaints with the Federal Energy Regulato-
ry Commission assailing aspects of the prevailing formula.  
Exxon challenges the formula itself, a so-called "distillation" 
methodology that the Commission adopted in 1993 and later 
modified in 1997;  Tesoro contests the specific valuation of 
two "cuts" of petroleum, West Coast naphtha and West Coast 
vacuum gas oil ("VGO").  A rate order must be modified 
where "new evidence warrants the change."  Tagg Bros. & 
Moorhead v. United States, 280 U.S. 420, 445 (1930).  Both 
Exxon and Tesoro appear to have offered evidence that is 
new in relation to what was before the Commission in its 
earlier determinations and sufficiently compelling to require 
reconsideration of the earlier resolution.  We therefore re-
verse and remand the case for the Commission to reconsider 
the adoption of the distillation methodology and the pricing of 
West Coast naphtha and West Coast VGO, or to provide a 
suitable explanation for why it should not.

__________
     1  The authority was originally vested in the Interstate Com-
merce Commission, then transferred to the Federal Energy Regula-
tory Commission when it replaced the Federal Power Commission 
in 1977.  See 49 U.S.C. App. ss 1 et seq. (1988);  see also 49 U.S.C. 
s 60502 ("The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has the 
duties and powers related to the establishment of a rate or charge 
for the transportation of oil by pipeline or the valuation of that 
pipeline that were vested on October 1, 1977, in the Interstate 
Commerce Commission or an officer or component of the Interstate 
Commerce Commission.") (emphasis added).  The Commission's 
jurisdiction over the rates for oil going through to Valdez is 
uncontested.  See Trans Alaska Pipeline System, 23 FERC 
p 61,352 at 61,762 (1983).

     2  Exxon Company, U.S.A. was a division of Exxon Corporation.  
Since filing its appeal, Exxon Corporation has merged with Mobil 
Corporation to become Exxon Mobil Corporation.

                             *  *  *

     In 1984 the Commission approved a settlement agreement 
establishing a "Quality Bank" to make the required adjust-
ments between shippers.  See Trans Alaska Pipeline Sys-
tem, 29 FERC p 61,123 (1984).3  The Quality Bank initially 
used a so-called "gravity" method.  As the term gravity is 
used here, it is a measure of density established by the 
American Petroleum Institute ("API").  In contrast to "spe-
cific gravity", a higher API gravity represents a less dense 
crude oil or petroleum product.  See Exxon Co., U.S.A. v. 
FERC, 182 F.3d 30, 35 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Because crude 
oil was generally more valuable to the extent that it was 
"higher"-gravity, i.e., lighter, the Quality Bank initially valued 
crude oils according to their gravity.

     Starting in 1987, the amount of natural gas liquids 
("NGLs") in the stream increased, changing the picture--or 
at least the perception.  Two factors contributed to this 
increase.  First, natural gas operations expanded in Prudhoe 
Bay, resulting in sharply increased deliveries of NGLs at the 
head of the pipeline.  OXY USA, Inc. v. FERC, 64 F.3d 679, 
691 (D.C. Cir. 1995);  see also Exxon Co., U.S.A. v. Amerada 
Hess Pipeline Corp., 87 FERC p 61,133 at 61,521 (1999) 
("Exxon Decision").  Second, expansion of one refinery and 
construction of another along the route led to an increase in 
removal of valuable mid-weight petroleum products from the 
stream, apparently leaving a higher proportion of the lighter 
NGLs in the petroleum at the end of the pipeline.  OXY, 64 
F.3d at 691;  see also 57 FERC p 63,010, at 65,053 (1991).  
NGLs have a much higher API gravity relative to other 
petroleum components, but critics of the gravity method 
argue that NGLs reduce rather than raise the value of the 
common stream.  See OXY, 64 F.3d at 686.

     Responding to the resulting complaints under s 13(2) of 
the Interstate Commerce Act, the Commission in 1989 started 
to investigate the gravity method.  It found that the method 
was no longer just and reasonable and, in approving a con-

__________
     3  Unless stated otherwise, all citations to FERC orders have 
the title "Trans Alaska Pipeline System".

tested settlement in 1993, adopted the distillation method.  
See 65 FERC p 61,277 (1993) ("Distillation Decision"), order 
on reh'g, 66 FERC p 61,188 (1994), further order on reh'g, 67 
FERC p 61,175 (1994).  This latest method recognizes eight 
"cuts" of petroleum products (propane, isobutane, normal 
butane, natural gasoline, naphtha, distillate, VGO and resid) 
in each stream entering TAPS, ranked by their boiling points.  
The cuts are individually priced.  Each shipper's delivery is 
categorized under this system and valued in accordance with 
the volume-weighted price of its component cuts.  Because 
Alaskan North Slope ("ANS") oil is sold in both the Gulf 
Coast and West Coast markets, each cut is assigned Gulf 
Coast and West Coast prices.  Distillation Decision, 65 
FERC at 62,290.

     For some cuts there were acceptable indicators of market 
value from the Oil Price Information Service ("OPIS") or 
Platt's Oilgram.  No such markers were available, however, 
for distillate, VGO or resid, or for West Coast naphtha.  For 
these cuts the settlement proposed to use prices for kindred 
products, adjusted for differences between them and the 
actual cuts.  The Commission rejected this approach, saying 
that for a system to be non-discriminatory it must use 
"market prices, uncomplicated by subjective adjustments."  
Id. at 62,289.  As part of this "No Adjustment Policy," the 
Commission rejected the proposed use of adjusted West 
Coast prices to value the West Coast naphtha cut and instead 
set a Gulf Coast price for the cut.  On rehearing, it also 
ordered the use of Gulf Coast prices for West Coast deliveries 
of VGO.  Tesoro Alaska Petroleum Co. v. Amerada Hess 
Pipeline Corp., 87 FERC p 61,132 at 61,514 (1999) ("Tesoro 
Decision").  In OXY we affirmed the switch from the gravity 
to the distillation method but remanded to the Commission its 
refusal to adjust the reference prices for the distillate and 
resid cuts.  64 F.3d at 701.  In due course the Commission 
approved a nine-party settlement on these issues, providing 
for some redefinition of cuts and for use (for several of the 
cuts) of petroleum product prices adjusted to reflect process-
ing costs.  See 81 FERC p 61,319, at 62,462-65 (1997).  On 

review, we rejected the revised valuation of the resid cut and 
again remanded.  Exxon, 182 F.3d at 42.

     In 1996, while the OXY remand was under way, Exxon filed 
a complaint against seven TAPS owners pursuant to ss 9, 
13(1) and 15(1) of the Interstate Commerce Act, 49 U.S.C. 
App. ss 9, 13(1), 15(1) (1988)--leading to the present case.  
Upholding an ALJ decision, the Commission dismissed the 
complaint, holding that Exxon had failed to produce evidence 
of changed circumstances to justify re-examination of the 
1993 adoption of the distillation method.  Exxon Decision, 87 
FERC at 61,527-30.

     Tesoro participated in the proceedings before the ALJ on 
Exxon's complaint, raising issues that the ALJ ultimately 
identified as different from Exxon's.  The ALJ's order of 
dismissal mooted Tesoro's arguments but noted that Tesoro 
was free to file its own complaint.  Exxon Co., U.S.A. v. 
Amerada Hess Pipeline Corp., 83 FERC p 63,011, at 65,102 & 
n.90 (1998).  It did so in August 1998, attacking the valuation 
of the naphtha and VGO cuts.  The Commission dismissed 
this, also on a finding of no changed circumstances.  Tesoro 
Decision, 87 FERC at 61,517-20.

     Petitioners argue that because their complaints were dis-
posed of by Motion for Summary Disposition, our review is de 
novo.  That would be true if we were reviewing a district 
court's equivalent action.  But these dismissals implicate the 
Commission's expertise and policy-making authority, compel-
ling deference.  Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Ass'n of the 
United States v. State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 
29, 43 (1983).  The requisite deference does not, however, 
mean passive acceptance of irrational or unexplained decision 
making.  Id.;  see also Louisiana Public Service Comm'n v. 
FERC, 184 F.3d 892, 895 (D.C. Cir. 1999).  Here we find the 
Commission's answers to the evidence unconvincing.

                              * * *

     In Tagg Bros. & Moorhead v. United States, 280 U.S. 420 
(1930), the Supreme Court held that a "rate order is not res 
judicata."  Id. at 445.  Specifically, where a party presents 

"new evidence [that] warrants the change," the regulatory 
agency has the power and duty "to institute new proceed-
ings."  Id.  Just as a plaintiff may allege a new cause of 
action for every time a conspiracy in restraint of trade 
operates against him, see Stanton v. District of Columbia 
Court of Appeals, 127 F.3d 72, 78 (D.C. Cir. 1997), so each 
new shipment by a carrier gives rise to a new cause of action, 
as to which a previous adverse determination is not res 
judicata, Interoceanica Corp. v. Sound Pilots, Inc., 107 F.3d 
86, 91 (2d Cir. 1997);  Hawaiian Telephone Co. v. Public 
Utilities Comm'n of Hawaii, 827 F.2d 1264, 1274 (9th Cir. 
1987).  Issue preclusion might nonetheless be applicable, but 
Tagg Bros. suggests that any such application is quite weak.

     The Commission acknowledges the authority of Tagg Bros., 
but reframes Justice Brandeis's formula--allowing re-opening 
for "new evidence"--into one requiring evidence of "changed 
circumstances."  It is unclear if any such limit may be 
imposed.  In OXY itself we observed, "[t]he fact that a rate 
was once found reasonable does not preclude a finding of 
unreasonableness in a subsequent proceeding."  64 F.3d at 
690 (internal quotation omitted).  See also Texas Eastern 
Transmission Corp. v. FERC, 893 F.2d 767, 774 (5th Cir. 
1990).  In OXY, as we noted, there were changed circum-
stances--the increased proportion of NGLs in the common 
stream, and in Texas Eastern there was an issue that the 
prior determination had not confronted (the consistency of 
minimum commodity bills with cost allocation based on the 
modified fixed variable approach), 893 F.2d at 774.  In rate 
cases that look toward the setting of a future rate (as this 
does, having been brought under s 13(1) of the Interstate 
Commerce Act), unacceptable competitive distortions could 
occur if one shipper were perpetually locked into a rate less 
advantageous than the one enjoyed by a competitor.  The 
Supreme Court has emphasized this concern in the tax con-
text:

     [A] subsequent modification of the significant facts or a 
     change or development in the controlling legal principles 
     may make that [judicial] determination obsolete or erro-
     
     neous, at least for future purposes.  If such a determina-
     tion is then perpetuated each succeeding year as to the 
     taxpayer involved in the original litigation, he is accorded 
     a tax treatment different from that given to other tax-
     payers of the same class.
     
Commissioner of Internal Revenue v. Sunnen, 333 U.S. 591, 
599 (1948).  Accordingly, we have upheld the denial of issue 
preclusion where the Commission had initially rejected a 
requested rate on grounds of difficulties in tracing costs of 
service, but in a later proceeding the utility offered a solution.  
Second Taxing Dist. of Norwalk v. FERC, 683 F.2d 477, 484 
(D.C. Cir. 1982).  The new solution was perhaps a changed 
circumstance, but it was one under the control of the utility 
and thus seems somewhat akin to new evidence.  In any 
event, because the outcome of our decision here does not turn 
on the distinction between evidence of changed circumstances 
and evidence that is merely new, we need not decide whether 
there is any reason to retreat from the language of Justice 
Brandeis.

     Exxon provided the testimony of Dr. Pavlovic, an economic 
consultant, who tested the accuracy of the modified distilla-
tion methodology for 34 crude oils in the California crude oil 
market from 1993 to 1996.  Pavlovic used regression analysis 
to compare the relative values of the cuts produced by the 
distillation method with actual market prices.  He claimed his 
tests showed that the distillation method "substantially over-
values low-value, heavier petroleum and substantially under-
values high-value, lighter petroleum."  Joint Appendix 
("J.A.") at 430.  He also testified that this bias "increase[d] 
dramatically in 1994 and remain[ed] large thereafter."  Id. at 
451.  A perfect pricing method would produce a coefficient of 
1.0 in a regression of the method's relative values on those of 
the benchmark market.  Whereas the coefficient--also called 
a bias measure--was indeed just over 1.0 for 1993 (1.07), it 
jumped in 1994 to 1.65 and remained around 1.6 for the next 
two years.  Id. at 495.  Pavlovic argued that he could reject, 
at a statistically significant level, the hypothesis that the bias 

measure was 1.0 in 1994-1996.4 Id. at 453.

     Pavlovic's testimony appears to constitute not only new 
evidence but changed circumstances as well.  It shows that, 
for reasons not yet conclusively determined, the degree of 
bias resulting from the use of the distillation method rose 
from imperceptible to severe after 1993.  The Commission's 
answer--that it "consistently has refused to base its decisions 
on how the TAPS Quality Bank should operate based on 
regression analyses of West Coast or world crude values," 
Exxon Decision, 87 FERC at 61,528--baffles us.  The Com-
mission cannot be saying that regression analysis, good 
enough to be a valuable tool for everyone else interested in 
quantitative analysis, is never good enough for the Commis-
sion.

     The Intervenors offer an explanation that may be part of 
what the Commission in fact had in mind:  "Dr. Pavlovic's 
analysis was like testing a methodology designed to value 
Alaskan apples by applying that methodology to a crate of 
California oranges."  Intervenors' (BP Exploration (Alaska), 
Inc. et al.) Br. at 13 ("Intervenors' Br.").  This glib use of the 
old apples-oranges metaphor overlooks the problem confront-
ing the Commission:  There simply are no market prices for 
the Alaskan crude oils delivered into TAPS.  If there were, 
there would be little or no issue about inferring their relative 
values.  To the extent that the California crudes are similar 
to the Alaskan crudes, Pavlovic's technique seems to test the 
accuracy of the distillation method.  Compare J.A. at 440-43.

     Exxon also provided the testimony of Mr. Moore, an engi-
neer, and Dr. Hausman, an applied economist.  Moore 
stressed that the gravity of ANS crude oil (consisting of the 
streams that enter at the start of the pipeline at Pumping 
Station #1 and the return stream from refineries along its 
path) had increased from about 28ø API in 1992 to about 30ø 
API in 1996.  Id. at 323.  In the face of the theory that 

__________
     4  The parties appear to agree that here the reference point is 
November 30, 1993, the day on which the Commission ruled that 
the distillation method was just and reasonable.  See Exxon Deci-
sion, 87 FERC at 61,526.

gravity increases due to NGL blending had undermined the 
gravity formula, Moore tracks the seemingly close positive 
relationship between the fraction of NGLs and gravity of this 
crude oil, and, critically, between the gravity and price of 
ANS crude (measured against West Texas Intermediate, a 
"marker crude" used as a reference for valuing other crudes).  
Id. at 323, 419, 421.

     Exxon invokes the testimony of Moore not only to suggest 
that the premise of the 1993 abandonment of gravity was 
mistaken, but also to explain why one should expect occur-
rence of the sort of distortions that Pavlovic seemingly 
showed in the distillation method.  Although there is an 
obvious link between crude oil values and petroleum product 
prices, they do not move in lockstep.  The same event may 
drive the prices of the two in different directions.  If a 
refinery shuts down because of equipment problems, for 
instance, it is likely to raise the market price of the refined 
petroleum product, but may reduce demand for crude oil and 
lower its price.  See id. at 342.

     Hausman testified that regression results on price and 
gravity data from 1988 to 1997 showed that gravity was a 
significantly positive predictor of the price of ANS crude.  Id. 
at 511-13.  This evidence seems to show a positive correlation 
between (1) NGL blending, (2) gravity, and (3) value.  Peti-
tioners rely on the Moore and Hausman testimony to suggest 
that the distillation method seriously undervalues the NGL 
contribution to the TAPS stream.  Aspects of Hausman's 
testimony might pose questions about the line between evi-
dence that is "new" and evidence of changed circumstances.  
After all, Hausman claims that his regression results apply to 
the entire period of his data--from 1988 to 1997--indicating 
that the pre-1993 data also show the positive effect of gravity 
on ANS value.  Overall, however, it certainly confirms the 
implication of the Pavlovic and Moore testimony that the 
distillation method is seriously flawed.

     To dismiss the testimony of Moore and Hausman, the 
Commission's decision invoked our deference in OXY to the 
ALJ's conclusion that "the current straightline gravity basis 

for valuing crude oil does not assign an accurate value for 
NGLs," and our statement, "It follows from this conclusion 
that shippers delivering oil with a high NGL content were 
either being overcompensated or undercompensated under 
the gravity methodology...."  64 F.3d at 691 (cited by the 
Commission, Exxon Decision, 87 FERC at 61,528).  But 
these remarks were plainly not intended to suggest indiffer-
ence to the impact of NGL contributions to the value of the 
common stream.  Quite the reverse:  We were endorsing the 
ALJ's point that "the issue was not whether the gravity 
methodology accurately valued NGLs per se, but whether it 
placed a proper value on petroleum whose gravity had been 
increased as a result of the injection of substantial quantities 
of NGLs."  64 F.3d at 691.  That issue is precisely what 
Exxon's testimony speaks to, seemingly calling into question 
the Commission's 1993 determinations.

                             *  *  *

     Tesoro challenges the current pricing of the naphtha and 
VGO cuts based on Gulf Coast market prices under the 
modified distillation method.  Tesoro wants the Quality Bank 
to value West Coast naphtha using a formula based on West 
Coast gasoline prices and West Coast VGO using OPIS's 
quoted price for West Coast high sulfur VGO.

     Tesoro argues that the Commission's use of the published 
Gulf Coast price, rather than a formula based on West Coast 
gasoline prices, significantly undervalues West Coast naph-
tha.5  Its claim is based on three propositions.  First, Tesoro 
presents evidence, and the Intervenors acknowledge, that 
Gulf Coast deliveries of ANS crude "have declined consider-
ably from the somewhat less than 20% level that existed in 
1993."  Intervenors' Br. at 25;  see also Distillation Decision, 
65 FERC at 62,290.  The nearly complete disappearance of 

__________
     5  Naphtha is used to make gasoline.  Because there are consid-
erable trades on the Gulf Coast, there is a quoted price for Gulf 
Coast naphtha.  On the West Coast, however, refineries over-
whelmingly use their own naphtha rather than buying it.  See J.A. 
at 940-41.

Gulf Coast ANS sales suggests that the Commission's current 
reliance is more dubious now than in 1993.

     Second, the Commission has changed its outlook on the use 
of "adjusted" market prices.  In OXY we held that the 
Commission's "No Adjustment Policy," which used market 
prices instead of formulas, lacked an adequate foundation 
with respect to the distillate and resid cuts.  64 F.3d at 694 
(holding that the Commission "cannot, consistent with the 
requirement of reasoned decisionmaking, value some cuts 
precisely and others haphazardly").  On remand, the Com-
mission seems to have abandoned its No Adjustment Policy, 
adopting adjusted prices for several cuts.  See 81 FERC at 
62,460-65.  The Commission tries to distinguish its treatment 
of distillate and resid by suggesting that its No Adjustment 
Policy could be trumped only when there is no reliable 
published price for a cut in either market.  See Respondents' 
Br. at 56.  But our decision in OXY does not rely on this 
distinction.  See 64 F.3d at 693.  In fact, we made clear in 
OXY that our concern was that the Commission use uniform 
methods, id. at 694, a principle that would be breached if the 
availability of an adequate non-adjusted benchmark for the 
Gulf Coast prevented the use of an adjusted benchmark for 
the West Coast.  See also Exxon, 182 F.3d at 38 ("[W]e did 
not remand because the old method was inaccurate, but 
because it was unfairly nonuniform.").

     Despite the Commission's claims to the contrary, its deci-
sion to use the Gulf Coast price for West Coast deliveries of 
naphtha appears to have been based at least in part on the 
now abandoned No Adjustment Policy.  Indeed even its brief 
invokes the benefits of making no adjustments.  See Respon-
dents' Br. at 13.  And the Intervenors admit that the Com-
mission declined to adopt a formula based on West Coast 
gasoline prices for naphtha because it did not want to assume 
"the risk that the formulas the parties proposed would be 
manipulated in some fashion to favor one party over another."  
Intervenors' Br. at 26.  Even on a narrow view of OXY's 
impact on the No Adjustment Policy, the changes in the Gulf 
Coast naphtha market improve the trade-off for using an 

adjusted price rather than one from the dwindling Gulf Coast 
market.

     Third, Tesoro presents evidence that appears to show a 
large disparity between the Commission's valuation and the 
true value of West Coast naphtha.  According to Mr. Stancil, 
an engineer and energy consultant, the quoted Gulf Coast 
naphtha price in December 1996 ($26.38 per barrel) underval-
ued West Coast deliveries by $2.71 per barrel.6  This alleged 
disparity dwarfs the ones that required remand in OXY.  See 
81 FERC at 62,462 (revising valuation of light distillate by 
$0.005 per gallon, or $0.21 per barrel, after OXY remand).

     These three propositions may well be answerable by the 
Commission.  But without an adequate Commission response, 
they at the least establish a prima facie case that new 
evidence warrants re-examination of how West Coast naphtha 
should be valued.

     Tesoro also challenges the valuation of the VGO cut.  In its 
original decision on the distillation method, the Commission 
found that illiquidity in the West Coast market required it to 
use Gulf Coast prices for West Coast VGO.  67 FERC at 
61,531.  Tesoro suggests that because the Commission later 
found the West Coast NGL market, which is allegedly less 
liquid than the West Coast VGO market, to be sufficiently 
liquid to be used for NGL cuts, the Commission should also 
use West Coast VGO prices for West Coast VGO.

     The Commission provides two responses.  The first is 
plainly inadequate.  The Commission says that it considered 
Tesoro's evidence in 1998 in evaluating--and rejecting--a 
proposal to change the valuation of West Coast VGO because 
of a change in how Gulf Coast VGO prices were being 
reported.  82 FERC p 61,343 (1998).  See also Tesoro Deci-
sion, 87 FERC at 61,519 (citing the 1998 decision).  But when 
Tesoro sought review of the resulting order in this court, the 
Commission moved--successfully--for dismissal of the peti-
tion for review on the ground that the order was non-final.  

__________
     6  Using adjusted gasoline prices, Stancil claims that West Coast 
naphtha is worth $29.09 per barrel.  See J.A. at 1001.

Petitioners' Br. at App. A.  Agencies may not use shell games 
to elude review.  See AT&T Co. v. Federal Communications 
Commission, 978 F.2d 727, 731-32 (D.C. Cir. 1992).

     Second, the Commission argues that in its decision to use 
the West Coast NGL market another factor was in play--
differences between the coasts' petrochemical industries and 
consequently their demand for NGLs--that is apparently 
inapplicable to VGO.  That much is true.  In approving a 
switch to reliance on the West Coast market for West Coast 
NGLs in 1998, it reasoned that the higher demand for NGLs 
on the Gulf Coast made it a less reliable standard for West 
Coast NGLs than the West Coast market, despite the latter's 
illiquidity.  81 FERC at 62,466.  But Tesoro's argument is 
more subtle.  It is that the switch to reliance on the illiquid 
West Coast NGL prices reflects a liberalization in the Com-
mission's liquidity standards.

     To this the Commission's reply is that it has no "generic 
standards for liquidity."  Respondents' Br. at 57.  Thus the 
1998 decision on NGLs could not have reflected a change in 
such standards.  But the answer is illogical.  Clearly the 
Commission regards illiquidity as a factor weighing against 
the use of a possible benchmark.  When it changed its 
position in 1998 to allow use of the illiquid West Coast market 
it invoked disparities between the Gulf and West Coast 
markets, but it never asserted that there has been a change 
in those disparities.  Accordingly, Tesoro's inference that the 
NGL change reflects a reduced Commission anxiety about 
illiquidity is hardly unfair.  Of course it may be that for VGO 
the Commission might reasonably find the balance to tilt 
more strongly in favor of Gulf Coast prices, so that Tesoro's 
claim will ultimately lose.  But Tesoro has shown enough to 
get its foot in the door, entitling it to an attempt to persuade 
the Commission to make a different trade-off on VGO.

                             *  *  *

     Whether or not Exxon's ultimate goal is to resurrect the 
gravity method in some form (a matter the parties dispute), 
its evidence at least suggests changed circumstances regard-

ing the reasonableness of the distillation methodology.  Teso-
ro has also supported its prima facie case about the valuation 
of the naphtha and VGO cuts.  The Commission's failure to 
respond meaningfully to the evidence renders its decisions 
arbitrary and capricious.  Unless an agency answers objec-
tions that on their face appear legitimate, its decision can 
hardly be said to be reasoned.  International Harvester Co. 
v. Ruckelshaus, 478 F.2d 615, 648 (D.C. Cir. 1973);  see also 
City of Vernon v. FERC, 845 F.2d 1042, 1048 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

                             *  *  *

     Exxon in a footnote arguably challenges the Commission's 
observation that "changes in the quality bank would be on a 
prospective basis, and no damages awarded."  Exxon Deci-
sion, 87 FERC at 61,524 n.28 (cited in Petitioners' Br. at 10-
11 n.8).  The issue appears premature, as there has yet been 
no finding that the prevailing methodology is not just and 
reasonable.  Presumably the availability of damages turns in 
the first instance on the applicable statutory language.  See, 
e.g., 49 U.S.C. App. s 15(1)(1988) ("Whenever, after full 
hearing, upon a complaint made as provided in section 13 [of 
the Interstate Commerce Act] ... the Commission shall be of 
opinion that any ... rate ... is or will be unjust or unreason-
able ..., the Commission is authorized and empowered to 
determine and prescribe what will be the just and reasonable 
... rate ... to be thereafter followed....").  See also 49 
U.S.C. App. s 13(2) (1988) (withholding authority to make 
"orders for the payment of money" under this section);  49 
U.S.C. App. s 15(7) (1988) (providing for Commission suspen-
sion of carrier-filed rate schedules pending hearing, and for 
refunds when the rate issues are resolved);  cf. OXY, 64 F.3d 
at 698-700.  But see Exxon, 182 F.3d at 49-50.  Because the 
claim is premature, we do not address it.

                             *  *  *

     The absence of a reasoned Commission explanation re-
quires us to reverse and remand the case for further proceed-
ings.

                                                             So ordered.

                                              