                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 7, 2000   Decided November 3, 2000 

                           No. 98-5516

           Diamond Game Enterprises, Incorporated and 
               The Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes of 
          Oklahoma Gaming Commission, on behalf of the 
            Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, 
                            Appellants

                                v.

              Janet Reno, Attorney General, et al., 
                            Appellees

                        Consolidated with 
                             99-5345

          Appeals from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No.  97cv00452)

                            ---------

     James E. Townsend argued the cause for appellants.  With 
him on the briefs were David W. McElroy, Munford Page 
Hall, II, Virginia W. Boylan and Stephen A. Lenske.  Philip 
Baker-Shenk entered an appearance.

     Leander Bergen, Geoffrey M. Standing Bear and Andrew 
W. Baldwin were on the brief for amici Pueblo of San Juan, 
et al.

     John T. Stahr, Attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, ar-
gued the cause for the Federal appellees and Jonathan A. 
Glogau, Special Counsel, State of Florida, argued the cause 
for the State appellees.  With them on the joint brief were 
Lois J. Schiffer, Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, David C. Shilton and Edward J. Passarelli, 
Attorneys, and Sara J. Drake, Supervising Deputy Attorney 
General, State of California.  Jared A. Goldstein, Attorney, 
U.S. Department of Justice, entered an appearance.

     Before:  Ginsburg, Randolph and Tatel, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Tatel.

     Tatel, Circuit Judge:  This case requires us to determine 
whether a gambling machine known as the Lucky Tab II, an 
electromechanical device that dispenses paper pull-tabs and 
then displays their contents on a video monitor, should be 
classified under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act as a Class 
II "aid" or a Class III "facsimile."  The Act prohibits Indian 
tribes from operating Class III facsimiles without first negoti-
ating a compact with the state.  Applying the statute's plain 
language, guided by our only relevant precedent, Cabazon 
Band of Mission Indians v. NIGC, 14 F.3d 633 (D.C. Cir. 
1994), and proceeding without any views from the agency 
charged with the Act's implementation, we conclude that the 
Lucky Tab II is a Class II aid.

                                I

     The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 ("IGRA"), 25 
U.S.C. s 2701-19, regulates gambling operations run by Indi-
an tribes.  The Act's purpose is to "provide a statutory basis 
for the operation of gaming by Indian tribes as a means of 

promoting tribal economic development, self-sufficiency, and 
strong tribal governments."  25 U.S.C. s 2702(1).

     The Act divides Indian gaming into three classes, each 
requiring a different level of authorization.  Class I gaming 
consists of social games played solely for prizes of minimal 
value as well as traditional forms of Indian gaming.  See 25 
U.S.C. s 2703(6).  Indian tribes may operate Class I games 
as they wish.  See 25 U.S.C. s 2710(a)(1).

     Class II gaming includes bingo, and if conducted in the 
same hall as bingo, it also includes lotto, punch boards, and 
tip jars, as well as pull-tabs, the game at issue here.  See 25 
U.S.C. s 2703(7)(A).  In language central to the dispute in 
this case, the Act allows the use of "electronic, computer, or 
other technologic aids" in connection with Class II games, 25 
U.S.C. s 2703 (7)(A)(i), but prohibits the use of "[e]lectronic 
or electromechanical facsimiles of any game of chance." 25 
U.S.C. s 2703 (7)(B)(ii).  Tribes may conduct Class II gaming 
if the state in which they are located permits such forms of 
gambling and if the governing body of the tribe adopts a 
gaming ordinance that is then approved by the Chairman of 
the National Indian Gaming Commission, the agency created 
by Congress to implement IGRA.  See 25 U.S.C. ss 2710(b), 
2704.

     Class III gaming includes all gambling not covered by 
either Class I or Class II, including "facsimiles" of Class II 
devices.  See 25 U.S.C. s 2703(8).  In order to conduct Class 
III operations, tribes must obtain state approval through 
negotiation of a tribal-state compact.  See 25 U.S.C. 
s 2710(d)(1).

     Commission regulations define Class II aids and Class III 
facsimiles.  An aid is "a device ... that when used ... [i]s 
not a game of chance but merely assists a player or the 
playing of a game [and] is readily distinguishable from the 
playing of a game of chance on an electronic or electrome-
chanical facsimile."  25 C.F.R. s 502.7.  A facsimile is "any 
gambling device as defined in [the Johnson Act]."  25 C.F.R. 
s 502.8.  Predating IGRA by more than 30 years, the John-
son Act prohibits the use of gambling devices on federal land, 

in interstate commerce, and in "Indian country." See 15 
U.S.C. ss 1171-78 (1953).  Both the Commission's regula-
tions and this Court have interpreted IGRA as limiting the 
Johnson Act prohibition to devices that are neither Class II 
games approved by the Commission nor Class III games 
covered by tribal-state compacts.  See Cabazon, 14 F.3d at 
635, n.3 (noting that IGRA repealed the Johnson Act with 
regard to Class III devices subject to a tribal-state compact 
but that there is no other repeal of the Johnson Act in IGRA, 
implying that Class II aids, permitted under IGRA, do not 
run afoul of the Johnson Act).

     This case concerns a game known as pull-tabs.  A small, 
two-ply paper card, a pull-tab bears symbols and patterns 
similar to tic-tac-toe that appear when players peel off the 
pull-tab's top layer.  The pattern of the symbols determines 
whether the player wins a prize.  In the traditional pull-tabs 
game, bingo hall clerks sell pull-tabs from counters or mobile 
carts, and winners present the tabs to either clerks or cash-
iers to collect prizes.  Pull-tabs are sold from large pools 
known as "deals."  Containing anywhere from 1200 to 100,000 
pull-tabs, deals have a fixed number of winners and losers.

     At issue in this case is the proper classification of a 
gambling device known as the Lucky Tab II, an electrome-
chanical dispenser of paper pull-tabs.  The machine dispenses 
pull-tabs from a roll containing approximately 7500 tabs.  
About 100 rolls comprise a deal, within which winning pull-
tabs are randomly distributed.  The machine cuts the pull-tab 
from the roll and drops it into a tray.  A bar code scanner 
inside the machine automatically reads the tab and then 
displays its contents on a video screen.  A placard on the 
machine informs players that "[v]ideo images may vary from 
actual images on pull tabs.  Each tab must be opened to 
verify."  To collect prizes, players must present the actual 
winning tab to a clerk.  In many bingo halls, players pur-
chase pull-tabs either from a Lucky Tab II or from clerks;  in 
such cases, machines and clerks cut pull-tabs from rolls that 
are part of the same deal.

     In 1994, the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas and 
Diamond Game Enterprises, the manufacturer of the Lucky 
Tab II, asked the Commission to classify the machine as a 
Class II aid.  Two years passed without Commission action.  
In August 1996, the Kickapoo Tribe began operating approxi-
mately 100 Lucky Tab II machines.  At this point, the record 
becomes complicated and, to say the least, confusing.  As far 
as we can tell, the following events of significance to this case 
transpired:  The Commission's Director of Enforcement ad-
vised the Tribe that the machines were Class III gambling 
devices that could only be operated pursuant to a tribal-state 
compact.  See Diamond Game Enterprises, Inc. v. Reno, 9 F. 
Supp. 2d 13, 15 (D.D.C. 1998).  Notwithstanding the Di-
rector's action, the members of the Commission were appar-
ently divided over the proper classification of the Lucky Tab 
II, some thinking it an aid and others a facsimile.  Because of 
this disagreement, the Commission sought advice from the 
Department of Justice, but DOJ lawyers were themselves 
divided over the proper classification of the machine.  See 
Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Attorney General Rich-
ard Shiffrin to Associate Deputy Attorney General Seth P. 
Waxman, at 1 (June 13, 1996) (noting that the Office of Tribal 
Justice and the Criminal Division had reached opposite con-
clusions on the appropriate classification of the Lucky Tab 
II--the former concluding that it falls under Class II and the 
latter concluding that it belongs in Class III).  The Commis-
sion never formally responded to the request to classify the 
Lucky Tab II.

     According to the Tribe and Diamond Game, certain mem-
bers of the Commission recommended that the Tribe and the 
company file a declaratory judgment action in federal court to 
resolve the issue.  Acting on that advice, they filed this action 
in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia seek-
ing, among other things, a declaratory judgment that the 
machine qualifies as a Class II aid.  The Cheyenne and 
Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma intervened as plaintiffs.  Ala-
bama, California, and Florida intervened as defendants.

     The parties filed cross motions for summary judgment.  
Finding that the Lucky Tab II "performs all the functions 
that a player of the traditional pull-tab game would have 
performed," the district court found the machine to be a Class 
III facsimile and granted summary judgment to the govern-
ment.  See Diamond Game, 9 F. Supp. 2d at 20.  Subse-
quently, Diamond Game and the Tribes filed a Rule 60(b) 
motion, claiming that the company had made technical 
changes to the Lucky Tab II.  Finding that the modifications 
were not new evidence, the district court denied the motion.

                                II

     Unlike the legal issues presented in this case, the policy 
questions are both interesting and challenging.  In determin-
ing the proper classification of the Lucky Tab II, how do we 
further Congress' objective of allowing Indian tribes to use 
gaming as a means of "promoting tribal economic develop-
ment, self-sufficiency, and strong tribal governments," 25 
U.S.C. s 2702(1), while at the same time "shield[ing] [Indian 
tribes] from organized crime and other corrupting influ-
ences," 25 U.S.C. s 2702(2)?  Will the Lucky Tab II enable 
tribes to "take advantage of modern methods of conducting 
class II games"?  S. Rep. No. 100-446, at 9 (1988).  Or does 
the machine increase the risk of corruption or excessive 
gambling losses, concerns that government counsel told us at 
oral argument require its classification as a Class III device?  
To resolve such issues, Congress created the National Indian 
Gaming Commission, headed by a Chair appointed by the 
President and confirmed by the Senate presumably for his or 
her expertise on Indian gaming.  Yet whether because of 
bureaucratic gridlock or, as the tribes allege, because of 
congressional interference, we have no idea what the Com-
mission thinks about the policy questions presented by the 
Lucky Tab II.  Not only does this leave us with no agency 
position to which we might defer, see Chevron U.S.A. v. 
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 844 
(1984) ("[A] court may not substitute its own construction of a 
statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation made by 
the administrator of an agency"), but the Commission's IGRA 

regulations provide no assistance in interpreting the statute.  
Boiled down to their essence, the regulations tell us little 
more than that a Class II aid is something that is not a Class 
III facsimile.  We mention this not to escape our duty to 
decide this case--to the contrary, because we have jurisdic-
tion, we must determine how the Lucky Tab II should be 
classified--but to highlight the fact that we have no choice 
but to proceed without the benefit of a Commission position, a 
situation we expect Congress neither anticipated nor would 
appreciate.  That said, we turn to the parties' arguments 
about the classification of the Lucky Tab II.  See Everett v. 
United States, 158 F.3d 1364, 1367 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("We 
review a grant of summary judgment de novo.").

     Diamond Game and the Tribes contend that the Lucky Tab 
II acts as a permitted "electronic aid" to the Class II game of 
pull-tabs.  They emphasize that the machine's operation de-
pends entirely on pre-printed paper pull-tabs that can be (and 
in fact are) played without the mechanical dispenser.  The 
Lucky Tab II, in other words, cannot function without rolls of 
paper pull-tabs.  The Tribes also emphasize that despite the 
fact that the Lucky Tab II presents a video image of the 
contents of the pull-tabs it dispenses, the machine does not 
give the player the final word on the game;  players must still 
peel off the top layer to verify its contents and present it to a 
clerk to receive their winnings.  For all of these reasons, they 
argue, the Lucky Tab II cannot be considered a facsimile of 
the paper game of pull-tabs.

     According to the government, because the machine mirrors 
the traditional game played by purchasing cards from clerks, 
it is a Class III facsimile, not a Class II aid.  The government 
embraces the district court's description of the Lucky Tab II:  
"When the participant plays the Lucky Tab II, she is not 
playing the pull-tabs inside the machine;  she is engaging the 
machine that replicates the functions of the traditional pull-
tab game." Diamond Game, 9 F. Supp. 2d at 13, 20.  As to 
the possibility that the information on the video screen might 
be inaccurate, the government says mistakes are rare and for 
all practical purposes, the Lucky Tab II is a duplicate of the 
paper version.

     Both sides claim support from Cabazon Band of Mission 
Indians v. NIGC, 14 F.3d 633 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  There, we 
held that a video pull-tabs game was a "computerized ver-
sion" of pull-tabs and therefore a Class III facsimile.  The 
machine "randomly selects a card for the gambler, pulls the 
tab at the gambler's direction, and displays the result on the 
screen.  The computer version, like the paper version, has a 
fixed number of winning cards in each deal." Cabazon, 14 
F.3d at 635.  Finding that video pull-tabs "exactly repli-
cate[s]" the game of pull-tabs in computer form, Cabazon 
concluded that it amounted to a facsimile of the game.  See 
id.;  see also Sycuan Band of Mission Indians v. Roache, 54 
F.3d 535, 541-42 (9th Cir. 1994) (holding that a self-contained 
unit containing a computer linked to a video monitor and a 
printer constitutes an electronic facsimile of pull-tabs).

     We think the Lucky Tab II is quite different from the 
machine at issue in Cabazon.  To begin with, the Lucky Tab 
II is not a "computerized version" of pull-tabs.  Although the 
Lucky Tab II has a video screen, the screen merely displays 
the contents of a paper pull-tab.  Instead of using a computer 
to select patterns, the Lucky Tab II actually cuts tabs from 
paper rolls and dispenses them to players.  In other words, 
the game is in the paper rolls, not, as in the case of the 
Cabazon machine, in a computer.  Indeed, players using the 
Lucky Tab II often play a deal simultaneously with other 
players in the same hall who have chosen to purchase pull-
tabs from clerks.  For players using the Lucky Tab II, the 
machine functions as an aid--it "helps or supports," or "as-
sists" the paper game of pull-tabs.  Webster's Third New 
International Dictionary 44 (1993).  Without the paper rolls, 
the machine has no gaming function at all.  It is, in essence, 
little more than a high-tech dealer.  Viewed this way, the 
game played with the Lucky Tab II is not a facsimile of paper 
pull-tabs, it is paper pull-tabs.

     Another difference between the Lucky Tab II and the video 
machine at issue in Cabazon reinforces our belief that the 
Lucky Tab II should be classified as a Class II aid.  The 

Cabazon machine plays the game of pull-tabs in its entirety, 
dispensing receipts for players to redeem winnings.  By 
contrast, the Lucky Tab II dispenses actual paper pull-tabs 
that players must peel and display to a clerk before they can 
obtain prizes.  Although the machine's scanner apparently 
commits few errors when reading paper pull-tabs, the fact 
remains that unlike the Cabazon machine, the Lucky Tab II 
is technically not final.  It is, in other words, an aid to the 
game of pull-tabs.

     Notwithstanding the differences between the Lucky Tab II 
and the machine at issue in Cabazon, the government insists 
that the Lucky Tab II is a Class III device.  At oral 
argument, the government even asserted that removing the 
video screen would not convert the Lucky Tab II into a Class 
II aid.  Asked what in the government's view would be an 
aid, counsel pointed us to an electronic scanner called the 
"Tab Force Validation System."  As we understand this 
device, after a clerk dispenses a paper pull-tab, instead of 
peeling off the top layer, the player inserts the pull-tab into 
the machine, which scans the bar code and displays the 
results on a video screen.  The Commission has issued advi-
sory opinions classifying the Tab Force and other similar 
machines as Class II aids, concluding that the systems "sim-
ply read the pull-tabs and display whether or not they are 
winners....  [They] cannot change the outcome of the 
game."  See NIGC Advisory Opinion, at 2 (June 8, 1998).

     We see no principled difference between the Tab Force and 
the Lucky Tab II.  Both devices electronically "read" paper 
pull-tabs and display their contents on a screen, and neither 
can "change the outcome of the game."  Unlike the machine 
involved in Cabazon, neither contains an internal computer 
that generates the game.  Rather, both machines facilitate 
the playing of paper pull-tabs. They are thus Class II aids.

     The government makes two additional arguments in sup-
port of its position that the Lucky Tab II is a Class III 
facsimile.  First, like the district court, it relies on language 
from a Senate Indian Affairs Committee report describing a 
Class II aid as a device that enables tribes to "take advantage 
of modern methods of conducting class II games" by, for 

example, "join[ing] with other tribes to coordinate their class 
II operations and thereby enhance the potential of increasing 
revenues."  S. Rep. No. 100-446, at 9 (1988).  Class II aids 
are thus limited to devices that "merely broaden the potential 
participation levels and [are] readily distinguishable from ... 
electronic facsimiles in which a single participant plays a 
game with or against a machine rather than with or against 
other players." Id.  Unlike computers, cables, or telephone 
lines that connect bingo games on different reservations--
examples the Senate Report gives of aids that expand partic-
ipation--the Lucky Tab II, the government argues, neither 
increases participation levels nor enhances competition among 
players.  Second, the government claims that the Lucky Tab 
II makes it easier for players to play pull-tabs, thus increas-
ing the potential for players to "lose the rent money."

     These statutory interpretations, resting as they do on the 
policy underlying IGRA, are interesting and might even be 
worthy of Chevron two deference had they been offered by 
the Commission.  But they come only from appellate coun-
sel--indeed the "lose-the-rent" argument surfaced for the 
first time at oral argument. Moreover, nothing in the Senate 
Report suggests that an electronic device must link players 
on different reservations to qualify as a Class II aid.  Accord-
ingly, because of the similarities between the Lucky Tab II 
and the Tab Force Validation System, which the Commission 
has found to be a Class II aid, and because of the differences 
between the Lucky Tab II and the Class III device at issue in 
Cabazon, we reverse the district court and remand with 
instructions to enter summary judgment for appellants.  In 
view of this disposition, we have no need to address the 
district court's denial of the Rule 60(b) motion.

                                                            So ordered.
          
         