                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

         Argued April 11, 2000      Decided June 9, 2000 

                           No. 99-1297

                Frazier Industrial Company, Inc., 
                            Petitioner

                                v.

                 National Labor Relations Board, 
                            Respondent

          On Petition for Review and Cross-Application 
               for Enforcement of an Order of the 
                  National Labor Relations Board

     Robert Leinwand argued the cause for petitioner.  With 
him on the briefs were Michael Hoffman and Robert G. 
Hulteng.

     Anne Marie Lofaso, Attorney, National Labor Relations 
Board, argued the cause for respondent.  With her on the 
brief were Leonard R. Page, General Counsel, Linda Sher, 
Associate General Counsel, Aileen A. Armstrong, Deputy 

Associate General Counsel, and David S. Habenstreit, Super-
visory Attorney.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Henderson and Rogers, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Rogers.

     Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge Henderson.

     Rogers, Circuit Judge:  Frazier Industrial Company ap-
peals the National Labor Relations Board's decision that the 
company violated s 8(a)(1) and (3) of the National Labor 
Relations Act.  See 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), (3) (1994).  The 
company contends that the Board's conclusion that it violated 
s 8(a)(1) and (3) by discharging John Ramirez for engaging in 
union activity was unsupported by substantial evidence, and 
that his reinstatement with backpay was an abuse of discre-
tion and inconsistent with the after-acquired evidence rule.  
We deny the petition and remand the case for enforcement of 
the Board's order.

                                I.

     Frazier Industrial Company manufactures steel storage 
systems for warehouses.  The company has manufacturing 
facilities at locations throughout the United States, and the 
instant case involves its plant in Pocatello, Idaho, which 
began operating in March 1996.  During the plant's startup 
phase, Dennis Haga, the plant manager, hired nine welders 
and nine other employees to perform fabrication, mainte-
nance, painting, and other duties.

     One of the welders, John Ramirez, applied for the position 
at the request of the International Association of Sheet Metal 
Workers Association, Local 60 ("the union").1  Ramirez, a 
member of the union, was asked to assist in organizing the 
company's work force.  Ramirez started working for the 
company on March 7, 1996.  Beginning in April, he solicited 
__________
     1 Previous to his employment at the Frazier Industrial Compa-
ny, he was an employee of G&L Metal but was discharged for 
absenteeism and for attempting to organize workers. When he 
applied for employment at the company, Ramirez failed to disclose 
this information.

employees to attend organizational meetings and to sign 
union authorization cards.  According to Ramirez, he spoke 
with more than half of the plant's work force about the union, 
and spoke with at least one person about unionization daily or 
every other day before his discharge.  We review his activi-
ties in light of the company's contention that Ramirez was 
harassing employees and, thus, his activities were not protect-
ed by the Act, and that even if Ramirez's conduct were 
protected, the company would have terminated Ramirez even 
in the absence of protected conduct.

     In late May 1996, Ramirez approached Mike Jennings, 
another welder, and asked him to sign an authorization card 
while on break.  Jennings did not sign the card but told 
Ramirez that he would take the card home and discuss it with 
his wife.  Ramirez followed up with Jennings several times 
during May 1996.  Jennings never brought the card back to 
Ramirez, nor did he tell Ramirez that he was uninterested in 
joining a union.  Jennings did speak with Clint Moosman, a 
supervisor, and asked him whether he "was aware of what 
was going on" in regard to Ramirez's attempts to interest 
Jennings in the union.  Moosman told Jennings that "Ra-
mirez could solicit ... before work, during breaks, and after 
work, but not on company time."  At around the same time, 
an employee remarked to a group of other employees in the 
plant lunchroom during a break that they should start a 
union.  Moosman overheard the remark, and angrily told the 
employees, "Well if I hear of anyone going union ... they'll 
be down the road."

     Marty Hrabik, another supervisor, received two complaints 
from employees about Ramirez's union activities in May and 
June of 1996.  Hrabik and Moosman met with Haga, the 
plant manager, in early June 1996.  Haga told them to warn 
their employees "that they could do whatever they wanted to 
on their own time, but on company time they need not [ ] talk 
about the union or bother[ ] anybody about it."  Following 
that meeting, Moosman spoke with the welders at their work 
stations and explained that there had been complaints about 
some employees "harassing" others to join a union.  Moos-

man warned each welder, including Ramirez, that what they 
did on their own time was their business, but that they could 
not "harass" employees about the union during "company 
time."2  Moosman then delivered the same message to a 
group of employees, also including Ramirez, in the lunchroom 
during a break.  During the meeting, Moosman told the 
employees that "he wanted to know about it if some one was 
talking to [them] about the union on company time."

     In early June 1996, the union sponsored several meetings.  
The day after one meeting, Moosman remarked to Robert 
Rodriguez, an employee who had attended the meeting, that 
he had heard a rumor about a "little bitch session" where 
employees talked about "stuff" that they did not like about 
the shop.  Moosman told Rodriguez that he "was disappoint-
ed" in him.  Rodriguez told Moosman that he and others had 
discussed whether or not they wanted to continue working at 
the shop with Haga, Hrabik, and Moosman being "the way 
they were."  Following that remark, Moosman took out his 
knife, opened it, handed it to Rodriguez handle first and said, 
"[W]ell don't cut your own throat."  Later that day, Moosman 
asked Rodriguez for the names of the employees who were at 
the union meeting.  When Rodriguez did not disclose the 
names other than his own, Moosman told him, "If you contin-

__________
     2 The company distributed an employee handbook on its policies 
and rules at other locations, but did not give Pocatello employees 
the handbook until July 1996, subsequent to the events underlying 
Ramirez's discharge.  The handbook stated the company's no-
harassment policy as follows:  "[h]arassment of an employee ... is 
unacceptable and will not be tolerated" and "[m]anagers and super-
visors are responsible for promoting and maintaining a working 
environment which is free of such harassment for all employees."  
The handbook further stated that "[i]n the event such harassment 
does occur, managers and supervisors must take immediate correc-
tive action, including, where appropriate, dismissal of the offender."  
Before the handbook was distributed, company supervisors orally 
informed the Pocatello employees of the company's policies on an ad 
hoc basis, and the plant culture was one in which employees 
engaged in diverse personal conversations during working time, 
with the knowledge of management.

ue to cut your own throat I'm not going to be able to do 
anything for you."

     Hrabik discussed the union with some employees as well.  
Employee Allen Wilcox had promised Hrabik that he would 
come to Hrabik's house one evening to help build a fence, but 
Wilcox missed his appointment for personal reasons and to 
attend a union meeting.  The next day, Hrabik asked Wilcox 
how the meeting was.  When Wilcox asked if Hrabik referred 
to his personal meeting, Hrabik replied, "[N]o you know what 
meeting."  Hrabik had another discussion about unionizing 
when Wilcox was at his house with Rodriguez to work on the 
fence as he had promised.  While working, Hrabik was asked 
what he thought about the union organizing, and Hrabik told 
them that the company did not "have any stock here in 
Pocatello" and that "Frazier isn't going to allow this, the 
union to spread to the other companies, they'll just close this 
plant up and they'll move on."  Hrabik added that if his job 
were threatened he would "start cutting throats," and that if 
he were fired, they were "going down" with him.  Shortly 
afterwards, Hrabik asked Wilcox why certain employees 
wanted a union, and upon hearing that perhaps employees 
wanted better pay or better benefits, Hrabik said that before 
the company "went union they would either hire non-union or 
shut the plant down."

     Also in June 1996, employees Todd Chandler and James 
Frasure complained to Hrabik that Ramirez was "harassing" 
them about attending union meetings.  Ramirez spoke to 
Chandler five or six times over several days about an upcom-
ing union meeting, and Chandler neither expressed an inter-
est in attending a union nor told Ramirez that he was not 
interested.  Similarly, Frasure was approached several times 
by Ramirez, including four or five approaches on company 
time on one particular day, each time to urge Frasure to 
attend a union meeting.  Ramirez's remarks to Frasure were 
brief and on each occasion Frasure said that he would think 
about it, never telling Ramirez that he was uninterested.  
However, when Frasure talked to Hrabik about Ramirez, he 
said that Ramirez's persistence about the union meetings was 
"really pissing [him] off."  Hrabik told Moosman about these 

conversations, and both met with Haga, who said that "ha-
rassing" employees on company time "had to stop."  Later 
that day, Moosman told the employees, including Ramirez, 
that "there had been complaints about people being harassed 
on company time that needed to stop."

     Around the same time, Ramirez followed up on his earlier 
discussions with Jennings about unionizing and invited him to 
meet with a union organizer.  Jennings responded that he 
would think about it.  Later that day, Ramirez talked to 
Jennings, who at the time was working with employee Tom 
Neilsen.3  Ramirez testified that this conversation lasted 
about twenty minutes, while Jennings stated that they spoke 
for about forty-five minutes.  Several days later, Ramirez, 
after the end of his workday, saw Jennings reporting for 
work and spoke with Jennings for about ninety seconds in an 
effort to persuade Jennings to meet with a union organizer.  
Jennings agreed to make an appointment, and then Ramirez, 
noticing that Haga was watching them, ended the conversa-
tion.  After Ramirez left, Haga asked Jennings if Ramirez 
was bothering him, and Jennings replied that "[Ramirez] was 
bothering [him] about the damn union stuff and won't leave 
[him] alone."  Later that day, Haga asked Moosman to tell 
Ramirez to report to Haga's office the next morning.

     When Ramirez met with Haga in his office the next day, 
Haga asked Ramirez, "[W]hat am I going to do with you, 
John?"  Haga told him that people were complaining about 
him "bothering them all the time" and that it was "affecting 
... productivity."  Ramirez denied that he was bothering 
anyone.  When Haga repeated, "[W]hat am I going to do with 
you," Ramirez replied, "[W]ell you're the plant manager you 
do whatever you have to do."  Haga, who testified that 
Ramirez had "a really bad attitude about it," offered him the 
opportunity to quit, but Ramirez refused and Haga dis-
charged him.  Later that morning, Hrabik spoke to Rodri-

__________
     3 This meeting took place after Ramirez had already approached 
Neilsen on a previous occasion.  Ramirez asked him at their initial 
meeting for his opinions on unionizing, and Neilsen responded then 
that he "wasn't really for the union."

guez about Ramirez's discharge and told him that Rodriguez 
should now understand why he should not talk about the 
union on company time.

     Following his discharge Ramirez applied for unemployment 
insurance, and stated on the application that although he was 
discharged for organizing on company time, he never did 
organize on company time.  The Idaho Department of Labor 
denied his application.

     Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board adopted the 
Administrative Law Judge's findings that the company violat-
ed s 8(a)(1) by threatening to discharge employees who en-
gage in union activities, coercively interrogating employees 
about their union activities and sympathies,4 threatening em-
ployees that it would close the plant if employees chose union 
representation, and maintaining and enforcing a rule prohibit-
ing union talk while permitting other nonwork discussions.  
See Frazier Indus. Co., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 89, 3, 14-15 (June 
14, 1999).  The Board, by a two to one vote, also adopted the 
judge's findings that the company violated s 8(a)(1) and (a)(3) 
by discharging Ramirez because of his union activity.  See id. 
at 3, 15.  The Board ordered the company to cease and desist 
from engaging in these unfair labor practices and ordered the 
company to offer Ramirez full reinstatement and backpay for 
any lost earnings and benefits.  See id.

                               II.

     Section 8(a)(1) and (3) of the Act makes it an unfair labor 
practice for an employer "to interfere with, restrain or coerce 
employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed" by the 

__________
     4 Although the Board unanimously found that the company 
unlawfully interrogated employees about their union activities on 
various occasions, the finding that Haga's inquiry of Jennings as to 
whether Ramirez was bothering him the day before Ramirez was 
discharged constituted an unlawful interrogation was made by a two 
to one vote.  The dissenting member thought that Haga's question-
ing was "lawful in view of the repeated complaints by employees, 
including Jennings, of harassment by Ramirez."  Frazier, 328 
N.L.R.B. No. 89, at 6 n.12.

Act, 29 U.S.C. s 158(a)(1), and "by discrimination in regard to 
hire or tenure of employment or any term or condition of 
employment to encourage or discourage membership in any 
labor organization."  Id. s 158(a)(3).  To establish a causal 
nexus between adverse employment decisions and an employ-
ee's union affiliation, the complaining party must first show 
that protected activity "was a 'motivating factor' " in the 
adverse employment decision, and then the employer may 
show that it would have made the adverse decision even had 
the employee not engaged in protected activity.  Wright 
Line, Inc., 251 N.L.R.B. 1083, 1089 (1980);  see also NLRB v. 
Transportation Management Corp., 462 U.S. 393, 403 (1983) 
(approving of the Wright Line approach).  To establish an 
employer's discriminatory motive, the Board may "consider[ ] 
such factors as the employer's knowledge of the employee's 
union activities, the employer's hostility toward the union, and 
the timing of the employer's action."  Power, Inc. v. NLRB, 
40 F.3d 409, 418 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  In addition, evidence that 
an employer has violated s 8(a)(1) of the Act can support an 
inference of anti-union animus.  See Parsippany Hotel Man-
agement Co. v. NLRB, 99 F.3d 413, 423-24 (D.C. Cir. 1996).

     The court will affirm the findings of the Board unless they 
are "unsupported by substantial evidence in the record con-
sidered as a whole," General Elec. Co. v. NLRB, 117 F.3d 
627, 630 (D.C. Cir. 1997), or unless the Board "acted arbitrari-
ly or otherwise erred in applying established law to the facts."  
Allegheny Ludlum Corp. v. NLRB, 104 F.3d 1354, 1358 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997) (quotation and citation omitted).  Even if the court 
might have reached a different conclusion had the court 
considered the issue de novo, the court will uphold the 
Board's decision if it is supported by substantial evidence in 
the record.  See Synergy Gas Corp. v. NLRB, 19 F.3d 649, 
651 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  The court gives even greater deference 
to the Board's determination of questions of motive, see Laro 
Maintenance Corp. v. NLRB, 56 F.3d 224, 229 (D.C. Cir. 
1995), and "accept[s] the ALJ's credibility determinations that 
are adopted by the Board 'unless they are patently unsup-
portable.' "  Schaeff Inc. v. NLRB, 113 F.3d 264, 266 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997) (quoting NLRB v. Creative Food Design Ltd., 852 

F.2d 1295, 1297 (D.C. Cir. 1988));  see also Capital Cleaning 
Contractors, Inc. v. NLRB, 147 F.3d 999, 1004 (D.C. Cir. 
1998).

     The company contends that Ramirez "harassed" co-workers 
regarding the union during working time, and on the compa-
ny premises, and that such solicitations were not protected by 
the Act.  The company maintains further that, even if Ra-
mirez's actions constituted protected activities, its termination 
of Ramirez's employment was lawful because it would have 
discharged him in the absence of protected conduct for his 
insubordination and dishonesty.  We hold that there is sub-
stantial evidence in the record to support the Board's conclu-
sions that Ramirez's conduct was protected union activity 
under the Act, that the company violated the Act by discharg-
ing Ramirez for engaging in such protected union activity, 
and that the company's other proffered reasons for termi-
nation of Ramirez's employment--insubordination and dis-
honesty--are insufficient to meet its burden under Wright 
Line.

     In support of its contention that Ramirez's conduct was not 
protected by the Act because he was engaged in repeated 
harassment of fellow employees during work time resulting in 
frequent interruptions of work, the company relies on NLRB 
v. General Indicator Corp., 707 F.2d 279 (7th Cir. 1983), 
which held that "an employee who disrupts other employees 
during working hours is not engaged in a protected activity 
even though he is discussing union business."  Id. at 282.  
Similarly, Board precedent states that "activity that would 
otherwise be protected may lose that protection if the means 
by which that activity is conducted are sufficiently abusive or 
threatening."  Patrick Indus., Inc., 318 N.L.R.B. 245, 248 
(1995).  Under such precedent, the company contends, the 
fact that Ramirez was attempting to organize the company's 
work force is immaterial because he had no legitimate pro-
tected interest in repeatedly approaching and harassing his 
co-workers while they were trying to work.  Although this 
interpretation of evidence may be reasonable, the Board's 
finding to the contrary was supported by substantial evidence 
in the record.

     The Board found that Ramirez's activities were protected 
because "it is clear that ... all of Ramirez' worktime solicita-
tions were brief and did not involve any obvious disruption in 
production."  Frazier, 328 N.L.R.B. No. 89, at 2.  Adding 
that "there is no evidence that employees whom Ramirez 
solicited more than once ever even told him that he was 
interfering with their work or that further solicitations would 
have that effect," id., the Board found that although Ramirez 
tenaciously solicited employees to sign cards, attend the 
union's meetings, or meet individually with a union organizer, 
he did not pursue such matters with employees over their 
expressed objections.  On the contrary, the Board found that 
"his persistence, in the main, resulted in those instances 
where he received tepid or inconclusive responses from the 
employees with whom he spoke."  Id. at 13.5  The Board thus 
concluded that Ramirez's conduct, while persistent, did not 
rise "to the level of unprotected harassment."  Id. at 2.  
There is substantial evidence in the record to support the 
Board's findings.

     Ramirez followed up with Jennings about signing an autho-
rization card only after Jennings stated that he would take 
the card home, think about it, and discuss it with his wife.6  
Ramirez similarly followed up with employees Chandler and 
Frasure only after they had given Ramirez the impression 

__________
     5 The Board also rejected the company's contention that, al-
though no employees had directly asked Ramirez not to approach 
them in the future, its warnings that employees were not to 
"harass" coworkers about the union on working time put Ramirez 
on notice that future entreaties to the complaining employees about 
the union would be considered harassment.  See Frazier, 328 
N.L.R.B. No. 89, at 13-14.  The Board's conclusion was reasonable;  
those warnings, themselves unlawful, did not identify for Ramirez 
the employees who did not wish to be solicited, nor did they provide 
any guidance as to what constituted harassment, other than that 
union organizing on company time was unwelcome.

     6 The company claims that Jennings repeatedly told Ramirez 
that he was not interested, and Jennings testified to that effect;  
however, the Administrative Law Judge did not credit this asser-
tion.  See id. at 13.

that they were at least feeling ambivalent about unionizing.  
By contrast, Ramirez never spoke to Neilsen about the union 
again after Neilsen informed Ramirez in their initial conver-
sation he "wasn't really for the union."  Neilsen was present 
as a bystander to a conversation Ramirez had with Jennings 
one evening, and this conversation was the only conversation 
that was more than momentary, lasting twenty minutes ac-
cording to Ramirez and forty-five minutes according to Jen-
nings.  However, as the Board explained, there is "no evi-
dence that anyone told the [company] about this incident 
before Ramirez's discharge."  Id. at 2 n.5.  Therefore, how 
long this particular conversation lasted and what Jennings 
told Ramirez in the conversation are immaterial.  In addition, 
there is no evidence that Ramirez's solicitations were other 
than courteous or produced disruptive arguments.7

     Taking another tack, the company contends that the 
Board's finding that Ramirez's activities were protected was 
based on erroneous legal standards, requiring the company to 
demonstrate Ramirez's interruptions were lengthy and result-
ed in a loss of production and requiring Ramirez's co-workers 
to confront Ramirez directly instead of complaining to super-
visors.  This contention mischaracterizes the Board's find-
ings.  The Board did not apply a general standard that work 
time interruptions must be lengthy and result in a loss of 
production in order for them to be harassment.  The question 
that the Board was addressing was whether Ramirez's activi-

__________
     7 The company maintains that Ramirez's solicitations were dis-
ruptive and cites the instance in which employee Clair Monson 
started screaming at him when Ramirez approached him.  (Presum-
ably, our dissenting colleague's description, "almost to the point of a 
physical fight," refers to this incident.)  However, the Board has 
ruled that mere hostile reactions to protected union solicitation do 
not render that conduct unprotected.  In Patrick Industries, the 
Board stated that "the test for determining whether a given union 
card solicitation was protected is not the perhaps idiosyncratic 
reaction of the particular employee who happened to be on the 
receiving end of that activity," and that "it is for the Board to 
decide whether or not the Act's protections apply."  Patrick Indus., 
318 N.L.R.B. at 248.

ties rose to the level of harassment, and, in order to make 
that determination, the Board considered various factors, 
such as how long each interruption lasted, how disruptive it 
was, how courteous or abusive Ramirez was in each instance, 
and whether he respected co-workers' requests not to be 
bothered.  The Board noted that Ramirez's conduct was 
neither lengthy nor disruptive only because they were, quite 
reasonably, considered to be relevant to the Board's determi-
nation that his conduct was protected by the Act, and not 
because it determined that only lengthy interruptions rose to 
the level of harassment.

     Contrary to the company's contention, this approach is 
consistent with Patrick Industries and General Indicator.  In 
Patrick Industries, the Board ruled that an employee's re-
peated solicitations of a coworker to sign an authorization 
card were protected under the Act, and explained that in the 
absence of evidence that the employee ever "threatened or 
abused" the coworker or even "raised his voice," a conclusion 
that the activity was unprotected could "significantly limit the 
ability and willingness of employees to solicit their fellow 
employees' support for, opposition to, a union, activity that is 
central to the purposes of the Act."  Patrick Indus., 318 
N.L.R.B. at 248.  Also, unlike the instant case, in General 
Indicator, where the Seventh Circuit held that an employer 
lawfully discharged an employee who engaged in union activi-
ties on company time, the discharged employee "had a history 
of disrupting the work schedule of co-employees, and even 
after he had been disciplined for this pattern of disruption 
and had received a 'final warning,' he continued to approach 
other employees and prevent them from completing their 
assigned tasks in a timely manner."  General Indicator, 707 
F.2d at 283.  The court concluded that the discharged em-
ployee's tenure with the company was "a continual pattern of 
disruptive and insubordinate behavior and activities as well as 
... interfer[ence] with productivity."  Id.  By contrast, the 
Board found that Ramirez's behavior was neither disruptive 
nor threatening and that he voluntarily discontinued the 
solicitation of any employee who failed to express at least 
some interest in the union.

     Similarly, the company's contention that the Board "fault-
ed" Ramirez's co-workers "for complaining to their supervi-
sors rather than directly confronting Ramirez" is groundless.  
Contrary to our dissenting colleague's criticism, the Board 
did not assume that Ramirez's co-workers had a "duty ... to 
inform Ramirez he was disturbing their work."  Again, the 
Board considered various relevant factors in order to deter-
mine whether Ramirez's conduct was protected by the Act.  
One of the factors the Board considered relevant was that 
Ramirez was persistent only with those who gave "tepid or 
inconclusive responses."  Frazier, 328 N.L.R.B. No. 89, at 13.  
Therefore, when the Board stated that "there is no evidence 
that employees whom Ramirez solicited more than once ever 
told him that he was interfering with their work or that 
further solicitations would have that effect," the Board was 
not applying a general requirement that a behavior does not 
constitute harassment until there is a direct confrontation.  
Instead, the Board was merely emphasizing that Ramirez, 
while persistent as a union organizer, did not bother anyone 
who expressly indicated that he was not interested or that he 
did not want to be bothered.  Therefore, the company's claim 
that the Board inappropriately required employees to rebuke 
Ramirez first before complaining to the management is a 
wholly inaccurate account of the Board's opinion.

     Given that Ramirez's union activities are protected under 
the Act, the remaining question is whether the company's 
discharge of Ramirez was lawful.  The Board found that 
Ramirez's discharge was unlawful because "the chain of 
events leading to the discharge was a direct result of the 
[company's] enforcement of its unlawful rule prohibiting talk 
about the Union during worktime."  Frazier, 328 N.L.R.B. 
No. 89, at 2.  There is substantial evidence in the record to 
support this finding.  Here, context is everything.  The com-
pany promulgated an invalid rule prohibiting employees from 
talking about the union during working time.  See Industrial 
Wire Prods., 317 N.L.R.B. 190, 190 (1995).  That rule was 
implemented in direct response to rumors of Ramirez's union 
organizing efforts, and the employees who subsequently in-
formed the company of Ramirez's work time solicitations 

were acting in accordance with the company's directive that 
they report union "talk" to management.  In addition, the 
company's activities in violation of s 8(a)(1), violations the 
company does not challenge, included threatening to dis-
charge employees who engaged in union activities, coercively 
interrogating employees about their union activities and sym-
pathies, expressing disappointment in employees who attend-
ed union meetings, threatening to close the plant if employees 
chose union representation, threatening to retaliate against 
employees for their union activities, and remarking to an 
employee after Ramirez's discharge that the employee should 
now understand why he should not talk about the union on 
company time.  Such factual findings by the Board constitute 
substantial evidence to support its finding that Ramirez's 
discharge by the company violated s 8(a)(3) and (1) of the 
Act.

     Nor, as the company contends, did the Board's conclusion 
contradict Patrick Industries and BJ's Wholesale. In Patrick 
Industries, the Board found that the company's discipline, 
while unlawful under s 8(a)(1), did not independently violate 
s 8(a)(3) because "the discipline was not discriminatory and 
was not done in order to encourage or discourage member-
ship in any labor organization."  Patrick Indus., 318 N.L.R.B. 
at 248.  As noted, the Board's finding in the instant case was 
based on numerous indications of the company's discriminato-
ry prohibition on union talk, its repeated solicitation of com-
plaints regarding union solicitation, and numerous other in-
stances reflecting the company's anti-union animus.  The 
company's reliance on BJ's Wholesale fares no better.  As the 
Board explained, in BJ's Wholesale, the employee had previ-
ously been counseled under the employer's anti-harassment 
policy for conduct unrelated to the union, and, unlike the 
instant case, the employer had not promulgated an unlawful 
rule prohibiting all working-time union speech.  See BJ's 
Wholesale, 318 N.L.R.B. at 684.  Moreover, in finding the 
discipline in BJ's Wholesale to be lawful, the Board empha-
sized that the employer had not solicited complaints from 
employees about union activity.  See id.  The record here 
shows that the company repeatedly solicited complaints about 

union "harassment," and that Moosman told the employees 
that he "wanted to know about it if some one was talking to 
[them] about the union on company time."  Moreover, the 
purported "complaint" from Jennings that immediately pre-
cipitated Ramirez's discharge was directly solicited by Haga's 
inquiry as to whether Ramirez was harassing him.  There-
fore, the Board's findings are consistent with BJ's Wholesale 
and Patrick Industries.

     The Board reasonably rejected the company's Wright Line 
defense that Ramirez would have been terminated even in the 
absence of the protected activity because of his insubordina-
tion and dishonesty when questioned by Haga.  Substantial 
evidence supports the Board's finding that Haga decided to 
terminate Ramirez for the union activities, and not for insub-
ordination and dishonesty.  As the Board emphasized, Haga 
initially testified that Ramirez was discharged solely for 
"harassing" company employees.  In addition, none of the 
company's filings with regard to Ramirez's application for 
unemployment benefits mentioned any grounds for termi-
nation other than alleged harassment.  Therefore, the compa-
ny has failed to provide sufficient evidence to overcome the 
Board's finding that it would have terminated Ramirez even 
in the absence of the protected activity for his insubordination 
and dishonesty.  In the end, the company offers no reason for 
the court to disturb the Board's finding of unlawful discharge.

                               III.

     The company also challenges the Board's remedy, contend-
ing that the Board abused its discretion by awarding Ramirez 
reinstatement.  The company takes the position that Ra-
mirez's failure to disclose fully his employment history at the 
time he applied for employment as a welder and his false 
statements regarding his union activities on his unemploy-
ment benefit application warranted immediate termination 
and preclude reinstatement.  The company relies on the 
after-acquired evidence rule of McKennon v. Nashville Ban-
ner Publishing Company, 513 U.S. 352 (1995), which held 
that "neither reinstatement nor front pay is an appropriate 

remedy" for an unlawful termination "where there is after-
acquired evidence of wrongdoing that would have led to 
termination on legitimate grounds had the employer known 
about it."  Id. at 361-62.  Following McKennon, the Board 
has limited reinstatement and backpay based on after-
acquired evidence that an employee who was unlawfully dis-
charged had engaged in misconduct that would have led to 
the employee's termination.  See, e.g., Marshall Durbin Poul-
try Co., 310 N.L.R.B. 68, 70 (1993), enforced in pertinent 
part, 39 F.3d 1312, 1317 (5th Cir. 1994);  John Cuneo, Inc., 
298 N.L.R.B. 856, 857 (1990);  Axelson, Inc., 285 N.L.R.B. 
862, 866 (1987).  The difficulty for the company stems from 
the fact that it makes a bare assertion.

     The McKennon Court explained, "Where an employer 
seeks to rely upon after-acquired evidence of wrongdoing, it 
must first establish that the wrongdoing was of such severity 
that the employee in fact would have been terminated on 
those grounds alone if the employer had known of it at the 
time of the discharge."  McKennon, 513 U.S. at 362-63.  The 
Court added that "[t]he concern that employers might as a 
routine matter undertake extensive discovery into an employ-
ee's background or performance on the job to resist claims is 
not an insubstantial one."  Id. at 363.  Accordingly, the 
Board has placed on the employer the burden of showing that 
it would have discharged the employee because of the miscon-
duct, not simply that it could have done so.  See, e.g., 
Marshall Durbin, 310 N.L.R.B. at 70;  John Cuneo, 298 
N.L.R.B. at 859.  The Board has broad remedial discretion to 
devise remedies that effectuate the policies of the Act, see 
ABF Freight System, Inc. v. NLRB, 510 U.S. 317, 324 (1994), 
and because the company has not produced evidence to 
overcome that deference and to show that it would have 
terminated Ramirez's employment for his misconduct, we find 
that the Board did not abuse its discretion in ordering 
reinstatement.

     It is undisputed that Ramirez falsified his employment 
application by omitting information about his previous em-
ployment with G&L Metal;  however, the Board reasonably 
concluded that the company failed to show that he would have 

been discharged for his failure to disclose the information had 
the company learned about it before the discharge.  As the 
Board noted, the employment application that Ramirez filled 
out states merely that false information, omissions, or misrep-
resentations may result in a discharge of the employee.  See 
Frazier, 328 N.L.R.B. No. 89, at 15.  In other words, the 
language on the form warns of dismissal only as a potential 
option, and the company has provided no evidence that its 
practice has been to dismiss employees for similar omissions.  
The company's assertion that the company's policy manual, 
which specifies that "[f]alsifying or altering Company rec-
ords" is a violation "warranting immediate dismissal of an 
employee," is sufficient evidence that it would have dis-
charged Ramirez for his omission fails not only because the 
manual was not distributed to him before the termination of 
his employment and there is no evidence otherwise to indicate 
that he was made aware of this falsification rule, but because 
the company offered no evidence that it has routinely dis-
missed employees for similar omissions.

     Similarly, the company's reliance on the evidence of Ra-
mirez's false statement on his unemployment benefits applica-
tion is misplaced.  The company has not provided sufficient 
evidence to show that Ramirez's misrepresentations amount-
ed to "[f]alsifying or altering Company records," given that it 
is not obvious why unemployment insurance applications filed 
with a state agency would be considered company records for 
the purposes of the company policy at issue.  Neither has the 
company proffered any other evidence to show that Ramirez's 
misconduct precludes his reinstatement.  While we do not 
understand the Board to suggest that the company would 
have to demonstrate that other employees had been dis-
charged on this ground, as there will always be a first case, a 
bare assertion merely referring to a company policy that 
seems remotely related is insufficient.  Hence, the Board 
reasonably distinguished Vilter Mfg. Corp., 271 N.L.R.B. 1544 
(1984), in which the Board found no unfair labor practice for 
failure to reinstate a discharged employee where the employ-

er demonstrated that an employee's post-termination dishon-
esty would have resulted in the employee's discharge under 
the employer's progressive discipline system.  See Frazier, 
328 N.L.R.B. No. 89, at 15;  Vilter, 271 N.L.R.B. at 1546-47.

     Accordingly, we deny the petition and remand the case for 
enforcement of the Board's order.

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit Judge, dissenting:

     I would grant the petition for review for the reasons 
expressed so convincingly by the dissenting member of the 
National Labor Relations Board.  John Ramirez repeatedly 
pestered the same employees while they were trying to 
perform their jobs, as many as four times in a single day and 
once almost to the point of a physical fight.  This was not 
protected activity but harassment.  His fellow employees 
were under no duty, as the majorities of this panel and of the 
Board seem to think, to inform Ramirez he was disturbing 
their work.  That should have been, and surely was, as 
obvious to him as it was to them.  As the dissenting Board 
member noted, Ramirez's discharge did not violate section 
8(a)(1) or (3) of the National Labor Relations Act because the 
employer "was lawfully responding to multiple complaints 
from multiple employees regarding Ramirez' repeated harass-
ment of them during worktime about the Union."  Frazier 
Indus. Co., 328 N.L.R.B. No. 89, slip op. at 59 (1999) (footnote 
omitted).  Further, "even assuming that the General Counsel 
has established a prima facie showing that Ramirez' protected 
conduct was a motivating factor in his discharge, the Respon-
dent has met its burden of showing that the discharge would 
have occurred even in the absence of protected activity."  Id. 
(citing Wright Line, 251 N.L.R.B. 1083 (1980), enf'd., 662 F.2d 
899 (1st Cir. 1981), cert. denied, 455 U.S. 989 (1982)).  Ac-
cordingly I dissent.

                                         