                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued September 8, 2000   Decided November 14, 2000 

                           No. 99-5390

                    American Bus Association, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

         Rodney E. Slater, Secretary of Transportation, 
                             Appellee

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                         (No. 98cv02351)

     Richard A. Allen argued the cause for appellant.  With 
him on the briefs were Richard P. Schweitzer, Craig M. 
Cibak and Jol A. Silversmith.

     Sandra Wien Simon, Attorney, U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, argued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief 
were David W. Ogden, Acting Assistant Attorney General, 
Marleigh D. Dover, Attorney, Nancy E. McFadden, General 

Counsel, U.S. Department of Transportation, and Paul M. 
Geier, Assistant General Counsel.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Rogers, Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Concurring opinion filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  American Bus Association 
("ABA") appeals from a District Court judgment upholding a 
Department of Transportation ("DOT") rule that implements 
portions of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA" or 
"Act"), 42 U.S.C. s 12101 et seq. (1994).  Appellant challenges 
those portions of the rule that authorize the imposition of 
money damages against bus companies that fail to comply 
with the ADA.  Appellant claims that the remedies enumerat-
ed in the ADA are exclusive, and may not be supplemented 
with a money-damages scheme.  It also alleges that DOT 
violated the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA"), 5 U.S.C. 
s 551 et seq. (1994), because it provided neither notice that it 
was considering authorizing monetary relief nor opportunity 
for the public to comment.

     We conclude that DOT lacked the statutory authority to 
impose money damages on bus companies.  Congress has 
given the agency no authority to establish remedies in addi-
tion to those that are specified in the ADA.  Because we hold 
that DOT exceeded the scope of its authority, we need not 
reach Appellant's notice-and-comment claim.

                          I. BACKGROUND

A.   Factual background

     Title III of the ADA generally requires operators of public 
accommodations, including common carriers, to make their 
services accessible to disabled persons.  See 42 U.S.C. 
ss 12181-88 (1994).  Toward that end, the ADA instructs the 
Secretary of Transportation--which post is presently held by 
Appellee Rodney E. Slater--to promulgate rules concerning 
the accessibility of over-the-road buses ("OTRBs"), which are 
large motorcoaches designed for travel between cities.  See 

id. s 12186(a).  On September 6, 1991, DOT issued a set of 
interim rules governing OTRB accessibility.  These rules 
required bus companies to provide boarding assistance to 
disabled passengers, and permitted operators to require pas-
sengers who needed such assistance to provide them with 48 
hours of advance notice.  DOT did not, at the time, oblige 
operators to equip their OTRBs with wheelchair lifts, nor did 
it require operators to pay money damages to disabled per-
sons whose travel plans were frustrated.  See Transportation 
for Individuals with Disabilities, 56 Fed. Reg. 45,584, 45,640 
(1991).

     In 1993, DOT issued an advance notice of proposed rule-
making in which the agency identified the OTRB-accessibility 
issues it hoped to resolve.  Among DOT's concerns were 
whether all OTRB routes should have accessibility require-
ments, and whether disabled passengers' needs could be 
accommodated by an "on-call" system under which they could 
request an accessible OTRB in advance.  See Transportation 
for Individuals with Disabilities;  Accessibility of Over-the-
Road Buses, 58 Fed. Reg. 52,735, 52,738-39 (1993).  The 
public more than complied with the agency's request for 
comments:  hundreds were submitted, mostly from disabled 
persons' advocacy groups and organizations representing the 
bus industry.

     On March 25, 1998, DOT published a notice of proposed 
rulemaking ("NPRM") that proposed requiring all fixed-route 
OTRBs (regularly scheduled buses, such as Greyhound) to 
install wheelchair lifts, and obliging charter/tour OTRBs to 
provide lift-equipped buses to passengers who request them 
48 hours in advance.  The NPRM made no mention of the 
possibility of money damages, or any other scheme to com-
pensate disabled passengers whose travel plans were frustrat-
ed by an inaccessible OTRB.  See Transportation for Individ-
uals with Disabilities, 63 Fed. Reg. 14,560-71 (1998).

     After considering the over 400 comments submitted in 
response to its NPRM, the agency issued its final rule on 
September 28, 1998.  Several commentators had urged DOT 
to promulgate an "on-call," or reservation-based, rule, under 

which all OTRB operators (and not just charter/tour opera-
tors) would be required to provide wheelchair-accessible bus-
es to passengers who gave 48-hours advance notice of their 
need.  See, e.g., Comments of Coach USA, Inc. at 19-21.  The 
agency rejected that alternative.  Its final rule essentially 
imposed the obligations proposed in the NPRM--requiring 
fixed-route OTRB operators to equip their entire fleets with 
wheelchair lifts--with the additional requirement that bus 
companies pay "compensation" to disabled passengers when 
they fail to provide them with accessible service.  A bus 
operator will be assessed a $300 fine for its first violation, 
$400 for its second, and so on in $100 increments up to $700 
for its fifth and all subsequent infractions.  See Transporta-
tion for Individuals with Disabilities, 63 Fed. Reg. 51,670, 
51,692 (1998) (codified at 49 C.F.R. s 37.199 (2000)).

B.   The District Court decision

     Two days after the final rule was promulgated, September 
30, 1998, Appellant American Bus Association filed a com-
plaint in the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia.  ABA, an organization representing the bus indus-
try, alleged, among other things, that DOT had no statutory 
authority to implement the money-damages scheme, that the 
agency had not provided adequate notice that it intended to 
adopt a remedies provision, and that the rule violated the 
National Environmental Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. s 4321 et seq. 
(1994).

     On the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment, the 
District Court rejected each of ABA's contentions.  The court 
found that the agency had provided adequate notice that it 
was considering a money-damages provision.  While the 
NPRM may not expressly have mentioned the possibility of 
money damages, the remedies scheme was the "logical out-
growth" of the agency's often-expressed concern that bus 
companies would fail to provide accessible service to disabled 
passengers.  See American Bus Ass'n v. Slater, No. 98-2351, 
Mem. Op. at 22-23 (D.D.C. Sept. 10, 1999) ("Mem. Op.") 
(citing, inter alia, United Steelworkers v. Marshall, 647 F.2d 
1189, 1221 (D.C. Cir. 1980) ("Where the change between the 

proposed and final rule is important, the question for the 
court is whether the final rule is a 'logical outgrowth' of the 
rulemaking proceeding.")).  Indeed, the court reasoned, ABA 
had actual notice that DOT was considering a damages 
provision, as its own submitted comment expressly endorsed 
a proposal that disappointed passengers should be permitted 
to seek monetary relief.  See id. at 25-26.

     ABA's argument that the agency exceeded its statutory 
authority by imposing money damages fared no better.  The 
District Court cited the Supreme Court's pronouncement 
that, if an authorizing "statute is silent or ambiguous," courts 
must uphold "a reasonable interpretation made by the admin-
istrator of an agency."  Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 843, 844 
(1984).  Such an ambiguity, the court reasoned, exists here:  
"The plain language [of the ADA] indicates that Congress did 
not explicitly forbid the Secretary from including a compensa-
tion mechanism in the OTRB accessibility regulations."  
Mem. Op. at 28.  Because of the ADA's silence on the 
availability of money damages--because "[a] gap exists in this 
enabling statute," id.--the court concluded that Chevron 
obliged it to defer to DOT's reasonable interpretation.

     Nor was the District Court persuaded by ABA's argument 
that the agency's money-damages scheme is foreclosed by 
APA s 558(b), which establishes that "[a] sanction may not be 
imposed ... except within jurisdiction delegated to the agen-
cy and as authorized by law."  5 U.S.C. s 558(b) (1994).  The 
court conceded that DOT had authorized sanctions, but it 
reasoned that they were not penal sanctions.  Because the 
sanctions were designed to remedy the injuries suffered by 
disabled persons whose travel needs were not accommodated, 
and because the fines would be paid directly to the disap-
pointed passengers, "this court concludes that the provision is 
a regulatory sanction with a remedial purpose and not a 
penalty."  Mem. Op. at 27.  The court therefore entered 
summary judgment in favor of the agency's Secretary.

     This appeal followed.  ABA no longer contests DOT's 
decision to require that OTRB companies equip their buses 

with wheelchair lifts, and only its money-damages and notice-
and-comment claims are before this Court.

                          II. DISCUSSION

A.   Chevron and ADA s 12188

     The principal issue in this case is whether DOT had the 
statutory authority to adopt a rule imposing money damages 
on bus companies that fail to provide accessible service to 
disabled passengers.  Because, DOT proposes, this case in-
volves a dispute as to whether that rule is in fact authorized 
by the statute it purports to implement, it is governed by the 
familiar two-step analysis announced in Chevron U.S.A. Inc. 
v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 
(1984).  "First, always," the reviewing court must consider 
"whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise ques-
tion at issue."  An affirmative answer "is the end of the 
matter;  for the court, as well as the agency, must give effect 
to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress."  Id. at 
842-43.  If, on the other hand, "the statute is silent or 
ambiguous with respect to the specific issue," the court must 
uphold "a reasonable interpretation made by the administra-
tor of an agency."  Id. at 843, 844.

     Applying Chevron to this case, we conclude that Congress 
unambiguously intended to preclude DOT from authorizing 
money damages.  The ADA's carefully crafted remedies 
scheme reveals the legislature's intent that the statute's 
enumerated remedies were to be exclusive, and consequent 
intent to deny agencies the power to authorize supplementary 
monetary relief.  The relevant portion of the ADA establishes 
that:

     The remedies and procedures set forth in section 
     2000a-3(a) of this title are the remedies and procedures 
     this subchapter provides to any person who is being 
     subjected to discrimination on the basis of disability in 
     violation of this subchapter or who has reasonable 
     
     grounds for believing that such person is about to be 
     subjected to discrimination in violation of section 12183 of 
     this title.
     
42 U.S.C. s 12188(a)(1) (emphasis added).

     By preceding the words "remedies and procedures" with 
the definite article "the," as opposed to the more general "a" 
or "an," Congress made clear that it understood 
s 2000a-3(a)'s remedies to be exclusive.  Indeed, "[i]t is a 
rule of law well established that the definite article 'the' 
particularizes the subject which it precedes.  It is a word of 
limitation as opposed to the indefinite or generalizing force of 
'a' or 'an.' "  Brooks v. Zabka, 450 P.2d 653, 655 (Colo. 1969) 
(en banc);  see also Black's Law Dictionary 1477 (6th ed. 
1990) ("In construing statute, definite article 'the' particular-
izes the subject which it precedes and is word of limitation as 
opposed to indefinite or generalizing force 'a' or 'an'.").  If 
Congress had intended those remedies not to be exclusive, it 
would have provided that the relief available to an ADA 
plaintiff "includes" the 2000a-3(a) remedies.

     The remedies set forth in 42 U.S.C. 2000a-3(a)--which is 
part of the 1964 Civil Rights Act--do not include money 
damages.  See Newman v. Piggie Park Enters., Inc., 390 U.S. 
400, 402 (1968) ("When a plaintiff brings an action under that 
Title, he cannot recover damages.").  Instead, as that subsec-
tion's caption ("Civil actions for injunctive relief") indicates, a 
party may invoke s 2000a-3(a) only in an effort to obtain 
"preventive relief, including an application for a permanent or 
temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order."  42 
U.S.C. s 2000a-3(a).  As the Supreme Court has explained, a 
s 2000a-3(a) plaintiff primarily seeks not redress of his own 
injury, but to vindicate the policy of the United States 
government.  See Newman, 390 U.S. at 402 ("If he obtains an 
injunction, he does so not for himself alone but also as a 
'private attorney general,' vindicating a policy that Congress 
considered of the highest priority.").

     DOT additionally attempts to locate its authority to impose 
fines in the ADA's specification that the Attorney General 
may bring a civil action for money damages against OTRB 
operators that fail to provide accessible service.  See 42 

U.S.C. s 12188(b) (1994).  "Congress contemplated," the 
agency submits, "that some type of compensation might be 
paid from an operator to a disappointed rider."  Appellee's 
brief at 54.  Not only does the civil-action provision not assist 
DOT's claim that the ADA empowers it to authorize monetary 
relief, it actually undermines it.  Congress did indeed contem-
plate that money damages would be available--but it also 
specified the precise conditions under which they could be 
paid.  The monetary relief must be (1) awarded by a court (2) 
in a civil action (3) that was brought by the Attorney General.  
By specifying the circumstances under which monetary relief 
will be available, Congress evinced its intent that damages 
would be available in no others.  See Transamerica Mortgage 
Advisors, Inc. v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11, 19 (1979) (recognizing 
that "it is an elemental canon of statutory construction that 
where a statute expressly provides a particular remedy or 
remedies, a court must be chary of reading others into it").

     DOT's rule satisfies none of those three conditions.  First, 
the agency itself, not an Article III court, presumably would 
levy fines against OTRB companies.  Second, and as a conse-
quence, the fines would not be assessed in a civil action.  
Finally, DOT makes monetary relief available even absent the 
participation of the Attorney General.  In fact, the agency is 
somewhat, and perhaps deliberately, vague as to how it will 
enforce its sanctions:  The parties dispute whether a disap-
pointed passenger would hold a judicially cognizable right to 
compensation.  Compare Appellant's brief at 25 n.16, 26 n.17, 
with Appellee's brief at 54-55 n.10.  And at one point in its 
briefs--though not, crucially, in the rule itself--the agency 
claims that the Attorney General would be responsible for 
enforcement.  See Appellee's brief at 54-55 n.10.  But it is 
difficult to see how that could be the case, since DOT's rule 
describes the compensation procedure as involving "a sum 
sent directly to the passenger whose travel plans were dis-
rupted," and indeed states that "[n]o administrative proce-
dure"--or, presumably, judicial procedure--"is needed."  
Transportation for Individuals with Disabilities, 63 Fed. Reg. 

51,670, 51,687 (1998) (emphasis added).1

     We conclude, therefore, that Congress has not granted 
DOT the power to impose money damages on bus companies 
that fail to provide accessible service to disabled passengers.  
We need not evaluate the reasonableness of the agency's rule 
under Chevron's second step, since we are bound in the first 
instance to "give effect" to Congress's "unambiguously ex-
pressed intent."  Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843.

B.   APA s 558(b)

     Our conclusion that DOT lacks the authority to authorize 
money damages is confirmed by the Administrative Proce-
dure Act, s 558(b) of which establishes that "[a] sanction may 
not be imposed or a substantive rule or order issued except 
within jurisdiction delegated to the agency and as authorized 
by law."  5 U.S.C. s 558(b) (1994).  There is no dispute in 
this case that DOT's fines are sanctions;  the District Court 
held as much, and the agency does not appear to challenge 
that finding.  Instead, the District Court apparently conclud-
ed that s 558(b) requires express grants of statutory authori-
ty, not for all sanctions, but only for the ones that can be 
characterized as "penal."  And, the court submitted, the 
OTRB rules do not impose a "penalty" inasmuch as they 
impose "a regulatory sanction with a remedial purpose."  
Memorandum Opinion at 27.

     That conclusion is likely erroneous for two reasons.  First, 
s 558(b) requires statutory authority for all sanctions, not 
merely those that can be characterized as penal.  Second, 
DOT's compensation rule does, in fact, impose penalties that 
go beyond simple compensation.  DOT's efforts to distinguish 
simple sanctions (which, it submits, may be imposed without 
an express authorization) from punitive sanctions (which may 
not) rest on the following syllogism:

__________
     1 If the Secretary intends to assert that by means of his rule he 
can channel the choices of the Attorney General and the courts 
within the ADA remedy structure, he points to nothing suggesting 
such authority.

       (1)  Section 558(b) permits agencies to impose non-
                punitive sanctions, even in the absence of express 
                statutory authority.
          
          (2)  DOT's sanctions are non-punitive.
          
          (3)  Therefore, DOT could impose the sanctions absent 
                express statutory authority.
          
     The problem with the syllogism is that its major premise is 
flawed.  Section 558(b) does not distinguish on its face be-
tween punitive sanctions and ordinary sanctions.  It speaks of 
"sanctions," period, and provides no basis for supposing that 
one type may be imposed without statutory authorization, but 
that other types may not.  Nor does DOT cite any cases that 
distinguish between punitive and ordinary sanctions.  It sim-
ply moves from its conclusion that its rule imposes a sanction 
to drawing a distinction between the two types, and omits the 
necessary middle step of explaining why that distinction has 
any legal significance.

     Nor is the syllogism's minor premise--that the agency's 
sanctions are non-punitive--persuasive.  The amounts which 
bus companies will be made to pay are not a function of a 
would-be passenger's injury, but of the number of times the 
company has violated the ADA in the past.  The fines begin 
at $300, for an OTRB operator's first offense, and escalate in 
increments of $100 up to $700, for an operator's fifth and all 
subsequent offenses.  See Transportation for Individuals with 
Disabilities, 63 Fed. Reg. 51,670, 51,692 (1998) (codified at 49 
C.F.R. s 37.199 (2000)).  There is no connection between the 
fine imposed and the injury suffered.  The fines are unrelated 
to the out-of-pocket expenses--which might include lodging, 
meals, and alternative transportation--a disappointed passen-
ger could be expected to pay.  Instead, the agency is con-
cerned principally with punishing noncomplying OTRB opera-
tors.

     To be sure, the agency's sanctions may have several objec-
tives, one of which is to punish and another of which is to 
remedy disabled persons' injuries.  But this Court regards as 
a penalty any sanction that "goes beyond remedying the 

damage caused to the harmed parties by the defendant's 
action."  Johnson v. SEC, 87 F.3d 484, 488 (D.C. Cir. 1996) 
(emphasis added).  In other words, a sanction is a penalty 
even if only one of its various objectives is to punish wrongful 
conduct;  that is, if it "serv[es] in part to punish."  Austin v. 
United States, 509 U.S. 602, 610 (1993) (emphasis added).  
Beyond cavil, DOT's sanctions are at least in part designed to 
punish, which is why the damages an OTRB operator must 
pay turn on the number of violations it has committed and not 
the extent of the disappointed passenger's injury.

     Nor are we persuaded by DOT's attempt to circumvent 
s 558(b)'s directive by claiming that agencies possess a limit-
ed, but inherent, power to impose sanctions.  DOT cites both 
Touche Ross & Co. v. SEC, 609 F.2d 570 (2d Cir. 1979), and 
Checkosky v. SEC, 23 F.3d 452 (D.C. Cir. 1994), for the 
proposition that an agency's general power to protect the 
integrity of its administrative processes entails an inherent 
sanctioning power.  Both cases are easily dismissed or distin-
guished.

     Touche Ross concerned a Securities and Exchange Com-
mission rule that enabled the SEC to discipline attorneys by 
refusing to allow them to practice before it.  The Second 
Circuit concluded that an agency has a limited power to 
impose sanctions that are not expressly authorized by statute, 
but only ones designed to "protect the integrity of its own 
processes."  Touche Ross, 609 F.2d at 582.  The Commis-
sion's disciplinary rule did not apply to the primary conduct 
of regulated entities, but was simply designed to "ensure that 
those professionals, on whom the Commission relies heavily in 
the performance of its statutory duties, perform their tasks 
diligently and with a reasonable degree of competence."  Id.  
The SEC's housekeeping-type rule is quite unlike the rule 
promulgated by DOT here, which penalizes regulated parties 
for violations of their statutory duties.  The agency's authori-
zation of monetary relief is not designed to "protect the 
integrity of its own processes," but to encourage OTRB 
companies to modify their primary conduct.

     DOT's reliance on our own decision in Checkosky is even 
more easily dismissed.  The portion of Checkosky on which 
the agency relies did not command a majority of this Court 
but is, instead, the separate opinion of a single Judge.  See 
Appellee's brief at 55 (citing Checkosky, 23 F.3d at 455 
(separate opinion of Silberman, J.)).  And even if the Checko-
sky opinion did bind us, it would be distinguishable on the 
same grounds as Touche Ross:  Like Touche Ross, that case 
concerned the SEC's authority to promulgate an internal 
disciplinary rule.  DOT's inherent sanctioning power extends 
only to "protect[ing] the integrity of the agency's administra-
tive processes," Checkosky, 23 F.3d at 455 (separate opinion 
of Silberman, J.), and not to modifying regulated parties' 
primary conduct.

     We conclude, therefore, that DOT lacked the statutory 
authority to require OTRB companies to pay money damages 
to the disabled passengers whom they fail to accommodate.  
Congress could not speak more clearly than it has in the text 
of the APA:  "a sanction may not be imposed or a substantive 
rule or order issued except within jurisdiction delegated to 
the agency and as authorized by law."  5 U.S.C. s 558(b).

C.   Notice-and-comment

     ABA additionally claims that DOT violated the APA by 
failing to provide it with adequate notice that it was consider-
ing, and with the opportunity to comment on, its money-
damages rule.  See 5 U.S.C. s 553(b), (c) (1994).  Because we 
hold that DOT had no authority to promulgate that rule in 
the first instance, the Court finds it unnecessary to take up 
ABA's notice-and-comment claim.  The agency has exceeded 
the scope of the authority delegated to it by Congress, and it 
matters not that they adhered to the APA's procedural 
requirements in doing so.

                         III. CONCLUSION

     Congress has not conferred on DOT the power to authorize 
money damages against OTRB companies that fail to comply 

with the ADA.  We therefore reverse the District Court's 
grant of summary judgment in favor of the agency's Secre-
tary.

                                                       It is so ordered.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge, concurring:  I write separately to 
express my view that the Court need not reach the second 
step of Chevron for a more fundamental reason;  namely, that 
the ADA contains no ambiguity that could trigger that analy-
sis.  DOT proposes as the statute's deference-triggering am-
biguity the fact that the statute does not expressly state that 
the remedies detailed in s 12188 are to be "exclusive."  In 
essence, the agency's position--and the District Court's hold-
ing--is that the absence of a statutory grant of power is itself 
an ambiguity that calls for Chevron deference.  See, e.g., 
Mem. Op. at 28 ("The plain language [of the ADA] indicates 
that Congress did not explicitly forbid the Secretary from 
including a compensation mechanism in the OTRB accessibili-
ty regulations.");  Appellee's brief at 43 (proposing that the 
"first step of the Chevron analysis ... can be resolved quickly 
here" because Congress "neither required nor prohibited the 
Secretary from promulgating a compensation provision" and 
because "Congress did not place any specific limitations on 
the contents of the OTRB rules").  An agency, DOT submits, 
is free to impose any otherwise-reasonable rule that Con-
gress has not expressly prohibited.

     I would conclude that the second step of Chevron is not 
even implicated in this case.  Chevron step two applies only 
when a statute contains an ambiguity.  But Congress's failure 
to grant an agency a given power is not an ambiguity as to 
whether that power has, in fact, been granted.  On the 
contrary, and as this Court persistently has recognized, a 
statutory silence on the granting of a power is a denial of 
that power to the agency.  See, e.g., Backcountry Against 
Dumps v. EPA, 100 F.3d 147, 150 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (rejecting 
EPA's argument "that, since section 6945(c) is silent as to its 
application to Indian tribes, the statute is 'ambiguous' ");  
Ethyl Corp. v. EPA, 51 F.3d 1053, 1060 (D.C. Cir. 1995) ("We 
refuse, once again, to presume a delegation of power merely 
because Congress has not expressly withheld such power.");  
see also Adams Fruit Co. v. Barrett, 494 U.S. 638, 649 (1990) 
("A 'gap' is not created in a statutory scheme merely because 
a statute does not restate the truism that States may not pre-
empt federal law.").

     This Court, while sitting en banc, has already disposed of 
DOT's argument that the judiciary must afford Chevron 
deference to an agency's interpretation of a statutory silence.  
"To suggest," we reasoned,

     that Chevron step two is implicated any time a statute 
     does not expressly negate the existence of a claimed 
     administrative power (i.e. when the statute is not written 
     in "thou shalt not" terms), is both flatly unfaithful to the 
     principles of administrative law outlined above, and refut-
     ed by precedent....  Were courts to presume a delega-
     tion of power absent an express withholding of such 
     power, agencies would enjoy virtually limitless hegemo-
     ny, a result plainly out of keeping with Chevron and quite 
     likely with the Constitution as well.
     
Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n v. National Mediation Bd., 
29 F.3d 655, 671 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (en banc) (emphasis in 
original) (citations omitted).  The ADA is not ambiguous on 
whether it grants DOT the power to authorize money dam-
ages against non-complying bus companies.  The statute sim-
ply does not grant it that power.

     The proposition that statutory silences are not Chevron-
triggering ambiguities follows from the very nature of admin-
istrative agencies.  Agencies have no inherent powers.  They 
instead are creatures of statute, and may act only because, 
and only to the extent that, Congress affirmatively has dele-
gated them the power to act.  See Louisiana Pub. Serv. 
Comm'n v. FCC, 476 U.S. 355, 374 (1986) ("[A]n agency 
literally has no power to act ... unless and until Congress 
confers power upon it.");  Railway Labor Executives' Ass'n, 
29 F.3d at 670 ("Agencies owe their capacity to act to the 
delegation of authority, either express or implied, from the 
legislature.").

     Hence if Congress wishes to deny an agency a given power, 
it need not expressly restrict the agency;  it is enough for 
Congress simply to decline to delegate power.  In the same 
way, a statute that is completely silent on the question of 
whether it confers a power does not vest the agency with the 
discretion to determine the scope of that power.  See Natural 

Resources Defense Council v. Reilly, 983 F.2d 259, 266 (D.C. 
Cir. 1993) (" '[I]t is only legislative intent to delegate such 
authority that entitles an agency to advance its own statutory 
construction for review under the deferential second prong of 
Chevron.' " (quoting Kansas City v. Dep't of Housing & 
Urban Dev., 923 F.2d 188, 191-92 (D.C. Cir. 1991))).  In order 
for there to be an ambiguous grant of power, there must be a 
grant of power in the first instance.  There is none here.

     Moreover, accepting DOT's contention--that a statutory 
silence empowers it to promulgate any rules that Congress 
has not expressly forbidden--would vest agencies with near-
plenary authority.  Agencies would become the nation's prin-
cipal lawmakers.  After all, it is the norm for statutes to be 
silent on whether they grant various powers to agencies.  The 
ADA is silent on whether DOT has the power to oblige bus 
companies to give disabled persons free passage.  It is also 
silent on whether DOT has the power to require that bus 
companies transport disabled passengers in their own individ-
ual buses.  If we were to accept DOT's view, we would be 
obliged to conclude that Congress somehow, if only ambigu-
ously, has authorized the agency to adopt both of those rules, 
and consequently would be bound to afford them Chevron 
deference.  We would not, of course, be obliged to rubber-
stamp an agency's interpretation of those, or any other, 
statutory silences;  any such interpretation would still have to 
satisfy the reasonableness test of Chevron step two.  See 
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 844 (requiring courts to uphold only "a 
reasonable interpretation made by the administrator of an 
agency").  But it makes a mockery of Chevron to suggest 
that its second prong is even implicated by Congress's failure 
to deny a power to an agency.

     The agency's position--that that which is not forbidden is 
permitted--turns the basic assumption of the American sys-
tem of government on its head.  Our Constitution permits the 
national government to exercise only those powers affirma-
tively granted to it by the people of the several states.  See, 
e.g., U.S. Const. amend. X;  McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. 
(4 Wheat.) 316, 405 (1819) ("This government is acknowledged 
by all to be one of enumerated powers");  Marbury v. Madi-

son, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 176 (1803) ("The powers of the 
legislature are defined and limited;  and that those limits may 
not be mistaken or forgotten, the constitution is written.").  
The Constitution's presumption is that a power not expressly 
conferred on the federal government has been denied to it.  
The same principle informs Congress's delegations of power 
to administrative agencies.  Unless Congress delegates au-
thority to an agency, the agency is without power to act.  
And, it goes without saying, courts need not defer to an 
agency's interpretation, reasonable or otherwise, of a non-
existent grant of power.

                  