                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued November 23, 1999   Decided January 7, 2000 

                           No. 99-1018

                          Heidi Damsky, 
                            Appellant

                                v.

               Federal Communications Commission, 
                             Appellee

                     Homewood Radio Co. LLC, 
                            Intervenor

                    Appeal of an Order of the 
                Federal Communications Commission

     Lauren A. Colby argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.

     Pamela L. Smith, Counsel, Federal Communications Com-
mission, argued the cause for appellee. On the brief were 
Christopher J. Wright, General Counsel, Daniel M. Arm-

strong, Associate General Counsel, and Gregory M. Christo-
pher, Counsel.

     Stephen Diaz Gavin and Janet Fitzpatrick were on the 
brief for intervenor.

     Before:  Williams, Sentelle and Randolph, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Sentelle.

     Sentelle, Circuit Judge:  Appellant Heidi Damsky appeals 
from an order of the Federal Communications Commission 
("FCC" or "Commission") finding her financially unqualified 
to receive an FM station construction permit and finding that 
an applicant that subsequently obtained the permit as part of 
a settlement agreement did not make disqualifying misrepre-
sentations to the Commission.  Damsky also argues that an 
intervening change in law entitled her to participate in an 
auction for the already-issued permit.  Upon review of the 
relevant law and the record, we hold that the Commission did 
not err in affirming the Administrative Law Judge's financial 
qualification findings.  We also hold that Damsky is not 
entitled to an auction because the Commission adequately 
explained why the statutory settlement provisions and Com-
mission policy permitted the negotiated outcome obtained 
here.  Therefore, we affirm the Commission's decision based 
on the aforementioned considerations and do not need to 
reach the misrepresentation issue raised by Damsky.

                          I. Background

     In 1988, Heidi Damsky, the appellant, and twelve other 
applicants filed mutually exclusive applications for a permit to 
construct a new FM broadcast station in Homewood, Ala-
bama.  The Mass Media Bureau designated all applications 
for comparative hearing.  As a result of a 1992 hearing, an 
Administrative Law Judge found that Damsky failed to estab-
lish her financial qualifications and dismissed her application.  
See In re Heidi Damsky, 7 F.C.C.R. 5244 pp 180-83 (1992) 
("Initial Decision").  The Commission affirmed the ALJ's 

determination.  See In re Heidi Damsky, 13 F.C.C.R. 11688 
pp 24-32 (1998) ("Memorandum Opinion and Order").

     By the time of the 1992 hearing, the applicant pool had 
narrowed to include Damsky and two others.  The two re-
maining applicants, WEDA, Ltd. ("WEDA") and Homewood 
Partners, Inc. ("HPI"), entered into a settlement agreement 
contingent on Damsky's disqualification.  Upon affirming 
Damsky's disqualification, the Commission granted the per-
mit to the resulting entity, intervenor Homewood Radio Com-
pany ("Homewood Radio").  See Memorandum Opinion and 
Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 11688 pp 4, 7, 24-32.  In addition to 
affirming the ALJ's financial disqualification findings, the 
Commission addressed two other challenges now properly 
raised and argued by Damsky on appeal.  First, the Commis-
sion rejected Damsky's claim that HPI had made disqualify-
ing misrepresentations to the Commission.  See id.pp 12-23.  
Second, the Commission rejected Damsky's claim that a 
recent Commission order required it to award the permit 
through a competitive auction in which Damsky could partici-
pate.  See In re Heidi Damsky, 14 F.C.C.R. 370 pp 9-14 
(1999) ("Further Petition for Reconsideration");  see also In 
re Heidi Damsky, 13 F.C.C.R. 16352 (1998) ("Petition for 
Reconsideration").

            A. Background on Financial Qualifications

     At the time the parties filed their applications, the Commis-
sion resolved competing applications though an evidentiary 
hearing process that assessed applicants' basic and compara-
tive qualifications.  Each broadcast applicant had to establish, 
among other things, that it was financially qualified to cover 
certain construction and operating costs.  See 47 U.S.C. 
s 308(b) (1994);  CHM Broad. Ltd. Partnership v. FCC, 24 
F.3d 1453, 1455 (D.C. Cir. 1994).  The financial qualification 
form in effect when the parties here made their filings 
required each applicant to certify with "reasonable assurance" 
that it had net liquid assets on hand or had funding obtain-
able from committed sources sufficient to construct and oper-
ate the requested facilities for three months without reve-

nues.  See In re Revision of Application for Construction 
Permit for Commercial Broadcast Station (FCC Form 301), 
50 Rad. Reg. 2d 381 (P & F) (1981) ("Form 301").  The form 
clearly indicated that an applicant had to be prepared to 
document certification compliance upon request.  See id.  If 
the Commission questioned an applicant's financial qualifica-
tions, the applicant had to demonstrate its "reasonable assur-
ance" by showing that, "prior to certification, it engaged in 
serious and reasonable efforts to ascertain predictable con-
struction and operation costs" and that it confirmed the 
availability of net liquid assets, either on hand or from 
committed sources, sufficient to construct and operate the 
station for three months without revenue.  In re Northamp-
ton Media Assocs., 4 F.C.C.R. 5517 pp 13-15 (1989), aff'd sub 
nom. Northampton Media Assocs. v. FCC, 941 F.2d 1214, 
1217 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  After questioning and investigating 
Damsky's financial qualifications, the ALJ found that Damsky 
failed to make either of the two showings required to estab-
lish a "reasonable assurance."

     Specifically, the ALJ found that Damsky failed to show 
prior to the certification that she engaged in "serious and 
reasonable efforts" to formulate cost figures because she only 
offered a general $300,000 "ballpark" cost estimate based on a 
conversation with her consulting engineer.  See Initial Deci-
sion, 7 F.C.C.R. 5244 pp 6-9, 181.  The Commission affirmed 
the ALJ's findings and conclusions.  See Memorandum Opin-
ion and Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 11688 pp 1, 30.  Likewise, the 
ALJ and Commission both agreed that Damsky failed to 
show that she had sufficient committed funding available 
since she based her financial backing on a casual assurance 
from her husband that the couple had the assets to cover the 
$300,000 project.  See Initial Decision, 7 F.C.C.R. 5244 
pp 10-24, 182-83;  Memorandum Opinion and Order, 13 
F.C.C.R. 11688 p 31.  The ALJ and Commission found that 
while the record showed that Damsky's husband preferred to 
obtain a loan rather than liquidate, neither Damsky nor her 
husband provided any assurance about the availability of such 
a loan contemporaneous with the certification.  See Initial 

Decision, 7 F.C.C.R. 5244 pp 182-83;  Memorandum Opinion 
and Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 11688 p 32.

                 B. Challenge with Regard to HPI

     In the order affirming Damsky's disqualification, the Com-
mission also accepted the Homewood Radio settlement agree-
ment.  Throughout the permit application process, Damsky 
challenged the corporate structure of HPI, one of the settling 
parties, as violating FCC rules and alleged that HPI had 
made various disqualifying misrepresentations to the FCC.  
The resulting inquiry primarily focused on whether two of the 
five HPI principals impermissibly acquired their ownership 
interests prior to the filing of HPI's amended application.  
Two checks formed the heart of the debate.  Apparently, two 
"investors" gave the three original partners two $1200 checks 
marked respectively "20% Interest Radio" and "Ownership 
20% of Homewood Partners."  The agency inquiry focused on 
whether the checks constituted an ownership interest or a 
loan.  Although conflicting documentary evidence existed, the 
ALJ evaluated all of the evidence and resolved the issue in 
HPI's favor by deeming the payments loans.  See In re Heidi 
Damsky, 9 F.C.C.R. 4011 pp 61-68 (1994) ("Supplementary 
Initial Decision").  The Commission affirmed the ALJ's find-
ings.  See Memorandum Opinion and Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 
11688 pp 13-23.

               C. Background on Auction Provisions

     While exceptions to the ALJ's decision were pending, this 
court held in Bechtel v. FCC, 10 F.3d 875 (D.C. Cir. 1993), 
that the "integration of ownership with management" criteria 
used in FCC comparative hearings was arbitrary and capri-
cious and therefore unlawful.  See id. at 878.  In response to 
Bechtel, the Commission froze all ongoing comparative cases, 
including this case, pending the development of a new regula-
tory structure.  See Memorandum Opinion and Order, 13 
F.C.C.R. 11688 p 3.  However, the Commission also created 
an exception to the freeze policy.  The exception allowed a 
frozen case to be adjudicated to completion if the parties to 

the comparative proceeding reached a settlement agreement 
even if the settlement were contingent on the resolution of 
specific basic qualifying issues.  See Modification of FCC 
Comparative Proceedings Freeze Policy, 9 F.C.C.R. 6689 
(1994).  The agreement resulting in Homewood Radio's re-
ceipt of the construction permit constituted such a settlement.

     However, while the parties here were negotiating for settle-
ment, Congress amended s 309(j) of the Communications Act 
to require the Commission to grant construction permits 
through a competitive bidding system.  See 47 U.S.C. s 309(j) 
(Supp. III 1997).  Since the mandatory competitive bidding 
system applied to applications filed after July 1, 1997, newly-
enacted s 309(l) covered the applications filed in this case 
because the filings occurred before July 1, 1997.  Subsection 
309(l)(1) states that the Commission "shall ... have the 
authority" to resolve the pre-July 1, 1997 filings through 
competitive bidding.  In addition, subsection 309(l)(3) re-
quired the Commission to "waive any provisions of its regula-
tions necessary to permit such persons to enter an agreement 
to procure the removal of a conflict between their applications 
during the 180-day period beginning on the date of August 
15, 1997."  Here, the settlement agreement fell within the 
180-day window.

     Subsequent to the Commission's approval of the Homewood 
Radio settlement agreement but prior to the Commission's 
denial of Damsky's Petition for Reconsideration, the Commis-
sion adopted rules to implement its new auction authority.  In 
an order, the Commission announced its decision to resolve 
the pre-July 1, 1997 filings by auction because "auctions will 
generally be fairer and more expeditious than deciding [the 
pre-July 1, 1997 filings] through the comparative hearing 
process."  In re Implementation of Section 309(j) of the 
Communications Act, 13 F.C.C.R. 15920 p 34 (1998) ("Auc-
tion Order").  In response to the Auction Order, Damsky 
sought further administrative remedy and asserted that the 
Auction Order required the Commission to hold an auction 
for the Homewood Radio permit.  Specifically, Damsky relied 
upon paragraph 89 of the Auction Order which stated:

     Where the Commission has denied or dismissed an appli-
     cation and such denial or dismissal has become final (e.g., 
     when an applicant failed to seek further administrative or 
     judicial review of that ruling), such an entity is not 
     entitled to participate in the auction.  Among those 
     remaining in the proceeding, we will permit all pending 
     applicants to participate in the auction, without regard to 
     any unresolved hearing issues ... as to the basic qualifi-
     cations of a particular applicant.
     
Id. p 89.  Thus, Damsky argued that the intervening Auction 
Order entitled her to participate in an auction for the permit 
because the original order disqualifying her was still under 
review and the "new" auction system allowed her to partici-
pate despite any unresolved qualification issues.  The Com-
mission rejected her claim because the settling parties 
reached an agreement in accordance with s 309(l) of the 
amended statute, the provision ordering the Commission to 
waive its rules and policies when necessary to permit 180-day 
window applicants to enter into settlement agreements, and 
because paragraph 89 did not address cases involving settle-
ments filed within the 180-day waiver period which were 
thereafter approved contingent upon the Commission resolv-
ing specified basic qualification issues.  See Further Petition 
for Reconsideration, 14 F.C.C.R. 370 pp 9-13;  see also In re 
Implementation of Section 309(j) of the Communications Act, 
14 F.C.C.R. 8724 p 18 (1999).

     On appeal, Damsky challenges the Commission's adverse 
financial qualification determination resulting in the dismissal 
of her application, the Commission's determination that HPI 
did not make disqualifying misrepresentations, and the Com-
mission's approval of the Homewood Radio settlement agree-
ment in lieu of an auction.

                          II. Discussion

                        A. Scope of Review

     As an initial matter, we must establish the extent of our 
review since the FCC challenges the sufficiency of Damsky's 

notice concerning the issues she currently argues on appeal.  
With regard to the auction issue, we hold that Damsky 
properly raised that issue in her Notice of Appeal ("Notice") 
by expressly appealing the order denying further reconsider-
ation in which the Commission first addressed the auction 
provisions in dispute.  See Further Petition for Reconsidera-
tion, 14 F.C.C.R. 370 pp 9-13.  Although "a petition seeking 
review of an agency's decision not to reopen a proceeding is 
not reviewable unless the petition is based upon new evidence 
or changed circumstances," Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. 
v. FCC, 180 F.3d 307, 311 (D.C. Cir. 1999), the FCC concedes 
and we agree that the auction issue pertains to changed 
circumstances in the law and is therefore reviewable by this 
court.

     The sufficiency of notice concerning the financial qualifica-
tion and misrepresentation issues requires a more extended 
discussion.  In Southwestern Bell, we held that when an 
agency has denied the reconsideration of a substantive under-
lying decision and a party appeals only the order denying 
reconsideration, the appeal does not suffice to bring the 
earlier substantive decision's merits before the court.  See 
Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 309.  The FCC argues that 
Damsky sought review only of the Commission orders deny-
ing her reconsideration and further reconsideration.  There-
fore, the FCC asserts, Damsky cannot raise the financial 
qualification or misrepresentation issues on appeal since the 
Commission only substantively addressed those issues in the 
unchallenged underlying Memorandum Opinion and Order.  
However, for the reasons set forth below, we reject the 
FCC's argument and hold that Damsky made sufficient refer-
ences to the underlying substantive Memorandum Opinion 
and Order in her Notice of Appeal and accompanying Concise 
Statement of Reasons to put the Commission on notice that 
she intended to challenge the financial qualification and mis-
representation issues in addition to the auction issue.

     On the face of her Notice of Appeal, Damsky clearly states 
that she is appealing the Commission order denying further 
reconsideration.  However, the Notice also references the 
order denying reconsideration and the underlying Memoran-

dum Opinion and Order.  Moreover, Damsky briefly ad-
dresses the merits of the Memorandum Opinion and Order 
in the Concise Statement of Reasons attached to the Notice.  
Given the ambiguity surrounding the existence of actual 
notice, we analyze Damsky's notice predicament under the 
"test for determining whether a filing that names one order 
suffices to bring a different order before the court" set out in 
Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 313.

     To determine whether an applicant sufficiently raised an 
order or an issue contained in a particular order, we first 
examine the notice to see whether it contains "the specifica-
tion of [other] orders and hearing dates [or] fail[ed] to 
mention the [disputed] order in either the notice of appeal or 
the docketing statement" and also review other relevant filing 
information.  Brookens v. White, 795 F.2d 178, 181 (D.C. Cir. 
1986) (per curiam).  We then use the results of this examina-
tion to infer the petitioner's intent and decide if the respon-
dent has been misled by the filings.  See Brookens, 795 F.2d 
at 181;  see also Southwestern Bell, 180 F.3d at 313.  Here, 
Damsky, in passing, cited to the order dealing with her 
disqualification and the HPI misrepresentation issues in her 
Notice of Appeal.  However, she also substantively chal-
lenged the Commission's denial of her application on financial 
qualification grounds and its dismissal of the misrepresenta-
tion issue in the Concise Statement of Reasons attached to 
her Notice of Appeal.  Thus, the Commission cannot claim 
that any notice defects surprised or misled it with regard to 
the issues Damsky intended to raise on appeal.  Given the 
circumstances, we conclude that Damsky adequately brought 
the Memorandum Opinion and Order before this court for 
review.  Therefore, we will address both the financial qualifi-
cation issue analyzed in the Memorandum Opinion and 
Order and the auction issue analyzed in the order denying 
further reconsideration.  For the reasons set forth below, we 
do not reach the misrepresentation issue.

                   B. Financial Qualifications

     We review FCC orders "under the deferential standard 
mandated by section 706 of the Administrative Procedure Act, 

which provides that a court must uphold the Commission's 
decision unless it is 'arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discre-
tion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.' "  Achernar 
Broad. Co. v. FCC, 62 F.3d 1441, 1445 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 
(quoting 5 U.S.C. s 706(2)(A)).  In this task, we "do not 
'substitute [our] judgment for that of the agency' [but] [r]ath-
er we look to see 'whether the decision was based on a 
consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has 
been a clear error of judgment.' "  Freeman Eng'g Assocs., 
Inc. v. FCC, 103 F.3d 169, 178 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (quoting Motor 
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 
463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)).  We also review the FCC's factual 
findings for support by substantial evidence.  See, e.g., Millar 
v. FCC, 707 F.2d 1530, 1540 (D.C. Cir. 1983).  Given the 
relevant standards of review, we hold that the Commission 
did not act arbitrarily in affirming the ALJ's finding Damsky 
financially disqualified since the law and substantial evidence 
in the record support the ALJ and Commission's decisions 
regarding Damsky's failure to substantiate her financial quali-
fication.  More specifically, we hold that the Commission's 
conclusion that Damsky did not certify funding with a "rea-
sonable assurance" because she did not engage in "serious 
and reasonable efforts" to obtain construction and operating 
cost figures is not arbitrary or capricious.

     In In re Northampton Media Assocs., 4 F.C.C.R. 5517 
(1989), aff'd sub nom. Northampton Media Assocs. v. FCC, 
941 F.2d 1214 (D.C. Cir. 1991), the Commission provided 
some guidance regarding "reasonable assurance" in the certi-
fication context:

     [T]he certification procedure was designed "to spare[ ] 
     [applicants] the time and effort necessary to prepare and 
     submit the documentation previously required to demon-
     strate their qualifications." ...  [R]easonable assurance 
     does not necessarily require that an applicant have the 
     written documentation [previously required] when it cer-
     tifies its financial qualifications.  Although the support-
     ing documentation must be produced upon the Commis-
     sion's request, the applicant may prepare and submit it 
     after certification, provided that the applicant actually 
     
     had a reasonable assurance of adequate funds at the time 
     of certification.
     
Id. p 14 (quoting In re Certification of Financial Qualifica-
tions by Applicants for Broadcast Station Construction Per-
mits, 2 F.C.C.R. 2122 (1987) (emphasis added)).  Specifically, 
the law required Damsky to establish, upon request, two pre-
certification inquiries in order to demonstrate "reasonable 
assurance."  First, she had to "adduce probative evidence 
that, prior to certification, [she] engaged in serious and 
reasonable efforts to ascertain predictable construction and 
operation costs."  Id. p 15;  see also Mission Broad. Corp. v. 
FCC, 113 F.3d 254, 260 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (noting that applicant 
must first determine how much money is required).  Second, 
she had "[t]o establish the availability of funds to meet these 
estimated expenses, [by] provid[ing] substantial and reliable 
evidence showing 'sufficient net liquid assets on hand, or 
committed sources of funds to construct and operate for three 
months without revenue.' "  Northampton, 4 F.C.C.R. 5517 
p 15 (quoting Form 301, 50 Rad. Reg. 2d at 388);  see also 
CHM Broad., 24 F.3d at 1458.  Here, Damsky's reliance on a 
vague "ballpark" cost estimate does not get her over the 
initial "serious and reasonable efforts" hurdle.  Cf. In re 
Victorson Group, Inc., 6 F.C.C.R. 1697 pp 18-19 (Rev. Bd. 
1991) (finding "general sense" of estimated costs insufficient 
for financial qualification purposes);  In re Sunbelt Ltd. Part-
nership, 7 F.C.C.R. 4394 pp 7-10 (Rev. Bd. 1992) (finding 
"bits of information" on costs insufficient for financial qualifi-
cation purposes), aff'd, 8 F.C.C.R. 753 (1993), rev'd and 
remanded on other grounds sub nom. Sunbelt v. FCC, Nos. 
93-1184 & 93-1708, 1994 WL 191656 (D.C. Cir. May 9, 1994).

     Damsky incorrectly relies on Northampton as support for 
her position.  In Northampton, the Commission found finan-
cially qualified an applicant--a three-person corporation in-
cluding a principal with experience in radio--that had relied 
on an oral cost estimate which included an itemization of 
equipment, construction, and salary and other operating costs 
necessary to cover a low-cost "mom and pop" operation 
($38,800).  See In re Northampton Media Associates, 3 
F.C.C.R. 570 pp 31, 51-56, 63, 68 (1988);  Northampton, 4 

F.C.C.R. 5517 pp 5, 17.  The applicant had relied on a consult-
ing engineer to prepare the technical portion of the applica-
tion and to give advice regarding potential construction and 
operation costs.  See 3 F.C.C.R. 570 p 53.  Here, unlike in 
Northampton, Damsky, a person relatively unfamiliar with 
the radio industry, relied on a consultant's "ballpark" esti-
mate indicating that the relevant costs would be around 
$300,000.  While Damsky's figure came from an engineer, 
perhaps even an engineer with experience in radio station 
management, Damsky could not verify that the figure took 
into account basic and fundamental expenses.  Given the 
potential magnitude of construction and operation costs at 
stake, the Commission reasonably concluded that Damsky did 
not have enough supporting detail at the time of her certifica-
tion to make her reliance on the $300,000 figure reasonable.  
The evidence offered by Damsky did not establish that she 
had made "serious and reasonable efforts" to secure a cost 
figure at the time of certification.  Thus, the Commission 
legitimately rejected Damsky's application due to her lacka-
daisical cost inquiry efforts.

                          C. The Auction

     In reviewing the interpretation and application of the FCC 
auction rules challenged here, we afford the deference due 
the FCC's interpretation of its own rules and policies, and will 
uphold the FCC's interpretation unless it is "plainly errone-
ous or inconsistent with the regulation."  E.g., Freeman 
Eng'g, 103 F.3d at 178 (citations and quotations omitted).  
Considering the ambiguity surrounding the interaction be-
tween the s 309(l) auction and settlement provisions as de-
scribed by the Commission in the Auction Order, we conclude 
that the Commission adequately explained why it did not 
regard paragraph 89 of the Auction Order as requiring that 
Damsky be allowed to participate in an auction for the 
construction permit.

     In addition to giving the Commission the ability to resolve 
transitional competing comparative permit applications 
though a competitive auction mechanism, Congress required 

the Commission to "waive any provisions of its regulations 
necessary to permit such persons to enter an agreement to 
procure the removal of a conflict between their applications" 
during a 180-day window.  47 U.S.C. s 309(l).  Here, two 
applicants, not including Damsky, filed a settlement agree-
ment within the 180-day period.  The agreement was contin-
gent upon the Commission's affirming the ALJ's finding that 
Damsky was disqualified on financial qualification grounds.  
Since the auction issue involves, in part, the Commission's 
interpretation of a statute committed to its administration, we 
employ the Chevron analysis in reviewing the agency's inter-
pretation.  Pursuant to Chevron, we will give effect to any 
unambiguously expressed intent of Congress as contained in 
the statutory provision under review.  See Nuclear Info. 
Resource Serv. v. Nuclear Regulatory Comm'n, 969 F.2d 
1169, 1173 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (en banc).  However, if the 
statutory provision is silent or ambiguous, we will defer to the 
agency's interpretation assuming its interpretation is reason-
able and consistent with the statute's purpose.  See id.  Giv-
en the statutory language in issue, we hold that the Commis-
sion reasonably interpreted s 309(l) as affording applicants 
falling in the window period, upon the resolution of any basic 
qualification disputes, the opportunity to settle instead of 
participating in an auction.  See Further Petition for Recon-
sideration, 14 F.C.C.R. 370 pp 11-12;  In re Implementation 
of Section 309(j) of the Communications Act, 14 F.C.C.R. 
8724 p 18.  The Commission's use of Damsky's financial quali-
fication as a condition to approving the settlement agreement 
is consistent with the statute.  See also 47 U.S.C. 
s 309(j)(6)(E) (1994) (indicating that the grant of auction 
authority not "be construed to relieve the Commission of the 
obligation in the public interest to continue to use ... thresh-
old qualifications ... in order to avoid mutual exclusivity in 
application and licensing proceedings").

     In reaching our decision, we reject Damsky's contention 
that s 309(l)(3) only governs global settlements.  The Com-
mission reasonably interpreted the statute when it deter-
mined that partial settlements could be approved under 
s 309(l)(3).  See Auction Order, 13 F.C.C.R. 15920 pp 73, 93;  

In re Implementation of Section 309(j) of the Communica-
tions Act, 14 F.C.C.R. 8724 p 18.  Nothing in the statute 
dictates that s 309(l)(3) only permits universal settlement.  
Since settlements are private contractual arrangements, an 
applicant such as Damsky has no general legal right to be 
included in a settlement.  See In re Anax Broad. Inc., 88 
F.C.C.2d 607 p 10 (1981).  Thus, nothing in the statute or 
other law appears to preclude the Commission from approv-
ing a settlement that includes only qualified parties.  The 
Commission has acted consistent with this interpretation.  
See In re Global Information Tech., Inc., 12 F.C.C.R. 11808 
pp 1, 3, 6 (1997), aff'd on other grounds sub nom. Frontier 
Broad., Inc. v. FCC, No. 97-1530, 1998 WL 704510 (D.C. Cir. 
Sept. 4, 1998);  In re Gonzales Broad., Inc., 12 F.C.C.R. 12253 
pp 4, 19 (1997), aff'd on other grounds sub nom. Jelks v. FCC, 
146 F.3d 878 (D.C. Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 199 S. Ct. 1045 
(1999);  In re Pensacola Radio Partners, 13 F.C.C.R. 11681 
p 1 (1998), aff'd on other grounds sub nom. Floyd v. FCC, No. 
98-1269, 1999 WL 236879 (D.C. Cir. Mar. 29, 1999).

     The Commission's interpretation of paragraph 89 of the 
Auction Order comports with its interpretation of the statute 
and its prior practice.  The Commission reasonably interprets 
paragraph 89 as only applying to cases "where an auction 
would otherwise be held because no settlements were 
reached."  Memorandum Opinion and Order, 14 F.C.C.R. 
370 p 12.  As the Commission points out, the Auction Order 
and supporting notices separate out s 309(l)(3) settlement 
from auction rules and guidelines.  See id. p 13.  Moreover, 
the Commission adequately established on the record that a 
proper s 309(l)(3) settlement would obviate the need for an 
auction.  See id.;  In re Implementation of Section 309(j) of 
the Communications Act, 14 F.C.C.R. 8724 p 18.  The Com-
mission's reading of paragraph 89 makes sense when the 
provision is analyzed in context.  Thus, paragraph 89 does not 
undo the Commission's approval of the settlement agreement 
in this case since the Commission reasonably interpreted 
paragraph 89 as not pertaining to permissible settlement 
agreements reached pursuant to s 309(l)(3).

     To recap, we hold that Damsky provided sufficient notice to 
entitle her to review of her claims stemming from the Memo-
randum Opinion and Order in addition to review of the 
auction issue.  However, we uphold the Commission's deter-
mination that Damsky was financially disqualified from re-
ceiving the Homewood FM station construction permit.  We 
also hold that the Commission reasonably interpreted s 309(l) 
and its Auction Order as not providing Damsky with the 
opportunity to participate in an auction.

                         III. Conclusion

     We conclude that the Commission did not err in finding 
Damsky financially disqualified from receiving a construction 
permit and in interpreting the auction provisions as being 
inapplicable to her.  Thus, the Commission correctly dis-
missed Damsky's application.  Since Damsky has no claim to 
the construction permit, we need not reach her challenge 
concerning the alleged misrepresentations made by HPI.  
Because the law and record support the Commission's find-
ings regarding Damsky's financial qualifications and the Com-
mission's interpretation and application of the relevant settle-
ment and auction provisions are reasonable, we affirm the 
Commission's determinations challenged on appeal.

                                                   