                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

      Argued October 23, 2000    Decided November 24, 2000 

                           No. 00-3026

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

               Antonione Smith, a/k/a Abdul Mines, 
                           a/k/a York, 
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00399-01)

     Sandra G. Roland, Assistant Federal Public Defender, 
argued the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was 
A. J. Kramer, Federal Public Defender.  Neil H. Jaffee and 
Tony W. Miles, Assistant Federal Public Defenders, entered 
appearances.

     Mary B. McCord, Assistant United States Attorney, ar-
gued the cause for appellee.  With her on the brief were 
Wilma A. Lewis, United States Attorney, John R. Fisher and 
Roy W. McLeese, III, Assistant United States Attorneys.

     Before:  Edwards, Chief Judge, Rogers and Garland, 
Circuit Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judge Edwards.

     Edwards, Chief Judge:  On November 3, 1999, following a 
three-day trial, a federal jury found appellant Antonione 
Smith guilty on one count of unlawful possession of a firearm 
and ammunition by a convicted felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
s 922(g)(1) (1994).  Smith was thereafter sentenced to 51 
months in federal prison, where he now resides.  On appeal, 
Smith identifies three alleged evidentiary errors, each of 
which he argues merit reversal of the judgment below and 
remand for a new trial.  Only one of the alleged errors, 
however, requires extended treatment here.

     Smith challenges the admission of government witness 
Frank Haera's testimony that government informant Kevin 
Perry, himself a witness at trial, had provided truthful infor-
mation to the police in the past.  Here, Smith renews his 
timely objection that the testimony was irrelevant under 
Federal Rule of Evidence 402.  He also offers a new argu-
ment that was not raised at trial, i.e., that the so-called 
"bolstering" evidence was inadmissible under Federal Rule of 
Evidence 608(b).  Rule 608(b) prohibits the use of extrinsic 
evidence "for the purpose of attacking or supporting [a] 
witness' credibility."  Fed. R. Evid. 608(b).  The Government 
responds that the prosecution offered the "bolstering" testi-
mony to rebut defense counsel's insinuation on cross-
examination that informant Kevin Perry had been biased by 
his plea agreement.  As a result, the Government argues that 
Rule 608(b) does not apply.

     We need not reach the substance of this disagreement.  
The fact that Perry had testified truthfully in the past was 

plainly relevant.  Because Smith did not raise the more 
specific Rule 608(b) objection at trial, we must review admis-
sion on that front for plain error.  This circuit has not yet 
addressed whether, and to what extent, Rule 608(b) prohibits 
admission of extrinsic evidence of specific instances of past 
"truthful" cooperation offered by the government to rebut 
allegations of an informant's bias;  and there is no consensus 
among the circuits that have addressed the issue.  Thus, even 
were we to find error, it would not be plain.

     Smith's two remaining challenges fare no better.  Smith 
argues that the trial court, despite defense counsel's failure to 
lodge timely objections, should have barred sua sponte the 
prosecution's references to Smith's aliases as well as state-
ments implying that Smith was a violent and dangerous 
criminal.  Allusions to Smith's aliases were not so gratuitous, 
and implications that Smith was a violent criminal not so 
transparent, as to merit a finding of plain error on either 
count.  We therefore affirm the judgment of the District 
Court.

                          I. Background

A.   The Investigation

     The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms ("ATF") 
utilizes a special High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area 
("HIDTA") task force to investigate narcotics dealing, violent 
crime, and drug-related homicides in the District of Columbia.  
In 1996, HIDTA agents began a targeted investigation of the 
Park Morton housing complex and surrounding area--a 
known locus of drug-trafficking, violence, and a number of 
unsolved murders.  Trial Transcript at 21-22 (Nov. 2, 1999) 
[hereinafter Tr.].  The investigation employed observation 
posts, undercover narcotics purchases, and the arrest and 
recruitment of confidential informants to aid in locating and 
arresting other perpetrators.  Tr. at 22-25.

     In the midst of the ongoing investigation, officers observed 
Perry selling crack cocaine.  Rather than face trial on distri-

bution charges, Perry, who is confined to a wheelchair, en-
tered into a cooperation agreement on February 14, 1997.  
Pursuant to his agreement, Perry entered a guilty plea to one 
count of conspiracy to distribute and possess with intent to 
distribute over 50 grams of crack cocaine.  Tr. at 59.  In 
exchange for assistance, information, and truthful testimony, 
HIDTA agents agreed to dismiss two charges then pending 
against Perry in Superior Court.  Tr. at 63-64.  The Govern-
ment also agreed to file a substantial assistance motion 
pursuant to U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual s 5K1.1 
(1997), urging the District Court to waive the mandatory 10-
year minimum sentence on the federal distribution charge.  
Tr. at 63.  Though not explicitly part of the agreement, 
agents also provided Perry with various amounts of money 
for rent, bills, childcare, transportation, and moving expenses.  
Tr. at 46-47, 104-07.

B.   The Transaction

     According to Perry, Smith--whom he had known for 10 
years--repeatedly approached him in the summer of 1997 
about purchasing an "AK-47."  Tr. at 66-67.  Though Smith 
was not himself a target of the investigation, HIDTA agents 
instructed Perry to go ahead with the transaction.  Tr. at 67.  
Perry testified that he and Smith agreed on a price of $900 
for the rifle, and because Perry claimed to be buying the 
weapon on behalf of a friend, Smith agreed to give Perry a 
small finder's fee.  Tr. at 67.  The actual "deal" took place in 
Perry's apartment on July 9, 1997.  Agent Frank Haera of 
the HIDTA task force oversaw the sting operation.  Tr. at 
27-29.

     On the evening of July 9, and before Smith was to arrive at 
Perry's apartment, undercover officer Clarence Brooks ex-
changed Perry's wheelchair for one equipped with a video 
camera to record the transaction.  Tr. at 114.  He also fitted 
Perry with a radio transmitter and provided him a cell phone 
and money to purchase the rifle.  Tr. 30-31.  On his way out, 
Officer Brooks passed a man entering the apartment whom 
he recognized as Smith, also known to him as "York."  Tr. at 

114.  Though no officer was present during the transaction, 
Agent Haera surveyed the events via radio transmitter from 
a block away.  Tr. at 30.

     Smith did not have the gun with him when arriving at 
Perry's apartment.  At trial, Perry testified that he and 
Smith initially discussed how Smith might inconspicuously 
transport the weapon from down the street to the apartment.  
Tr. at 70-71.  Smith left once and returned without the gun, 
at which time they again caucused over means of moving the 
merchandise without attracting attention.  Tr. at 71-72.  
Smith left a second time and eventually returned with Daniel 
Hamilton, or "Cat Face," who carried a large, torn cardboard 
box into the apartment.  Tr. at 72.  Hamilton put down the 
box, which contained a loaded Norinco SKS rifle, loose ammu-
nition, and a black skull cap.  Tr. at 34-36, 116-18.  Perry 
and Smith moved the box under the couch, and Perry gave 
Smith the money.  Smith returned a few dollars to Perry for 
arranging the deal, before leaving the apartment with Hamil-
ton.  Tr. at 74.  Officer Brooks then returned to the apart-
ment, retrieved the box and its contents, and exchanged 
wheelchairs.  Tr. 116-17.

C.   Proceedings Below

     On November 17, 1998, a federal grand jury indicted both 
Smith and Hamilton on one count of unlawful transfer and 
possession of a semi-automatic assault weapon, in violation of 
18 U.S.C. s 922(v)(1) (1994).  Because Smith already had a 
previous felony conviction, he was also indicted on one count 
of unlawful possession of a firearm by a person convicted of a 
crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one 
year, in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 922(g)(1).  See Indictment, 
United States v. Smith, Crim. No. 98-399-01-JR (D.D.C. 
Nov. 17, 1998), reprinted in Appellant's Appendix ("App.") at 
10.  The District Court dismissed the indictment on the first 
count as to each defendant, leaving only the second count as 
to Smith.

     The trial involving Smith's prosecution commenced on No-
vember 1, 1999.  After one day of testimony and argument, 
the jury returned a guilty verdict.  At trial, the Government 
called four witnesses--Agent Haera, Officer Brooks, Kevin 
Perry, and Jeffrey Descheemaeker, an ATF firearms special-
ist to testify about the rifle's capabilities.  During direct 
examination of Perry, the prosecutor played the videotape of 
the transaction, though the sound was inaudible.  Tr. at 85.  
Thus, Perry's testimony was the only evidence presented 
regarding the content of his discussions with Smith and 
Hamilton.  The defense rested without calling witnesses.

     On February 28, 2000, the trial judge sentenced Smith to 
51 months in federal prison, followed by three years' super-
vised release.  See Judgment, Smith, Crim. No. 98-299-01-
JR (D.D.C. Feb. 28, 2000), reprinted in App. at 13.  Smith 
now appeals, challenging three alleged evidentiary errors.  
He seeks reversal of the District Court's judgment and 
remand for a new trial.

                           II. Analysis

A.   The So-called "Bolstering" Evidence

     Smith argues that the District Court improperly admitted 
"bolstering" testimony that Perry, himself a witness at trial, 
had provided truthful information to the task force in the 
past.  Smith points to the following exchange on re-direct 
examination between the prosecutor and government witness 
Agent Haera:

     Q: Mr. Miles asked you some questions about Mr. 
     Perry's cooperation and the information he's given you.  
     Do you remember those questions?
     
     A: Yes.
     
     Q: Is it true that Perry had given you information that 
     has led to the capture of other criminals?
     
     Mr. Miles:  Objection, Your Honor.
     
     The Court:  Sustained.
     
     By Ms. Covell:
     Q: As a result of Mr. Perry's cooperation, have you 
     been able to arrest other criminals?
     
     Mr. Miles:  Objection.
     
     The Court:  Sustained.  It's leading.
     
     By Ms. Covell:
          Q: What happened--well, let me rephrase this.  With 
     the information that Mr. Perry gave you, what did you 
     do?
     
     Mr. Miles:  Objection to relevance.
     The Court:  I'll overrule that objection.
     
     The Witness:  Repeat your question.
     Ms. Covell:  Sure.
     
     By Ms. Covell:
     Q: Mr. Perry gave you certain information about indi-
     viduals in the Park Morton complex;  is that right?
     
     A: That's true.
     
     Q: And what did you do with that information?
     
     A: The information that Mr. Perry gave me personally, 
     I did a lot of different things with it.  Some of the 
     information was used to obtain search warrants.  Some 
     of the information was used to begin investigations on 
     other people in that area that were committing crimes 
     such as drug dealing and firearms possession.  And some 
     of the information was used to inform the attorneys of 
     how he could help us in these investigations by way of 
     testimony in the grand jury and at trials.
     Q:  In any of those search warrants that were based on 
     information given you by Perry, did you uncover contra-
     band?
     
     A: Yes.
     Q: And any of those investigations of other individuals 
     that you started as a result of Mr. Perry's information, 
     did any of those investigations lead to arrest?
     A: Yes
     Q: And were the arrests of those individuals corroborat-
     ed by any tangible evidence?
     
     Mr. Miles:  Objection, Your Honor.
     
     The Court:  Sustained.
     
     By Ms. Covell:
     
     Q: Agent Haera, based on what you know about the 
     information Mr. Perry gave you, and the search warrants 
     you've gotten and the arrests, do you believe that the 
     information Mr. Perry gave you is truthful?
     
     Mr. Miles:  Objection, Your Honor.
     
     The Court:  Sustained.
     
     Ms. Covell:  That's all I have, Your Honor.
Tr. at 52-55 (emphasis added).  This exchange came on the 
heels of a cross-examination, during which defense counsel 
elicited from Agent Haera information regarding Perry's 
possible bias, including his plea agreement and money paid 
Perry by the ATF.  Tr. at 42-48.  Smith here renews his 
relevance objection and also raises for the first time the 
inadmissibility of the testimony under Federal Rule of Evi-
dence 608(b).
     Because defense counsel lodged an objection on the basis of 
relevance in a timely fashion, we review admission of the cited 
testimony for abuse of discretion.  See United States v. 
Ramsey, 165 F.3d 980, 983 n.3 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 120 
S. Ct. 223 (1999).  Evidence is relevant if it has "any tenden-
cy to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to 
the determination of the action more probable or less proba-
ble than it would be without the evidence."  Fed. R. Evid. 401.

     That Perry has informed and testified truthfully in the past 
under his plea agreement certainly bears on his response to 
similar pressures and temptations in the present.  Further-
more, Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b), which prohibits the 
admission of evidence regarding past acts "to prove the 
character of a person to show action in conformity therewith," 
would be largely superfluous if the rules on "relevance" were 
construed to proscribe "propensity" testimony.  Similarly, 
were we to agree with Smith, Rule 608(b)'s prohibition on the 

use of extrinsic evidence of specific instances of a witness' 
truthful or untruthful conduct "for the purposes of attacking 
or supporting the witness' credibility" would itself be redun-
dant.  The concerns giving rise to Rules 404(b) and 608(b) are 
not relevance concerns.  To the contrary, both "propensity" 
rules and the rule restricting the admission of extrinsic 
credibility evidence embody specific concerns that, although 
relevant, evidence of prior acts will either unduly prejudice 
and overpersuade the jury, see Old Chief v. United States, 
519 U.S. 172, 181 (1997) (quoting United States v. Moccia, 681 
F.2d 61, 63 (1st Cir. 1982)), or waste time by sanctioning 
countless distinct credibility mini-trials within the trial prop-
er, see Fed. R. Evid. 405 advisory committee's note;  Fed. R. 
Evid. 608(b) advisory committee's note.  In short, we reject 
Smith's claim that the disputed testimony was irrelevant and 
turn to his 608(b) challenge.

     It should first be noted that certain of the alleged "bolster-
ing" testimony--concerning whether the information that 
Perry had given to law enforcement officers in the past had 
been corroborated and whether Perry had been truthful in 
past dealings--was objected to on unspecified grounds and 
the objections were sustained.  Nonetheless, Agent Haera 
was allowed to testify that he had received and used informa-
tion from Perry to facilitate investigations, uncover contra-
band, and secure arrests.  It is this latter testimony that 
Smith claims was "bolstering" and erroneously admitted un-
der Rule 608(b).  In light of our ruling in this case, we need 
not address the accuracy of appellant's characterization of the 
disputed testimony as "bolstering."

     Because Smith failed to raise a timely Rule 608(b) objec-
tion, we review admission of the testimony for plain error.  
See Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b);  see also United States v. Spriggs, 
102 F.3d 1245, 1257 (D.C. Cir. 1996).  The term "plain" as 
used in Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 52(b) "is synony-
mous with 'clear' or, equivalently, 'obvious.' "  United States 
v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 734 (1993).  "At a minimum, a court of 
appeals cannot correct an error pursuant to Rule 52(b) unless 
the error is clear under current law."  Id.

     As noted above, this circuit has not yet addressed whether, 
and to what extent, Rule 608(b) prohibits admission of extrin-
sic evidence of specific instances of past "truthful" coopera-
tion offered by the government to rebut allegations of an 
informant's bias.  Although this fact, alone, is not dispositive 
of the plain error issue, it is important when we consider that 
Rule 608(b) itself admits of no simple answer to the question 
at hand and, in addition, our sister circuits have been unable 
to agree on the point at which impermissible "bolstering" 
ends and permissible use of past cooperation to rebut bias 
begins.  Compare United States v. Taylor, 900 F.2d 779, 781 
(4th Cir. 1990) ("[I]t was error for the district court to admit 
extrinsic evidence that the informer, Phillips, had provided 
reliable information and testimony that resulted in several 
convictions, in order to bolster Philips' credibility."), and 
United States v. Murray, 103 F.3d 310, 321-22 (3d Cir. 1997) 
(discussing Taylor), with United States v. Lochmondy, 890 
F.2d 817, 821 (6th Cir. 1989) ("Several circuits have held that 
evidence of cooperation on other matters is admissible to 
justify a cooperation agreement and to rebut allegations of 
bias." (citing United States v. Sanchez, 790 F.2d 1561 (11th 
Cir. 1986);  United States v. Fusco, 748 F.2d 996 (5th Cir. 
1984);  United States v. Martinez, 775 F.2d 31 (2d Cir. 
1985))), and United States v. Penny, 60 F.3d 1257, 1264 (7th 
Cir. 1995) (quoting Lochmondy).

     Rule 608(b) states that,

     [s]pecific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the 
     purpose of attacking or supporting the witness' credibili-
     ty, other than conviction of crime as provided in rule 609, 
     may not be proved by extrinsic evidence. They may, 
     however, in the discretion of the court, if probative of 
     truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired into on cross-
     examination of the witness (1) concerning the witness' 
     character for truthfulness or untruthfulness, or (2) con-
     cerning the character for truthfulness or untruthfulness 
     of another witness as to which character the witness 
     being cross-examined has testified.
     
Fed. R. Evid. 608(b) (emphasis added).  As both the plain 
language of the rule and the cases cited above suggest, the 
threshold question under Rule 608(b) is:  For what purpose 
has the prosecution offered the extrinsic evidence?  If offered 
solely "in order to bolster [the informant's] credibility," Tay-
lor, 900 F.2d at 781, then Rule 608(b) bars admission lest one 
of the exceptions applies.  But, if offered for a different and 
legitimate reason, such as "to justify a cooperation agreement 
[or] rebut allegations of bias," Lochmondy, 890 F.2d at 821, 
the evidence falls outside Rule 608(b)'s narrow confines.

     Government informants present a uniquely difficult case for 
courts determining whether the prosecution has offered the 
so-called "bolstering" evidence for a permissible or an imper-
missible purpose.  Routinely, defense counsel cross-examines 
government witnesses about an informant's bias--whether it 
be a plea agreement, a financial arrangement, or both.  On 
re-direct, the prosecution may want to introduce specific 
instances of fruitful cooperation under the plea agreement to 
show that the informant has already cooperated substantially 
with the police, thereby reducing the marginal temptation to 
lie in the present circumstance.  The line between this per-
missible use and impermissible "bolstering" is indeed a hazy 
one.  In Fusco, the Fifth Circuit held extrinsic evidence of 
past cooperation admissible to rebut implications that the 
informant had received $45,000 from the DEA solely for his 
help in that case:  "Because the government was trying to 
convince the jury that [the informant] was not biased, it was 
not 'bolstering' [the informant] in a prohibited way, and [the 
informant's] prior cooperation was not 'extrinsic,' as those 
terms are used in Federal Rule of Evidence 608.  Bias, as 
opposed to general veracity, is not a collateral issue."  748 
F.2d at 998.  Likewise, in United States v. Lindemann, 85 
F.3d 1232 (7th Cir. 1996), the Seventh Circuit found admissi-
ble similar evidence offered in response to suggestions that 
the informant "would not have gotten a plea deal if he hadn't 
come up with the name of a 'big fish' like Lindemann."  Id. at 
1242. The court held that

     [t]he evidence specifically rebutted the allegation that 
     [the informant] was biased out of self-interest in Linde-
     
     mann's case:  Burns' successful participation in numerous 
     other cases meant that at the time he was negotiating 
     over his plea deal, he had lots of information to use as 
     bargaining chips.  That fact was relevant under the 
     standards of [Federal Rule of Evidence] 402 because it 
     made less probable the assertion that Burns was lying in 
     Lindemann's case out of self-interest.
     
Id. at 1243.

     Because defense counsel in the instant case failed to raise 
the 608(b) objection below, the prosecution never had an 
opportunity to explain why it offered the alleged "bolstering" 
evidence.  Defense counsel had used its cross-examination of 
Agent Haera to expose the terms of Perry's plea agreement, 
Tr. at 45-46, to suggest that Perry need only "accuse" 
suspects to benefit under that agreement, Tr. 44-45, and to 
show the tremendous financial incentives on Perry to provide 
even false information, Tr. at 46-48.  Perhaps, as in Linde-
mann, the prosecution offered the testimony to demonstrate 
the diminished marginal value to Perry of his participation in 
the instant case;  perhaps as in Fusco, it was offered to 
undermine any insinuation that Perry had received funds for 
his participation in this case alone;  or finally, perhaps the 
prosecution wanted to counter defense counsel's specific insin-
uation that Perry would benefit merely by accusing people.  
We simply do not know.  Given these possibilities, the ambi-
guity in the case law, and the context of the present testimo-
ny, we cannot say that admission of the evidence constituted 
plain error.

     We conclude by emphasizing that, to satisfy the plain error 
standard, Smith must show that the alleged error "affect[ed] 
substantial rights," that is, "affected the outcome of the 
district court proceedings."  Olano, 507 U.S. at 734 (holding 
that the "substantial rights" inquiry of Federal Rule of Crimi-
nal Procedure 52(b) mirrors Rule 52(a)'s "harmless error" 
inquiry, except that the burden in the former falls on the 
defendant to show prejudice).  Moreover, " '[t]he plain error 
exception to the contemporaneous objection requirement 
should be used sparingly, only for "particularly egregious 

errors" that "seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public 
reputation of judicial proceedings." ' "  Spriggs, 102 F.3d at 
1257 (quoting United States v. Copelin, 996 F.2d 379, 383 
(D.C. Cir. 1993)).  Here, the minimal damage arguably 
wrought by the contested testimony stands in stark contrast 
to the overwhelming weight of evidence against Smith.  Fur-
thermore, as noted above, it appears that the most damaging 
of the alleged "bolstering" testimony was excluded pursuant 
to objections that were raised by Smith's attorney.  There 
was no plain error.

B.   The Remaining Challenges

     We pause only briefly over Smith's two remaining eviden-
tiary challenges.  As with the Rule 608(b) issue, defense 
counsel failed to raise timely objections at trial.  We thus 
review admission for plain error.

     Smith argues first that the District Court improperly al-
lowed the prosecution to refer to and to elicit answers regard-
ing Smith's aliases.  The transcript does not reveal, however, 
whether the prosecution offered the aliases for arguably 
irrelevant and prejudicial purposes or primarily as a means of 
identifying Smith--Perry had apparently known Smith as 
"York."  Tr. at 66.  Furthermore, Smith has not shown how 
the limited allusions prejudiced his defense.

     Smith's second remaining argument--that the District 
Court erred by admitting evidence implying that Smith had 
been a target of the Park Morton investigation and implying 
that Smith had threatened Perry with violence--fares no 
better.  Perry himself testified that "[Smith] wasn't the tar-
get of the investigation, but, however, he approached me and 
asked me was I interested in buying an AK-47."  Tr. at 67.  
As to possible implications that Perry had been moved on 
various occasions to protect him from Smith, the District 
Court addressed any potential problem on its own initiative 
by requiring the prosecutor to ask for clarification from its 
witness:

          (Bench conference on the record)
          
     The Court:  This is--in NFL language, this is my time 
     out.  There's been a lot of sort of hinting around the 
     edges of the danger this guy was in, and my concern, of 
     course, is that the implication of all of it is that this 
     defendant is the one responsible for the danger.  Now 
     both sides have--both sides have toyed with this.  I can't 
     unscramble this egg.  But there haven't been any objec-
     tions until now, but I don't want this danger thing to be 
     played up.
     
     Ms. Covell:  I understand, Your Honor.  My view is that 
     Mr. Miles opened the door by asking him about the 
     payments for the move.  I was going to ask why and 
     make it clear--I can ask a follow-up question was it 
     because of the defendant.  He knows it wasn't because of 
     the defendant.
     
     The Court:  That would be very helpful.
     
     Ms. Covell:  I can do that.
     
     Mr. Miles:  Okay.
     
          (End of bench conference)
     
     By Ms. Covell:
     
     Q. What were the reasons that you moved Kevin Per-
     ry?
     
     A. I felt that his life was in danger on several occasions.  
     That's why I moved Mr. Perry.
     
     Q. Were any of those occasions that you moved him a 
     result of any sort of threat or danger that came from the 
     defendant?
     
     Let me rephrase that:  You never learned that the defen-
     dant had ever threatened Mr. Perry in any way?
     
     A. No.    
Tr. at 48-49.  Any residual problems lingering after the 
clarification certainly do not constitute plain error.

                         III. Conclusion

     Because the District Court's alleged evidentiary failings do 
not rise to the level of plain error, Smith's conviction is

                                                                    Affirmed.

