                  United States Court of Appeals

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

       Argued September 14, 1999     Decided March 7, 2000 

                           No. 98-3135

                    United States of America, 
                             Appellee

                                v.

                       Rachel L. Breedlove,
                            Appellant

          Appeal from the United States District Court 
                  for the District of Columbia 
                        (No. 98cr00041-01)

     Lisa B. Wright, Assistant Federal Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant.  With her on the briefs was A. J. 
Kramer, Federal Public Defender.  Maria Jankowski and 
Neil H. Jaffee, Assistant Federal Public Defenders, entered 
appearances.

     Anne Y. Park, Assistant U.S. Attorney, argued the cause 
for appellee. With her on the brief was Wilma A. Lewis, U.S. 

Attorney, John R. Fisher, Assistant U.S. Attorney, and Har-
ry R. Benner, Assistant U.S. Attorney.

     Before:  Silberman, Ginsburg and Henderson, Circuit 
Judges.

     Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit Judge Ginsburg.

     Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:  The appellant, Rachel Breedlove, 
was convicted of bank fraud.  At trial the Government intro-
duced evidence of her involvement in two prior fraudulent 
bank transactions, one of which involved a bank account held 
by William Cloud.  Mr. Cloud's role in the scheme was not 
established, and the district court instructed the jury not to 
speculate about his identity or his role in the transaction.  
Ms. Breedlove claims the district court thereby prevented the 
jury from considering a fact that may have raised a reason-
able doubt about her intent to commit the crime of which she 
was convicted.  On this ground, Ms. Breedlove seeks a new 
trial.  Alternatively, Ms. Breedlove seeks a remand for resen-
tencing on the ground that the district court, when computing 
her sentence, should not have considered the transaction 
involving Mr. Cloud.  Finally, Ms. Breedlove asserts that she 
was sentenced to a period of supervised release in excess of 
the statutory maximum.  We affirm Ms. Breedlove's convic-
tion and remand this case solely so that the district court may 
impose a term of supervised release within the statutory 
maximum.

                          I. Background

     As a former Marine, Ms. Breedlove received monthly edu-
cational benefit checks from the Department of Veterans 
Affairs.  Early in January 1998 she received in the mail a 
U.S. Treasury check payable to her in the amount of $58.65.  
At about the same time she opened a checking account at the 
First Union National Bank in Washington, D.C.  Several 
days later she deposited into that account a U.S. Treasury 
check seemingly for $998,688.65.  The teller assisting Ms. 
Breedlove suspected the check may have been altered, as did 
his supervisor.

     In February 1998 Ms. Breedlove was indicted for aiding 
and abetting bank fraud, in violation of 18 U.S.C. ss 1344 & 
2, and for uttering a counterfeit obligation of the United 
States, in violation of 18 U.S.C. s 472.  At trial, in order to 
establish Ms. Breedlove's specific intent to defraud First 
Union, the Government presented evidence of two prior and 
allegedly fraudulent bank transactions in which she had been 
involved.  The first transaction occurred in August 1997, 
when Ms. Breedlove deposited to the account of Mr. William 
Cloud at the Navy Federal Credit Union a check in the 
amount of $1,206,000, drawn upon the Bank of America, and 
made payable to Mr. Cloud.  Mr. Cloud had endorsed the 
check and an accompanying deposit slip was filled out before 
Ms. Breedlove approached the teller.  The Credit Union soon 
determined the check had been altered and it reversed the 
transfer of funds into Mr. Cloud's account.

     Shortly thereafter a check in the amount of $850,000, 
drawn upon Mr. Cloud's account at the Credit Union and 
made payable to Ms. Breedlove, was endorsed and deposited 
to Ms. Breedlove's checking account at Central Fidelity Na-
tional Bank--to no avail, of course, as there were by then 
insufficient funds in Mr. Cloud's account to cover the check.  
In October 1997 an Internal Revenue Service search of Ms. 
Breedlove's home turned up the checkbook of Mr. Cloud--
who did not live there--from which the $850,000 check had 
been written, as well as receipts for the $1,206,000 check Ms. 
Breedlove had deposited into Mr. Cloud's account.

     The second transaction occurred in December 1997.  Short-
ly after she had been sent an educational benefit check in the 
amount of $425.19, Ms. Breedlove deposited into her checking 
account at NationsBank a U.S. Treasury check made payable 
to herself, seemingly in the amount of $4,251.19.  The next 
day, she withdrew $4,500.00 from her account.

     At the close of Ms. Breedlove's trial, the district court 
instructed the jury in part as follows:

     [I]f you decide that the defendant was involved in the 
     prior transactions, you may consider the evidence relat-
     ing to the two other transactions solely for the purpose of 
     
     deciding whether the defendant acted with the specific 
     intent to defraud in committing the offenses charged in 
     the indictment.
     
          ...
     
          And ... I remind you that you have heard evidence 
     relating to a bank account held by a person named 
     William Cloud.  You may not speculate as to who this 
     person is or what role he may have had in the events that 
     have been described to you.
     
Ms. Breedlove's counsel had objected in advance to the 
district court's mention of Mr. Cloud, on the ground that it 
was a "reference to a specific fact."

     The jury convicted Ms. Breedlove on both counts of the 
indictment and the district court sentenced her on each count 
to concurrent terms of 46 months of imprisonment, to be 
followed by five years of supervised release.  In computing 
Ms. Breedlove's sentence, the district court considered her 
previous involvement with fraudulent checks both as relevant 
conduct and as evidence of more than minimal planning.

                           II. Analysis

     Upon appeal Ms. Breedlove raises three issues.  She ar-
gues that the district court erred in instructing the jury to 
avoid speculation about Mr. Cloud and his role in the August 
1997 transaction.  She claims the district court improperly 
considered the August 1997 transaction in calculating her 
sentence.  And she objects that the district court ordered her 
to serve a period of supervised release in excess of the 
statutory maximum.

A.   The Jury Instruction

     Under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 52, we review a 
properly raised objection to a jury instruction only for non-
harmless error;  an objection that was not raised in the 
original proceeding we review only for plain error.  See 
United States v. Perkins, 161 F.3d 66, 72 (D.C. Cir. 1998).  
An objection is not properly raised if it is couched in terms 
too general to have alerted the trial court to the substance of 

the petitioner's point.  See United States v. Pryce, 938 F.2d 
1343, 1350 (D.C. Cir. 1991).

     Counsel for Ms. Breedlove objected to the district court's 
instruction that the jury refrain from speculating about Mr. 
Cloud by stating that the instruction was a "reference to a 
specific fact."  Upon appeal Ms. Breedlove elaborates:  The 
instruction precluded the jury from considering the possibility 
that in August 1997 she unwittingly had cashed a check 
altered by Mr. Cloud.  That fact would have supported Ms. 
Breedlove's defense that she did not know the $998,688.65 
check had been altered and therefore did not have the 
requisite intent to commit the crimes of which she was 
accused.  Ms. Breedlove asserts that, in order to preserve 
her objection to the instruction, her counsel was required to 
point out to the district court only that the court should not 
make "reference to a specific fact";  that is, "trial counsel was 
not required to point out to the district court the value to the 
defense of the particular facts being foreclosed by the court's 
instruction, just to object that the court was erring by 
instructing on facts."

     Read in context,* trial counsel's objection was not specific 
enough to convey the meaning Ms. Breedlove now attributes 
to it.  The district court agreed that in her closing arguments 
counsel for Ms. Breedlove could refer to Mr. Cloud and to the 
evidence connecting him to the August 1997 transaction, but 
it did not want the jury to speculate about Mr. Cloud's role in 
that transaction.  Counsel apparently sensed some disjunc-
tion between the district court's agreement that she could 
refer to Mr. Cloud and the court's concern that the jury not 
speculate "as to who he may be."  She did not, however, 
make the substance of this objection, as Ms. Breedlove has 
now explained it, clear to the district court.  See United 
States v. Spriggs, 102 F.3d 1245, 1259-60 (D.C. Cir. 1996) 
(finding appellants failed to preserve argument where objec-
tion before district court did not include key terms used in 
appeal).  Further, counsel's apparent acquiescence in closing 

__________
     * The relevant portions of the transcript are appended at the end 
of this opinion.

the matter ("Your Honor, if I hear you correctly....") gives 
no indication that she remained dissatisfied with the result.

     Counsel's twice-stated objection that the proposed jury 
instruction "is a reference to a specific fact" barely resembles 
her present argument, which is that the jury instruction 
invaded the province of the jury as factfinder by removing 
from the jury's consideration a fact that might have raised a 
reasonable doubt about her guilt.  Insofar as that is her 
objection, we hold that Ms. Breedlove did not properly pre-
serve it for appeal.  We will therefore upset her conviction 
only if the instruction rises to the level of plain error.

     The Supreme Court defined plain error in United States v. 
Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993). First, of course, the district court 
must have made an error by "[d]eviati[ng] from a legal rule."  
Id. at 732-33.  Second, the error must be one that should 
have been "obvious" to the district court.  Id. at 734.  Third, 
the error must have "affect[ed] substantial rights," that is, 
"been prejudicial", "affected the outcome of the district court 
proceedings."  Id.  A court of appeals should correct even a 
plain error affecting substantial rights only if there would 
otherwise be a miscarriage of justice, as there would be if the 
defendant is actually innocent of the offense, or if the error 
" 'seriously affect[s] the fairness, integrity, or public reputa-
tion of judicial proceedings.' "  Id. at 736 (quoting United 
States v. Atkinson, 297 U.S. 157, 160 (1936)).

     The evidence concerning Mr. Cloud's role in the August 
1997 transaction was sparse.  It included testimony by a 
Navy Federal Credit Union investigator who concluded that 
Mr. Cloud had endorsed the $1,206,000 check.  The investiga-
tor stated that he believed Mr. Cloud had been in "cahoots" 
with Ms. Breedlove in executing the check scheme.  Ms. 
Breedlove did not submit any additional evidence linking Mr. 
Cloud to the August 1997 transaction or to any other act 
involving her.  The district court prevented Ms. Breedlove 
neither from introducing further evidence about Mr. Cloud 
nor from arguing to the jury about such evidence as there 
was linking Mr. Cloud to the August 1997 transaction.  The 
district court merely aimed to preclude the jury from spec-

ulating about Mr. Cloud absent any substantial evidence, in 
the words of trial counsel for Ms. Breedlove, "as to what Mr. 
Cloud may or may not have done."  We see no error in the 
district court's exercise of caution;  the instruction was not so 
restrictive as to remove from the jury any of its factfinding 
authority.  See Curley v. United States, 160 F.2d 229, 232 
(D.C. Cir. 1947) ("functions of the jury include ... the 
drawing of justifiable inferences of fact from proven facts....  
The jury may not be permitted to conjecture merely, or to 
conclude upon pure speculation").

     Even had the district court erred as claimed, the over-
whelming evidence that Ms. Breedlove is guilty of the crime 
charged would have rendered the error harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  Ms. Breedlove's intent to commit the 
crimes of which she stands convicted is apparent from the 
evidence.  She opened a checking account at the First Union 
National Bank only days before she attempted to deposit the 
check for $998,688.65.  When she opened the account she 
asked whether the bank offered tax-deferred or retirement 
accounts into which she might be able to deposit a half million 
or a million dollars, adding falsely that she was the owner of 
several lucrative businesses.  The teller who assisted Ms. 
Breedlove when she made the deposit told her a "hold" would 
be placed upon the check--that is, she could not draw upon 
the credit to her account until the bank had collected good 
funds for the check--because of its amount.  Ms. Breedlove 
claims that she did not know the check had been altered, but 
it is difficult to conceive of a bank placing a hold on a check 
for $58.65 due to its amount;  at the very least, Ms. Breed-
love's anticipation a few days earlier that she would be 
depositing a large sum, together with her ready acquiescence 
in the delayed availability of funds, suggests that she knew 
the check she deposited was for a significant amount, not for 
$58.65.  A reasonable juror could hardly fail to conclude from 
these facts that Ms. Breedlove intended to utter an altered 
check.

B.   The Sentence

     When it calculated Ms. Breedlove's base offense level, the 
district court included not only the potential loss involved in 
the offense for which she was convicted but also the potential 
losses from the August 1997 and December 1997 transactions, 
both of which the court found were part of the "same course 
of conduct" as the January 1998 transaction.  See U.S. Sen-
tencing Guidelines Manual s 1B1.3(a)(2) & application note 9.  
Upon appeal Ms. Breedlove argues that the August 1997 
transaction was too remote in time and too different in 
character from the offenses of December 1997 and January 
1998 to be considered part of the same course of conduct.  
We afford due deference to the district court's application of 
the Guidelines to the facts of Ms. Breedlove's case.  See 
United States v. Jackson, 161 F.3d 24, 28 (D.C. Cir. 1998).

     The Sentencing Guidelines list several factors for determin-
ing whether two or more offenses are part of the same course 
of conduct, including the similarity of the offenses, the regu-
larity of the offenses, and the time interval between the 
offenses.  See U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual s 1B1.3 
application note 9(B).  If in a particular case any one of these 
factors is counter-indicative, then the offenses should not be 
deemed a single course of conduct unless another of the 
factors is particularly suggestive thereof.  See id.

     In United States v. Pinnick we upheld the district court's 
determination that a defendant's repeated use of counterfeit 
checks constituted a single course of conduct.  The defendant 
had used different aliases in presenting the checks, and had 
used the checks to obtain different types of proceeds--cash in 
two instances and an automobile in another.  The instruments 
and the methods used by the defendant were sufficiently 
similar, however, to establish an " 'identifiable behavior pat-
tern of specified criminal activity.' "  47 F.3d 434, 439 (D.C. 
Cir. 1995) (quoting United States v. Perdomo, 927 F.2d 111, 
115 (2d Cir. 1991)).

     In this case the August 1997, December 1997, and January 
1998 transactions share a common modus operandi.  In each 
transaction, Ms. Breedlove presented an altered check for 
deposit to a controlled account (either hers or Mr. Cloud's) at 

a financial institution.  Ms. Breedlove then sought to reach 
the proceeds of the fraud by drawing checks upon the ac-
counts into which she had deposited the altered checks--
except that Ms. Breedlove was apprehended before she could 
draw proceeds from the January 1998 transaction.

     Ms. Breedlove points out that each offense involved a 
different depository institution, but that suggests to us only 
that Ms. Breedlove sought to reduce the risk of suspicion.  
She also argues that the August 1997 transaction is not 
similar to the December 1997 and January 1998 transactions 
because only the latter two involved U.S. Treasury checks.  
That distinction bears not at all upon whether she used the 
checks in a single course of conduct.  More important, each of 
the checks was legitimately issued for a small amount, then 
altered for the purpose of obtaining a larger amount from an 
unwitting depository institution.  As for the five months 
between the two transactions, the interval hardly seems 
significant in view of the similarity of the offenses.  We 
therefore defer to the district court's determination that the 
August 1997 transaction was part of the same course of 
conduct as the December 1997 and January 1998 transactions 
for the purpose of calculating Ms. Breedlove's base offense 
level.

     The district court also considered the August 1997 transac-
tion in enhancing Ms. Breedlove's sentence by two levels for 
"more than minimal planning," see U.S. Sentencing Guide-
lines Manual s 2F1.1(b)(2), defined as "more planning than is 
typical for commission of the offense in a simple form."  Id. 
at s 1B1.1 application note 1(f).  Such planning is deemed 
present "in any case involving repeated acts over a period of 
time, unless it is clear that each instance was purely oppor-
tune."  Id.  Three repeated (non-opportunistic) acts are gen-
erally sufficient to support a finding of more than minimal 
planning.  See United States v. Kim, 23 F.3d 513, 515 (D.C. 
Cir. 1994).

     Ms. Breedlove's argument that the district court improper-
ly relied upon the August 1997 transaction as evidence of 
more than minimal planning is but a corollary of her now-
rejected argument that that transaction was not relevant 

conduct for sentencing purposes. ("Absent the $1,206,000 
Cloud check, ... with only two acts of relevant conduct 
rather than three, the two-point 'more than minimal planning' 
enhancement for 'repeated acts' ... no longer applies.")  The 
corollary fails with the proposition from which it is derived.  
We hold, therefore, that the district court properly enhanced 
Ms. Breedlove's sentence for more than minimal planning.

C.   Supervised Release Term

     Ms. Breedlove argues, and the Government agrees, that the 
district court improperly sentenced her to a term of five years 
of supervised release on each of the two counts of which she 
was convicted.  The conviction for uttering carries with it a 
statutory maximum imprisonment of 15 years, making it a 
Class C felony.  See 18 U.S.C. ss 472, 3559(a)(3).  As Ms. 
Breedlove points out, the maximum authorized term of super-
vised release for a Class C felony is three years.  See 18 
U.S.C. s 3583(b)(2).  We therefore remand this case to the 
district court for the limited purpose of correcting this error.

                         III. Conclusion

     For the foregoing reasons, we affirm Ms. Breedlove's con-
viction.  We remand this case, however, so that the district 
court may impose a term of supervised release within the 
statutory maximum.

                                                      So ordered.

                             APPENDIX

     Ms. Jankowski:  Your Honor, I have one other objection 
     and, Your Honor, this may be my newness to this 
     jurisdiction, but there was no testimony at all concerning 
     motive.  And there is an instruction that says that intent 
     and motive shouldn't be confused and something along 
     the lines of if she acted with a good motive, that is not 
     supposed to be taken into consideration.
     
          I just don't see where that was an issue at all in this 
     case that would even warrant an instruction.  This is not 
     a case where Ms. Breedlove testified that her children 
     were hungry and she desperately needed the money, or 
     anything like that....  
     
     The Court:  I see your point. The instruction is included, 
     however, because I anticipate that there will be specula-
     tion on the part of the jury as to what motivated her to 
     do what she did, particularly in view of the fact that we 
     have this mysterious Mr. Cloud, whose presence in this 
     case has never been explained.  So I want to dissuade 
     them from speculating about who Mr. Cloud was or what 
     his role may have been.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Your Honor, I can see your concern, 
     however, I think that the instruction--I don't believe 
     that the instruction really addresses the possibility that 
     they may speculate about Mr. Cloud.  It kind of suggests 
     that personal advancement or financial gain are two well-
     recognized motives.  It kind of suggests a motive that 
     sometimes someone might attempt an act for advance-
     ment or financial gain, and that that is saying that is still 
     acceptable and that you can't confuse motive with intent.
     
          It doesn't really say to the jury--
     
     The Court:  Would you like me to leave out that para-
     graph, "personal advancement and financial gain"?  And 
     I think I may make some specific reference to Mr. Cloud 
     and that they are not to speculate on what part he may 
     have played, if any, in connection with these matters.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Your Honor, the only objection I have to 
     that is a reference to a specific fact.
     
     The Court:  That's what they are going to do.  I beg 
     your pardon?
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  That is a reference to a specific fact.
     
     The Court:  Well, I am also, in part, anticipating your 
     argument.  I expect that you will make reference to Mr. 
     Cloud, and I think maybe in the context, they ought to be 
     told that they are not to speculate on Mr. Cloud.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Certainly, Your Honor, if they are to 
     determine whether or not Ms. Breedlove committed the 
     prior bad act of--they are supposed to assume that she 
     committed that act and assume that she had knowledge 
     of the check's alteration.  I can certainly argue to the 
     jury that it was a check that was made out to him, a 
     check that was endorsed by him, and they can just as 
     likely assume that he--I don't think that is an improper 
     argument to make to the jury.  Your Honor, she is being 
     accused of a prior bad act.
     
     The Court:  There is evidence in the case to implicate 
     your client in the presentation of these fraudulent docu-
     ments.  The bank photographs alone may provide suffi-
     cient evidence for the jury's purposes, even though the 
     witnesses themselves couldn't identify her.
     
          Also, the fact that she was the one who apparently 
     endeavored to profit by the funds.  There is circumstan-
     tial evidence to point to your client as the one who was, if 
     you will, the culpable party insofar as these instruments 
     were concerned.
     
          There is no evidence one way or another as to Mr. 
     Cloud, other than the fact that his signature mysteriously 
     appears and his bank account mysteriously was used.
     
          Now, I am not suggesting that you are not permitted 
     to argue, but I don't want the jury speculating, on the 
     basis of a total absence of evidence, as to who he may be.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Your Honor, if I hear you correctly, I 
     can certainly argue to the jury that Ms. Breedlove has 
     not been proven to have committed this offense, but you 
     
     are going to tell the jury that they cannot speculate as to 
     what Mr. Cloud may or may not have done?
     
     The Court:  That's correct. That's the way I am going to 
     leave it.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  If we can then somehow--
     
     The Court:  But I will take out that middle paragraph of 
     instruction number 35 [regarding the distinction between 
     intent and motive] to which you had an objection.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Your Honor, the only--
     
     The Court:  That does not preclude [the prosecution] 
     from arguing it, however.
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Certainly
     
     The Court:  You want me to take that out?
     
     Ms. Jankowski:  Yes, Your Honor.
     
                                                 